Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 21 January 2010 .
Statements by the President
It is with great sadness that I have to inform you of the tragic death of Mrs Juarez Boal , deputy head of the European Union Delegation to Haiti .
Mrs Juarez Boal formerly worked in the European Parliament , until 2002 .
She died in the tragic earthquake which struck Haiti on 12 January .
The total number of victims of the earthquake may be as high as 200 000 people .
You will recall that , during the last session a month ago , we observed a one-minute silence in memory of all those who died in the earthquake .
We did not then know , we were not sure , that among them was a person so closely associated with the European Parliament and the work of the European Union - Mrs Juarez Boal .
Yesterday , the second round of presidential elections was held in Ukraine .
While waiting for official confirmation of the results of the vote , I would like to congratulate the people of Ukraine for conducting free and transparent elections .
This is what the reports from Ukraine are saying .
I still have not had an official communication , but the statements of our fellow Members of the European Parliament who observed the elections say that apart from a certain number of complaints and what were , certainly , breaches of electoral rules , the absolute majority of the actions of everyone associated with the elections were in accordance with procedure and met the standards of democratic elections .
This is a very great achievement for Ukraine .
We recall that , five years ago , it was completely different .
Today , our wish for Ukraine is that a democratically and peacefully elected President will act for the good of the country .
We also want to establish the best possible relations with Ukraine .
Despite the high degree of political instability in recent years , it can be seen that democracy in Ukraine has solid foundations .
I would also like to take this opportunity to call upon all political forces in Ukraine to overcome their differences and begin to work together on social and economic reforms , as well as on judicial and constitutional reforms , and to continue their European agenda .
I will say this again : the European Union is very anxious to have good , friendly relations with Ukraine .
This concerns both the future government and the opposition .
We hope and expect that Ukraine will work together on this .
We share this challenge and the responsibility .
On Wednesday , a debate will be held on the situation in Ukraine following the elections .
We will listen to the reports of our fellow Members .
The chair of the European Parliament election observation mission was Paweł Kowal .
They were on the ground and observed Sunday 's voting , and will share information about this with us .
The vote of approval on the new European Commission will take place tomorrow .
This will be one of the most important moments in this parliamentary term .
On behalf of our citizens , we will express our will in a democratic vote , and so tomorrow is a very important day .
During tomorrow 's session , we will also vote on the resolution on the new framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission .
The text of this agreement has been made available to you .
It is a very important piece of legislation , which will determine how both institutions work together in the next parliamentary term .
On Wednesday , we will hold another important debate on the processing and transfer of Financial Messaging Data to the United States for the purposes of the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme .
I will preside over this debate myself .
The European Parliament attaches exceptional importance to ensuring the right level of personal data protection .
We were elected directly by our citizens and we have a responsibility to them , but on the other hand , we understand the importance of the SWIFT agreement .
These priorities should be taken into account by all Members of this House when making this important and responsible decision .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
I will not be able to be present during the vote , because I will be attending the European Council in Brussels .
I would like to inform you of something else .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of committees : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda drawn up on Thursday , 4 February 2010 by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday :
No changes .
Tuesday :
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has submitted a request to add to the agenda Council and Commission statements on the difficult monetary and economic situation of euro area countries .
This concerns Member States which are experiencing financial difficulties .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( NL ) It is important for this House to debate the latest developments in the euro area and also the measures being taken by the European Commission with regard to the euro area countries that are in the danger zone .
We have seen that , in recent weeks , these developments have had a very great impact on the euro exchange rate and have also led to turbulence on the financial markets .
Therefore , prior to Thursday 's informal summit , we should like to see a statement by the Council and the Commission concerning not only the plans already proposed but also the measures that could still be taken to restore confidence in the euro as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I would like categorically to support this motion .
It is important that we discuss this issue and address the fundamental problems without getting into a party-political squabble over who is to blame for the crisis .
I have two requests .
Firstly , if my fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) are in agreement , we should include social impact in the title in order to make it clear that what is at stake here is the social impact of the crisis in these countries .
Secondly , we also want to talk to the Commission , but we want to discuss this with the members of the Commission who will bear responsibility for this issue in the future .
Since the new Commission has not yet taken office , we should ask the President of the Commission to attend such a discussion himself or to send somebody who will have a post in the new Commission , such as Mr Almunia or Mr Rehn .
In this difficult and important debate , it would be sensible to have an interlocutor who will subsequently discharge the same responsibility in the Commission .
If we agree to this request and include it as an item on the agenda , representatives of the Commission will be present .
I will talk to Mr Barroso about this .
Does anyone want to speak against the request ?
I do not see anyone .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Who is in favour of this request ?
I should like to emphatically endorse Mr Swoboda 's proposal .
This is about all the consequences , of course , including the social ones .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , indeed , these are three resolutions adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs examining the Commission 's progress report on enlargement .
They can therefore be seen together , examined together and debated together .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I know you had an overloaded agenda at the Conference of Presidents meeting last week and there was not much time to debate the addition of this item to the agenda , but in the January plenary - as you all saw - members of different political groups expressed concerns at the points raised in the question on abuses relating to foreigners ' property in Spain .
Wednesday evening provides an opportunity for the Commission to give an answer .
Therefore , I invite our colleagues to support this proposal .
On behalf of the EFD Group , I would invite you to hold a roll-call vote .
If the majority is in favour of this proposal , I would like to propose a second roll-call vote to wind up the debate with a resolution .
Mr President , I would like to speak in favour of Mrs Andreasen 's motion because many of our constituents write to us on this problem and I think it is something that Parliament should debate .
Mr President , I would merely note that a very anti-European group is using the European Parliament to raise this issue .
This is a welcome development but all the same , I am against , Mr President .
( Applause )
Mr President , if I can make one very small point of order .
My colleague over there ( Mr Guy Verhofstadt ) referred to us as ' anti-European ' .
This is not true ; we are anti the European Union .
That was not a point of order .
Please do not comment on the substance of a matter when we are setting the agenda and there is not time for such things .
Thursday :
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has submitted a proposal concerning the debate on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The group proposes replacing the debate on Madagascar with a debate on the death penalty , particularly the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal .
Mr President , we believe that the item on Madagascar is not particularly important today .
We would therefore ask that that time slot be used to discuss the case of Mr Mumia Abu-Jamal , the Afro-American journalist who was found guilty of murdering a policeman in 1982 , following a trial based on circumstantial evidence .
Mumia Abu-Jamal has been sentenced to death and has been waiting on death row for 30 years .
Up until now , no satisfactory explanation has been found for the events surrounding this murder and the evidence has never really been properly investigated .
In any case , the death sentence is one of the clearest violations of human rights we know .
Although , in this trial , the death sentence could have been commuted to lifelong imprisonment , the prosecution rejected this possibility at the end of January .
The life of Mr Abu-Jamal is now more at risk than ever .
We would like this matter to be debated in plenary so that we can decide what action to take in order to ensure that his death sentence is suspended and that Mumia Abu-Jamal is given the opportunity to prove his innocence in a fair trial .
Mr President , I do not deny that Mumia Abu-Jamal 's situation is critical and that the case certainly deserves to be heard .
However , the situation in Madagascar is absolutely chaotic .
The whole country is suffering from a transitional regime which was installed illegally and which is leading that country into anarchy .
It is very difficult to tell you that one is better than the other .
I think that we can save Madagascar .
Mr President , you can make representations once again to the United States to request the suspension of the death penalty .
This will not be the first time and , unfortunately , I fear that it will not be the last .
In any case , on behalf of my group , I refuse to withdraw the resolution that we have prepared on the subject of Madagascar , where there is also a real danger for an entire population .
In accordance with your proposal , I will analyse the problem thoroughly and make a statement on this .
( Parliament rejected the request )
( The order of business was adopted )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( RO ) The Romanian Government is examining the possibility of introducing a fast-food tax , in the hope that this will steadily reduce the numbers of citizens , especially children and young people , opting for this kind of food , which has an extremely detrimental medium- and long-term impact on the human organism .
Taxes may seem to be an elaborate solution during a crisis , but if such a measure is implemented properly , its impact can extend beyond fiscal matters into education .
This will enable an ever-increasing number of people to learn that looking after their health starts with diet .
The funds generated by these taxes should be allocated solely to programmes aimed at informing the general public about ingredients and substances which can harm them .
Diseases caused by obesity tend to place an ever-growing burden on Member States ' health care systems , and the connection between obesity and fast food is well documented .
The promotion of healthy eating should become a key policy in the European Union , and this must be done without delay .
A European programme using the initiatives devised by several Member States would be welcomed and extremely useful .
It could help make the staple diet in the European Union healthier .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to speak about security of supply of the raw materials needed by farmers and traders in the European Union for production , and which are also needed by producers of animal feeds and food .
One of the key issues and threats to the European supply chain is the lack of an established , acceptable , very low level of the presence of varieties of genetically modified organisms which have not yet received approval in the European Union .
According to the latest research , around 120 new species of GMO will be in cultivation in the world by 2015 .
The lack of a solution will contribute to a rise in prices of animal feeds and food , and may , as a result , contribute to the exclusion of many European farmers from the market .
The most recent example is the situation from July of last year , when trace amounts of genetically modified varieties were found in supplies of soya .
This had a significant influence on the whole food and animal feed chain , because Europe is not able to meet its needs with internal production and is forced to import 14 million tonnes of soya beans annually .
( HU ) I would like to ask the President or the Parliament 's Presidency to convey to the European Commission that in the course of my work , I submitted two queries in writing over a six-month period .
In the first instance , I received an answer after a serious delay , and I have still not received an answer to my second query , submitted on 30 November .
I think it would be important to have adequate communication and dialogue between the EU institutions .
Please convey this , to ensure that my work is not hindered and that I receive the answers requested .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , It is very good for the European Union to have a face at last , a Minister for Foreign Affairs , so to speak , in the person of Cathy Ashton .
During her hearing , she said one sentence about China , whose global importance we do not need to emphasise here .
Astoundingly , not a single Member of Parliament entitled to ask questions about China spoke up , even though the EU had recently received a slap in the face during the Copenhagen climate summit , where China and the USA came to an agreement behind our back .
It is equally astonishing that the European Council has never , throughout its existence , discussed the relationship between the EU and China .
I therefore ask the President to call on the European Council to put on its agenda the strategic relationship between the EU and China , while Parliament should , in the future , deal with this question as befits China 's importance .
( RO ) The top priority of the future European Commission must be to reduce the economic disparities between Member States by establishing close cooperation at fiscal and monetary policy level .
This receptiveness to cooperation has been evident right since the start of the economic crisis and it is absolutely necessary for it to continue .
At the same time , when coordination at fiscal level is involved , consideration must be given to the fact that the European Union includes countries with economies which have different structures .
In fact , the economies in certain Member States are characterised by larger cyclical movements , as they require a high level of public investment and their potential for growth exceeds that of the mature economies within the EU .
The Stability and Growth Pact and the current procedure for joining the euro area should therefore include flexibility clauses allowing the analysis of public expenditure throughout the entire duration of an economic cycle so that Member States can invest when it becomes necessary .
This could ensure that every Member State develops according to the stage its economy is at .
( EL ) Mr President , we have witnessed an unprecedented and coordinated attack over recent days on the economy of the Member States of the euro area , with the spread for government bonds in certain countries , such as Greece , Portugal and Spain , going off the scale .
Clearly , these countries are being used to strike at economic cohesion in the euro area in general and the euro in particular .
The very mechanisms which created the global credit crisis are now speculating shamelessly at the expense of the countries which face the greatest financial problems .
That is why it cannot , for Europe , merely be a question of evaluating the measures being taken to combat deficit .
The real question must be : do we intend to adopt solidarity measures at European level by safeguarding the euro area and the euro and will we eventually decide to adopt policies that serve fundamental economic , rather than just monetary , cohesion .
( SV ) Mr President , as of the beginning of this year , the EU 's Sulphur Directive sets a limit of 0.1 % on the sulphur content of fuel used by vessels calling at ports and vessels on inland waterways .
From an environmental point of view , this is a good thing .
It is important that shipping , in particular , also becomes more environmentally friendly .
At present , most seagoing passenger and freight vessels use heavy fuel oil .
In the Baltic Sea , we have already been using what is known as low-sulphur heavy fuel oil , with a sulphur content of 0.5 % , for many years with a view to protecting the environment .
A low sulphur content out at sea is not deemed to be an environmental problem , because the main aim has been to reduce urban pollution .
That is therefore the line that I believe the EU should take on this issue - namely , encouraging the use of low-sulphur heavy fuel oil .
The challenge we face is that the IMO 's Marpol Convention recommends a limit of 0.1 % for all vessels in the Baltic Sea with effect from 2015 - something that could have devastating consequences for the Baltic Sea .
I would therefore like to remind Members of this and encourage people not to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , sometimes , colleagues in this Parliament make life very difficult for its friends .
The Bureau has recommended expenditure in order to employ 150 more people , in Parliament and the political groups , to cope with the requirements of the Lisbon Treaty - a massive increase in expenditure at a time when so many of our citizens are facing public service cuts and tax rises .
I have been dealing with codecision legislation for more than 10 years .
I do not believe we need that many staff : I believe we can redeploy and use our staff more effectively without an increase in our budget .
All of us who run a council - or indeed a government - know that sometimes we have to live within our means .
We should not be doing things for which we cannot account .
The test should always be : can we stand up at a public meeting and explain what we are doing to our citizens ?
I believe that , in this case , we could not .
( PL ) Mr President , the basis of energy security in the European Union is the diversification of gas supply .
Making ourselves dependent on supplies from one direction will , in the long term , upset the balance not only in terms of energy security , but also from the point of view of economics .
No one in Europe can understand this more than post-communist countries which are still under the influence , the huge influence , of Russia .
The North Gas Pipeline will shut off the possibility of diversification and limit the possibility of the development of Baltic ports , and especially of a new diversified source of gas supply for Europe , the Świnoujście Gas Terminal .
In addition , there is also an ecological aspect to the unfavourable impact of building the gas pipeline .
Last year 's report shows unambiguously that the North Gas Pipeline will have a negative impact .
I call upon the Commission to investigate this matter again .
( FR ) Mr President , I am wondering what actions the European Union will introduce to ensure that all Member States observe the right of asylum and respect the human rights of people arriving from the southern shores of the Mediterranean .
Many of them are arriving in flimsy craft , and several thousand Africans are drowning without anyone protesting .
Are the Council and the Commission really sensitive to these issues , which fall under the headings of both human rights and humanitarian aid ?
Mr Moratinos 's statements with regard to the strengthening of the security approach and the additional resources allocated to Frontex , decided recently by the Council , do not reassure me in this regard .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is up to us to act to bring our actions into line with our values .
This is urgent , because there are lives at risk .
( GA ) Mr President , in the last few weeks , negotiations have taken place as part of the most recent phase of the Northern Ireland peace process .
The political parties and the governments of Britain and Ireland took part in these talks .
They were there , in particular , to ensure the transfer of policing powers from the Westminster Parliament in London to the Assembly in Belfast .
They also discussed other major issues .
I am glad that these talks have finally finished with agreement between the parties and I am sure that the European Parliament will also welcome this progress .
I hope that we can now deal with other commitments , which have not been settled or fulfilled as yet .
This will move us towards stable political institutions that will operate on the basis of equality , power sharing and mutual respect .
Mr President , I requested to make this one-minute speech to highlight the terrible effect that fortnightly bin collections are having upon communities in my constituency in the north-west of England .
Take my home town of Bootle , for example , where many families live in terraced houses with no front gardens and little space at the rear .
It is crazy that they are forced to put out waste every two weeks .
This , naturally , has caused pile-ups of rubbish , because there is no storage space .
If we have a hot summer , you can be sure that this will lead to an increase in vermin , which in turn is a public health hazard .
But why am I telling this House ?
Well , because fortnightly bin collections are the direct result of the EU 's Landfill Directive , which was supported in this Chamber by the British Labour Party and the Conservatives .
I for one hope that a large number of British voters bear this in mind when they go to the polls in the general election later this year .
( DE ) Mr President , in two days ' time , we will be debating the question of body scanners .
During that debate , we will be addressing the overall question of security in airports , i.e. our approach to airport security in the European Union .
The European Union has been known , time and again , to adopt precipitate legislation , based either on alleged or sometimes real terrorist threats .
This does not improve airport security .
What it does do is produce ever more laborious and ever more ludicrous measures .
If you consider , for example , the situation in railway stations , it is fundamentally similar to that in airports .
In general , railway stations do not use security measures , at least as far as inter-European and national traffic is concerned .
This begs the question as to whether our concern with security in airports is exaggerated .
Rampant bureaucracy and a never-ending stream of security measures will not contribute to security , but to inconvenience for air passengers .
( PL ) Mr President , as you said , we are going to vote on the appointment of the new European Commission .
It is , indeed , as you said , a very important moment , a moment connected with many hopes , not only of Members of the European Parliament and of European governments , but principally of the citizens of the European Union .
In this context , creation of a common European Union foreign policy is of special significance , and so the challenge faced by Baroness Ashton in this area is even greater .
There are two new challenges .
The first , and you spoke about this , Mr President , is Ukraine .
Irrespective of the results of the elections , we need to formulate and consistently implement a new policy towards Ukraine , a European Union policy , in order to make it possible for that country to become a Member State of the European Union in the future .
However , the second matter is Belarus .
I would like to announce that , unfortunately , several hours ago , another breach of human rights was perpetrated in Belarus .
The Belarusian police have entered the Polish House in Iwieniec , preventing the activity of the Union of Poles in Belarus .
( ES ) Mr President , last December , the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco entered into an agreement to liberalise trade in agricultural products .
Unfortunately , the only information we have on the content of this agreement has been gleaned from the media .
This information indicates an increase in the quota for tomatoes imported into the European Union , something we categorically reject , as the Kingdom of Morocco has repeatedly failed to honour its obligations to the European Union .
The European Commission refuses to admit to the existence of this situation , even though OLAF itself has done so .
We cannot allow the Commission to continue turning a blind eye , disregarding the needs of producers in the Canary Islands , Andalusia , Murcia and Alicante .
We therefore appeal strongly for agreements to be honoured and for more attention to be paid to plant health controls .
In addition , the timetable for Moroccan exports should be made more flexible , allowing exports to be spread across the entire year .
( PT ) Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to condemn what is currently happening in Portugal , where it is clear that the media has brought to light a government plan to control newspapers , television channels and radio stations , which jeopardises freedom of expression .
Just this week , a newspaper column written by a very well-known journalist , Mário Crespo , was also censured at the prompting - or apparently at the prompting - of the Prime Minister .
In this context , the Prime Minister , José Sócrates , must now offer the Portuguese newspaper O País a substantial explanation , and must explain that he is not controlling , curtailing or censuring freedom of expression in Portugal .
By acting in this way , Portugal is no longer a State governed by rule of law but a State governed by formal law , in which the Prime Minister restricts himself to formalities , procedures and red tape , and does not want to offer substantial explanations .
We want Portugal to be a State governed by substantive law !

( FR ) Mr President , on 27 January at two o 'clock in the morning , a gas explosion blasted the historic centre of Liège .
I was at the scene with my colleagues from the city council , and it was only by a miracle that we survived .
However , 14 people lost their lives in the explosion .
There are dozens of injured and 500 displaced persons .
I should like to pay tribute here not only to the victims and their families , but also to the exceptional courage of the fire fighters and of all the rescuers .
In this respect , I wish to remind you that there is not yet a single statute for fire fighters across the European Union and that , in my country as in others , fire fighting is still not considered to be a hazardous profession .
I call for a European statute for fire fighters since , in many circumstances , they are required to provide cross-border assistance .
Thank you very much for your statement and for drawing our attention to the tragedy which took place so near to us , in Belgium .
It is , indeed , a tragic case .
Thank you very much .
We would like to express our deepest sympathy to all those who have suffered as a result of the tragedy , as well as to their families .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of my speech is to point out the severity of the deindustrialisation process affecting a range of Sicilian industrial centres , in particular , the Termini Imerese automotive centre owned by the FIAT group , and the Gela petrochemical centre belonging to the ENI group .
Termini Imerese is being damaged by the competition arising from the low salary system within some EU countries , whilst Gela is being damaged by competition from Asia .
With regard to the severe deindustrialisation processes that are taking place in widespread areas of the Union , I would argue that the time has come to reconsider the policy of non-intervention that the European Commission has adopted up until now , and to begin to launch a set of important , strategic measures to support European industry .
This call is addressed chiefly to the European Commission and to Mr Tajani , the Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship .
( SL ) On Thursday last week , the Parliament of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) adopted a declaration of support for the European Parliament 's Resolution on Srebrenica , which we adopted with an overwhelming majority one year ago .
In this resolution , Parliament paid homage to all the victims on all sides of every war of the last decade of the last century , not only to the victims of the Srebrenica genocide .
The Parliament in Skopje is the third in the Western Balkans to have ratified and adopted the resolution , with 70 votes in favour and only one vote against .
Such a majority and such consensus deserve respect and recognition from this House , too .
Although FYROM was in no way involved in this tragic event , their resounding response is an act of solidarity and a civilised gesture worthy of respect and admiration .
The FYROM Parliament 's decision is an expression of respect for all the victims and a message that we all share the responsibility for building a better and brighter future for all the countries of the Western Balkans .
It is a step towards the future , a hand of reconciliation to all neighbouring countries and an example for all other countries in the region .
As someone who participated in drafting this resolution , I wish to congratulate Members of the FYROM Parliament on their political courage and their contribution towards reconciliation in the region .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to point out that , at this time of economic crisis , with some countries in recession , there are others , such as Greece , which need to sort out certain issues relating to questions of sexual equality , given that this crisis is hitting women harder than men .
A great deal of effort has been made over recent years and laws have been passed in Europe which give this sector certain facilities and specific tools ; however , the Community directives on equal treatment for men and women are not being transposed into national law .
Given that , these efforts notwithstanding , we need to bridge the sexual divide , as women are earning 17 % less than men and encounter particular forms of racism on the job market , I should like to emphasise that any regulation or change relating to insurance or labour issues must be accompanied by new social infrastructures .
( PL ) Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak , because I would like to talk about an important matter related to the costs of climate policy .
The European Union is planning climate policy consistently .
Of great significance , however , is the fact that this policy is having an overwhelming influence on the economies of Member States .
When structural differences between the economies of different Member States are taken into account , it is becoming increasingly clear that the individual Member States are going to bear very different costs of implementation of the strategy .
At the same time , it is a fact that the new Member States met their obligations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions under the Kyoto Protocol with a wide margin .
In the case of Poland the reduction amounted to nearly 30 % , compared to the 6 % which was required , but in the case of the ' old 15 ' the reduction was barely 1 % , whereas they had committed themselves to a reduction of 6 % .
In relation to this , everything the Commission does must take account of the differentiated costs of adaptation of the economies of different Member States - costs which different Member States have borne to date for reduction of greenhouse gas emissions under the Kyoto Protocol - and must also end those changes which might upset the balance between Member States .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( GA ) Mr President , the Irish Government is now to charge value added tax of up to 21 % on public services provided by the local authorities such as rubbish collection and recycling .
The European Union is forcing the Irish Government to apply these new taxes .
They will further increase the burden on normal working people and on poor people who are already paying heavily for the capitalist crisis in Ireland .
The government also intends to bring in new water charges for home owners which could be between EUR 500 and EUR 1 000 per year .
This would be another terrible blow to the standard of living of working people .
Furthermore , it is preparing the public water system for its privatisation in the future .
I hereby warn the Irish Government and the European Commission , who are in favour of charges and of privatisation , that this will not be accepted and that it will be opposed by a massive campaign of boycott and by grass roots power .
This is a further economic burden which the working people of Ireland will not accept .
( EL ) Mr President , tomorrow we shall vote on the new European Commission and shall become the United States of Europe .
Once this procedure has been completed , we shall need , within the framework of this new type of governance , to address the question of a common foreign policy , the question of a common economic policy , the question of closer ties between the members of the Union and solidarity and the programming of the future of Europe .
A future that will need to tread extremely carefully as regards the enlargement of Europe to include other countries , and , more importantly , as regards immigration , which is a massive problem in terms of the future of Europe and should , I believe , be addressed not only within the framework of national governments , but also under a common policy by the European Union .
That is why I should like to call on the Commission and the House to pay particular attention to this question .
( NL ) Mr President , like you , I visited Auschwitz a few weeks ago , and we came face to face with the horrors that took place there .
Imagine my amazement when , a few days later , Jews were demonised by loathsome statements on the official news channel of the Palestinian Authority .
To summarise : ' Jews are the enemies of Allah and of humanity .
The Prophet says : kill the Jews . '
These statements are downright loathsome , and I take the view that this cannot be without consequences .
A body whose so-called public television channel quotes the ' Prophet ' inciting the murder of Jews should receive not a cent - not one single cent - more in development funds .
The European Parliament should advocate cutting off this flow of funds , and should express its disgust at such practices .
( PT ) Mr President , the Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy , on which my Azorean colleague , Mrs Patrão Neves , was rapporteur , provides a unique opportunity for a debate concerning a sector that has a significant role to play in stabilising local development in the outermost regions .
Madeira is following the discussions taking place with particular interest and believes it is imperative to propose differentiating between artisanal fleets and large-scale fleets , which should come under different fishing regimes .
Supporting a principle of positive discrimination , whereby access to territorial waters within the exclusive economic zone is restricted to local artisanal fleets only , is crucial .
In Madeira , support for fleet modernisation is vital as is adopting a style of management that will ensure the conservation of a broad range of species in the long term .
It is only in this way that we will manage to avoid situations that are unsustainable for economic , environmental and social stability .
Finally , we will fight in favour of permanent and up-to-date support for fisheries in the outermost regions .
( SL ) Europe is full of minorities , and ethnic minorities represent a significant part of those .
With indigenous minorities representing a mere 8 % of our populations , we also need to take into account immigrant minorities who account for the additional 6.5 % .
Before the last two waves of enlargement , the candidate countries had to demonstrate compliance with the criteria on minority rights .
In contrast , the policies on , and the relationship towards , minorities of the countries which had by then gained membership of the European Union were not subject to any supervision .
Such a situation was incongruous .
In recent times , the Slovene ethnic minorities in Italy , Austria and Hungary have come under major pressure due to cuts in funding for their interests .
I therefore call on European policy makers to begin addressing minority issues seriously at a European level .
The new Treaty of Lisbon provides a legal basis for such action .
I also urge the European Commission to draw up and present a plan detailing its course of action with regard to the implementation of those provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon which safeguard minorities .
( SK ) Slovakia is under threat from the construction of a mega-casino misleadingly called the Metropolis .
After Slovenia , Hungary and Austria refused to issue the necessary licences , the groups involved are now turning to Slovakia in order to push through their business plan there .
The Parliament in Bratislava has expressed a negative opinion but the decision is not final and the gambling project continues .
The developer is already resorting to euphemisms and presenting the project as a multi-functional centre .
There is talk of playgrounds , an aqua park and a conference centre but nothing about a mega-casino .
What obstacles can the EU erect to prevent gambling operations in Member States ?
How is the EU protecting the most vulnerable groups ?
It is no secret that gambling goes together with criminality , violence , organised crime , prostitution and various other related phenomena .
I call on my fellow Members and also on national associations to join the citizens of Slovakia in their protest and to also sign the written declaration and in that way support our protest .
( RO ) The name Roşia Montană must have an increasingly familiar ring for both European institutions and citizens .
We are talking about an area in Romania containing historical remains , which have attracted the attention of UNESCO , now facing the spectre of destruction .
The use of cyanides for mining , which threatens to destroy the integrity and assets of this location , is again looming as a real prospect .
In recent weeks , the Romanian Government has given to believe that the region 's destruction can be regarded as acceptable by allowing this mining activity to commence .
I make a strong plea to the European Parliament and European Commission to consider the possibility of intervening at EU leadership forums to put a halt to what will undoubtedly be an ecological and human disaster .
Mr President , I wish to speak on energy policy .
As a previous speaker said , securing future energy supply is a vital issue for all of us , and to solve this problem we must look to a wide range of technologies : not just one ; not just gas .
Obviously , renewable energy will have its part to play , whether it is wind , biomass or tidal power , but also nuclear and CCS must play their part as well .
I therefore welcome recent initiatives from the UK Government .
It has recently brought forward a number of projects looking at new technologies for renewables but also nuclear and CCS as well .
I believe that these policies will secure the energy supply in the UK for the future , and I would see this as a model for the rest of Europe .
I certainly do not believe that we can put all our eggs in one basket : we must have a wide range of technologies .
I would urge colleagues here to do that in the future .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the outbreak of the global financial crisis , the European Commission presented a measure - the proposal under discussion today - to strengthen the fight against tax evasion .
This makes it possible to increase transparency between all European State tax systems by exchanging information on assets .
It is a good measure , but we must also remember that a few months ago , a majority in the Italian Parliament approved the tax shield , which conceals tax evaders ' identities and robs European citizens of VAT tax revenue .
As the whole world fights the vices of illegality , some national laws nevertheless insult the dignity of honest citizens .
It is for these reasons that we , together with other fellow Members from l 'Italia dei Valori and the Partito Democratico parties , have submitted a complaint to the Commission .
We have heard that the offices are acting on our comments .
I therefore call upon the Commission to be brave , to accept responsibility for declaring the Italian tax shield to be illegal , and to allow those capital sums to be taxed .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to raise a subject which has already been mentioned , but I would like to reinforce what has been said .
At this moment , while we are speaking here , in Iwieniec in Belarus , an illegal search is being conducted in the Polish House , one of the offices of the Union of Poles in Belarus .
This is a further act of repression against the Polish minority in Belarus .
I know , Mr President , that you have already intervened personally in the matter of the very high fine imposed on Angelika Borys , and I would like to thank you for your intervention , because we are , truly , under an obligation to help that organisation .
At the same time , I would like to appeal to you , Mr President , and also to the Council and the Commission , to make a statement as quickly as possible and to intervene in the matter of human rights violations in Belarus - breaches of the rights of Poles - but I say this , principally , in the context of breaches of citizens ' rights - human rights - in other words , something which should be important to us as the European Parliament .
( PT ) Mr President , over the past few weeks , we have witnessed the intensification of an insidious ideological campaign concerning the measures to be adopted by the Member States in order to balance public finances .
It is no coincidence that many of those playing a leading role in this campaign are the ones responsible for the current economic and social crisis .
Just as they have done in the past , they are again supporting fresh attacks on wages , social and employment rights and the social functions of the State .
In response to this onslaught , tens of thousands of Portuguese workers took to the streets in protest , demanding wage increases that will restore the purchasing power that has been lost over the past decade , and decent conditions for retirement .
Public accounts should be balanced in line with economic growth , while putting an end to the serious injustices surrounding the distribution of wealth that is at the heart of this crisis .
The progressive drive of the workers ' struggle is nowadays a sign of hope , and the most concrete reason for believing in a better future .
Mr President , a few weeks ago , my estimable friend and Yorkshire colleague , Edward McMillan-Scott , brought the chairman of the International Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) to this assembly and presented him as a legend in his own lunchtime and a top climate science guru - and I have to say that he certainly looked like a guru to me - but it turns out that he is a railway engineer who writes mucky books .
Now , I have nothing against railway engineers .
Some of my best friends are railway engineers and no doubt they read mucky books - that is not the point - but it might explain perhaps , does it not , why the IPCC has come out with so much absurd nonsense in the last few years .
Would it not be a good idea if the Commission , perhaps , were to write to the IPCC and suggest they get a new chairman , perhaps a tad better qualified ?
( HU ) A few minutes ago , Mrs Anna Záborská mentioned those mega-investments , the various gambling casino investments made by foreigners in Hungary , too , against which György Budaházy , the well-known leader of the extra-parliamentary opposition protested along with 12 members of the so-called Hunnia opposition group who have been under pre-trial detention for almost a year .
They are not entitled to know what evidence is brought against them .
In addition , due to the quirks of Hungarian regulations and in contravention of the right of ' habeas corpus ' , the judge who keeps extending the pre-trial detention does not take a close look at the incriminating evidence against them .
I find it scandalous that something like this can happen in the European Union , and I protest yet again , for the umpteenth time , against this .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to mention a matter which I consider to be of huge political significance ; it relates to the national parliaments and their cooperation with the European Parliament within the framework of efforts being made in Europe today to achieve economic recovery and financial stability .
As the credit crisis becomes a distant echo , everyone is talking about the need to strengthen the euro , about cohesion in the euro area , and about economic inequalities within the European Union and the solidarity mechanisms that need to be developed .
I believe that , within this framework , dialogue between the European Parliament and the national parliaments will highlight our common objective , our joint responsibility and the solidarity that we need to demonstrate at European and national level in order to ensure that we take the right decisions and apply the right policies , policies which often take a long-term view which is hard to grasp , especially for our national colleagues who have to pay the political price at home .
I believe that we can take the initiative in starting this dialogue .
( ES ) Mr President , I shall refer to the European Charter on the rights of victims of terrorism .
On 15 December , Mr Barrot undertook to promote a European Charter on the rights of victims of terrorism .
On 19 January , Mrs Malmström welcomed Mr Barrot 's words in a truly positive spirit .
On behalf of the Spanish Presidency , on 26 January , Mr Pérez Rubalcaba , the Spanish Interior Minister , stated that he fully supported the victims of terrorism , and that Spain would do all it could in the Commission and the Council to assist them .
We welcome all this .
It is now time , however , to move from declarations to actions , coinciding with the VI International Congress on Victims of Terrorism , due to be held in Salamanca on 11th , 12th and 13th of this month .
I wish the Congress every success in its work .
Mr President , we shall continue to call for commitment in this area and to promote it from within Parliament .
( FR ) Mr President , my colleague , Mrs De Keyser , has had the opportunity to recall the tragedy that occurred in Liège on 27 January .
Naturally , I am not going to repeat what she said about the victims and the emergency services , who deserve a statute .
What worries me is that , on this occasion , the owner of the building was not insured .
I merely wish to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that it would be useful , before talking about compulsory fire insurance for every citizen , to talk about compulsory civil liability insurance for damage that may be caused to third parties , sometimes with malicious intent , but above all , through negligence .
I believe that the Commission could present either a proposal , for example , in the framework of consumer protection - consumer in this instance meaning citizen - or an initiative , which could also come from Parliament .
I should like , in any case , to ask those of my fellow Members who are able to support me in this matter to call on every citizen to take out civil liability insurance to cover any damage to third parties .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Gas Natural , a Spanish holding company , has submitted a project for on-shore regasification plants which would affect the Trieste area , and which has been approved by the Italian Ministry of the Environment .
The Trieste regasification plant technical board has highlighted some important shortcomings .
Following the informal meeting that took place between the European Commission , Italy and Slovenia on 26 January 2010 , the Italian Permanent Representative to the European Union publicly speculated that the European Union had approved the project , whilst the official word from Slovenia is that the opposing sides have been called upon to reach an agreement .
This accord will probably be difficult to achieve in practice , because of the atypical background to the regasification plant affair .
In fact , it turns out that the bodies responsible for providing guarantees and for safety have failed to comply with their protection duties .
Significant delays in drawing up external emergency plans and in communicating with public bodies and authorities responsible for managing emergencies have been highlighted , as has a failure to inform the public about the risks of serious accidents concerning codes of conduct , and the absence of an objective assessment of the domino effect caused by a possible accident in high-risk industrial plants .
For these reasons , we believe this is yet another attempt to set up a high-risk plant , in the knowledge that there are absolutely no protection and safety measures in place .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have prolonged our session of one-minute speeches by 15 minutes .
Administrative cooperation in the field of taxation - Mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes , duties and other measures - Reverse charge mechanism : goods and services susceptible to fraud - Promoting Good Governance in Tax Matters ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the four reports dealing with taxation .
We have here :
the report by Mrs Alvarez on administrative cooperation in the field of taxation ,
the report by Mr Dumitru Stolojan on mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes , duties and other measures ,
the report by Mr Casa on an optional and temporary application of the reverse charge mechanism in relation to supplies of certain goods ,
the report by Mr Domenici on promoting good governance in tax matters ,
I will give the floor to Mrs Alvarez , the rapporteur , for four minutes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is founded on a relationship of solidarity between its Member States .
Indeed , a good example of this solidarity is administrative cooperation on tax matters , which is a key element of the functioning of the Union .
This is all about loyalty between Member States and their tax administrations .
Such loyalty translates into trust , whereby partners trust each other , coming to see themselves as allies who will not allow fraudsters to find refuge in their territory and continue their fraudulent activities there .
Tax fraud tarnishes the entire economy , and has serious implications for national budgets , as it reduces capacity to incur expenditure and undertake investment .
In addition , the principle of tax equity is infringed , as regards those citizens who do abide by the rules .
Unfair competition occurs , leading to inadequate functioning of the market .
All these implications are particularly worrying because the latest estimates suggest that tax fraud in the European Union amounts to EUR 200 billion a year .
If we consider that this figure equates to twice the cost of the Commission 's proposed economic recovery plan , the size of the sum involved can be appreciated .
We are therefore facing a major challenge and should come up with a decisive response .
The directive currently in force certainly represented a first step along the way .
Unfortunately , and despite all the good intentions enshrined in that directive , its practical implementation has not produced the desired results .
It is now time to go a step further and equip ourselves with new instruments so that issues in the field of taxation are dealt with alongside market integration and liberalisation .
I therefore welcome the proposal tabled by Commissioner Kovács and I would like to congratulate him on his work throughout his entire mandate , and today , in particular , on this proposed new directive .
The proposal will equip us with more and more efficient means with which to combat tax fraud and tax evasion in Europe .
The new directive represents a qualitative and quantitative leap forward in this respect .
It is a quantitative step forward because it sets new obligations and a qualitative step forward because it extends and specifies the existing obligations .
The field of application is extended by moving from exchange of information upon request to automatic exchange .
The third new element is the lifting of banking secrecy .
As I see it , this is the most notable measure in the proposal , in that the practice of banking secrecy is the main barrier facing tax administrations .
The OECD has long called for the lifting of banking secrecy , and the G20 has now taken up this cause .
The implementation of this will provide a very efficient tool to put an end to the untenable existence of tax havens within the EU .
This aim is shared by the report before us today .
In this report , we actually aim to strengthen the results of the Commission 's proposals .
The idea is to improve the efficiency and the area of application of the new directive .
I do not intend to provide an exhaustive commentary , and will focus on the main amendments .
Firstly , the area of application is extended , the implementation of automatic information exchange is strengthened , and regarding banking secrecy , it is proposed extending the applicability criterion to bring it into line with the rest of the directive .
There are also compromise amendments , namely those relating to automatic information exchange , data protection and confidentiality , and to the exchange of information with third countries .
Finally , I should like to thank my fellow committee Members for their work and their willingness to cooperate .
They are to be congratulated on their attitude .
We have achieved a broad degree of consensus .
The House is sending out a clear message . Parliament is firmly committed to combating tax fraud and tax evasion and to strengthening the great EU principles of loyalty , transparency and fair competition .
The recent financial and economic crisis has fully highlighted the major importance of having sound , sustainable public finances in each Member State .
Member States which have good control of their public finances and counter-cyclical fiscal policies have been able to provide financial incentives to help their economies exit the crisis .
In this context , as rapporteur , I welcome the European Commission 's initiative and the Council 's draft directive on improving mutual assistance between Member States for the recovery of claims relating to taxes and duties .
This directive will not only help boost efficiency in this area relating to the recovery of claims , but will also help the single market operate better .
I would like to mention to you that the draft directive contains major improvements to a number of important aspects with regard to the recovery of claims : the exchange of information between authorities , methods for pursuing claims and the feedback required by the European Commission to monitor a constantly growing activity , as reflected by the number of cases between Member States .
Amendments have been drafted .
I would like to thank all fellow Members who have submitted these amendments , which have specified more clearly the directives ' terms of application .
I believe that this report will clearly illustrate the efficiency with which the European Union operates , by virtue of its institutions , when faced with a problem that requires urgent and specific attention .
I believe that when we talk of missing trader intra-Community fraud , attention must be paid to the measures that need to be taken in this temporary scheme that is intended to stop those abusing the VAT systems used in Europe .
This type of fraud , as I have already mentioned , is known as missing trader intra-Community fraud .
In its most serious form , it is known as ' carousel fraud ' which is a criminal activity carried out by expert and professional fraudsters .
Recent studies have shown that this type of fraud amounts to about 24 % of all types of VAT-related fraud .
It occurs when a person offering a service or selling a good receives VAT payment from an intra-community buyer and this payment literally vanishes without due payment to the treasury by these fraudsters and by these criminals .
It has therefore been dubbed ' carousel fraud ' because this VAT goes on disappearing from each country where this type of trade is carried out .
The Commission 's proposal thus provides the opportunity to eliminate this risk that is being taken when intra-community trade takes place .
We have to ensure that we do not add to the bureaucratic burden and make the honest businessman suffer the consequences .
We were also careful not to apply this temporary measure to a wide range of products but to apply it only to those that can be controlled and evaluated .
The Emissions Trading Scheme should be mentioned as it has been amended by means of this Commission proposal .
We are stating that due to the vulnerability of the Emissions Trading Scheme , another change that has been implemented stipulates that when a Member State decides it is ready to adopt this system , then the reverse charge procedure has to be made mandatory for all payments concerning greenhouse gas emissions because it is imperative to have coordination and immediate action between all Member States .
Presently , and up to 2012 , around 90-95 % of the credits are allocated to those who generate most emissions .
These are issued by national governments and between 5 and 10 % of these are auctioned off .
From 2013 onwards , the greater part of these credits will be auctioned and therefore , before this system is put into place and is under way , we need to ensure that the market is being protected from those who are trying to abuse the system .
I believe that when one considers the consensus within the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , even with the compromises that I managed to reach - with the Socialists , the Liberals , and all the political groups - I believe that this should pave the way to a more reliable system .
Thus , when my report is approved , we would be combating fraud seriously and will therefore be more successful in matters related to the VAT system within the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although the theme of good tax governance has always been of great importance , it has become even more relevant and significant following the major economic and financial crisis of two years ago .
European and international summits - the G20 - have discussed and continue to discuss it , particularly when they are concerned with fighting tax evasion and tax havens .
All this is important .
It is a sign of commitment and willpower , but we should not delude ourselves into thinking that an announcement is all it is going to take . We need an effective and ongoing policy .
There are still many problems to be dealt with .
It really is still much too easy to buy or set up a front company in order to avoid taxation .
Just look around on the Internet : there are thousands of websites offering companies for sale , even in European Union countries .
Often , all you have to do is send an email and attach a photocopy of a scanned passport in order to set up a company .
We must put a stop to the practice of creating fictitious legal entities to evade tax .
The report I am presenting is based on the European Commission communication of 28 April 2009 on Promoting Good Governance in Tax Matters .
The report moves towards putting forward firm proposals , and calls for a strong commitment from the European Commission and Council , so that these proposals can be implemented .
The fight against tax havens , tax evasion and illicit capital flight must be considered priorities of the European Union .
Hence the principle of good governance , based on transparency , exchange of information , cross-border cooperation , and fair tax competition .
The point is that we need increasing tax cooperation and collaboration in the European Union .
The general objective that we must set ourselves is for automatic information exchange on a global and multilateral scale , but this must , obviously , start within the European Union .
As Mrs Alvarez has already said , we must completely abolish bank secrecy in European Union countries and hasten to put an end to the temporary derogation that allows the application of a withholding tax , which is often evaded or underestimated , instead of an exchange of information .
I do not wish to dwell on the tangible proposals that the report contains .
I will , however , stress that we still particularly need the following things : to extend the scope of the 2003 Savings Directive , to fight VAT fraud , to create an EU public register listing the names of individuals and undertakings having set up companies or accounts in tax havens and to give new impetus to tax harmonisation projects , beginning with the common corporate consolidated tax base .
The European Union must also send out only one message internationally , and fight for the improvement of OECD standards to achieve the automatic sharing of information , instead of sharing on request .
Mr Kovács , having listened to the other reports as well , we need strong commitment by the Commission and we now also need these priorities to be emphasised to the new Commission at the time of handover .
As the European Parliament , we are entitled to call on the Council and the Commission to account for their work .
I thank my fellow Members , and especially the shadow rapporteurs , for the contribution they have made to this work , which I hope will be adopted by Parliament .
Thank you , Commissioner Kovács .
As you mentioned , this is the last occasion when you will be coming to this House so let me also thank you for the excellent cooperation we have had with you during your tenure .
Mr President , chance often has a hand in things .
At a time when we are debating the protection of privacy and of individuals , and when these debates are having new repercussions , the Members of this House have a wonderful opportunity to affirm some strong principles .
Whether it is to do with the introduction of body scanners in airports or the SWIFT agreement with the United States , those who strenuously defend individual freedoms will not hesitate , this week , to make their voices heard , even if it means creating considerable diplomatic tension .
I regret , however , that their struggle for citizens ' freedoms is changeable and inconsistent .
When it is an issue of protecting bank and financial data , the good suddenly turns into the evil .
That which , in other fields , deserves protection , demands to be flouted in the name of a new imperative : the generally compulsory fiscal colonoscopy .
Wholesale automatic exchange , which forms the basis of the Alvarez and Domenici reports , is the scanner that strips you at every turn ; it is the SWIFT agreement writ large from which there is no return .
However , this Parliament will not let a contradiction stop it .
It can decide in favour of the automatic exchange of every conceivable type of data between tax authorities in Europe and , at the same time , reject the SWIFT agreement with the United States in the name of individual freedoms .
Can this incongruity , this inconsistency , be understood or even , at times , justified in the name of effectiveness ?
No .
The golden rule , your golden rule , in other words , the automatic exchange of all fiscal , bank and financial data of all non-residents , will inevitably lead to a flood of unmanageable data .
The precedent of taxation on savings should , however , serve as a warning to you .
Yet that is not the case .
Once again , you have to go down the wrong road and advocate a system that does not work .
There is none so deaf as those who will not hear .
To those of my friends who seem to be worried about the bureaucratic excesses that the implementation of this structure might entail , I would like to say that the only solution is to oppose it , not to introduce it and then be surprised by its disastrous consequences .
Allow me , Mr President , to address a final word to Commissioner Kovács , who is fighting his last battle this evening .
I wish him a happy retirement .
Commissioner , in your career , you frequently chose the wrong fight but , kind soul that I am , I will not ultimately hold this against you too much .
Have a happy retirement , Commissioner .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( PT ) Mrs Lulling , I would only like to ask you one question .
In your speech , what has the automatic exchange of tax information got to do with ending secrecy when they are two clearly separate issues ?
The majority of countries in Europe do not have banking secrecy .
Automatic mechanisms are in place for circulating information between tax authorities and the wealth of each one of them is not posted on the Internet .
Is there no way to keep the two issues separate ?
Mr President , my fellow Member has unfortunately not understood a thing , but as I have no speaking time , I will explain it to him in private .
I trust he will understand before the vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this period of crisis , public finances have been heavily used , initially to save the financial system and then to cushion the social and economic impact .
In this context , there is much talk of public deficits , the spending of Member States is being attacked , but the fall in tax receipts is allowed to fade into the background .
One forgets that , each year in the European Union , EUR 200 billion evades taxation , and these are resources which could have been used for essential recovery policies , resources which would allow us calmly to face up to what some are calling , in inverted commas , the demographic time bomb .
This is why the texts that we are discussing today are so important .
The introduction of common tools and absolute transparency between the Member States in the area of debt recovery are vital steps if we are to ensure that no citizen , no company , can evade their fiscal responsibility , and that everyone contributes to the collective effort .
We must give the tax authorities of each country in the Union the resources to fulfil their missions .
We must also emphasise the extent to which a healthy fiscal policy is essential .
Everyone is currently concerned about Greece .
We are seeing today the extremes to which the lack of an effective fiscal apparatus leads .
It is not merely the crisis that is harming the Karamanlis government ; it is , above all , its predecessor 's lack of political courage in failing to reform Greece 's fiscal administration and thus to create an effective tax recovery tool .
We hope , in this matter , that the Union will use all of the resources at its disposal to confirm its solidarity with Greece .
I hope that the vote we take on Wednesday confirms the vote in committee and results in some encouraging tax recovery texts .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am glad that we are debating these reports within the Commissioner 's term , even if it is only just .
The committee has worked hard to ensure that .
Now , in many - in fact , I would say in most - things , we have had a mutually supportive dialogue , Commissioner , though of course we have not agreed on everything .
For example , we agreed on VAT for intra-Community supplies but disagreed on joint and several liability in the framework of cross-border transactions , and in quite a few instances , we have both been disappointed by the slowness or lack of backing by Member States .
CCCTB is one of those proposals .
But in the face of these disappointments , you have brought forward more intensive , traditional controls based on cooperation , information exchange and data access .
So both personally , and as Chair of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , I take this opportunity to thank you for your work and enthusiasm during your term of office .
As colleagues have said , at this time of fiscal stress , enabling Member States to collect their full dues of taxes is even more important .
With this driving force , the Council must be more progressive in future .
Those who knowingly scheme to evade and avoid taxes do harm to society and should not expect leniency when they are caught , and we must have the tools to catch them .
Turning specifically to the matter of administrative cooperation , I believe that automatic exchange of information is beneficial .
It goes along with the Savings Tax Directive , which I hope will soon be adopted in Council .
But your activism in this matter has already created positive developments , both within and beyond the EU .
I also commend the directive on mutual assistance for recovery of claims but consider a lower threshold for implementation more appropriate .
And , finally , I apologise to you and colleagues for not staying for the rest of the debate but , as ever , there are double bookings going on in this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for some weeks now , it has been fashionable to worry about the budget deficits of certain Member States .
One can , of course , criticise some examples of public spending - and we shall not refrain from doing so - one might refer to the billions of euros in subsidies for fossil fuels , but let us not forget , as the Socialist Member said , that the increase in public deficits is the result , first and foremost , of the financial and economic crisis .
I do not believe that the governments need to be taught lessons in sound management by those who , due to their predilection for risky operations - financed , believe it or not , by debt - were the cause of the crisis .
This being the case , we agree that the public deficits are unsustainable at their current levels because they reduce the possibility of Europe spearheading the worldwide Green New Deal that it sorely needs .
We must therefore confront the issue not just on the ' spending ' front , but also on the ' income ' front , and this is the spirit in which we are reading the reports tabled today , in particular , those by Mrs Alvarez and Mr Domenici .
By making the automatic exchange of information between tax authorities the norm , they give the Member States the means to tackle tax fraud seriously .
I would remind you that the estimated annual amount of tax fraud is EUR 200-250 billion , or two per cent of GDP .
Before we even talk about restructuring the European tax regime , let us ensure that tax due is collected .
Moreover , the draft supports the introduction of a common tax base for company taxation , which will clarify matters both for taxpayers and for the Member States .
In so doing , it will be a step forward , but it should pave the way not for more competition but for more cooperation .
It is time we put an end to fiscal dumping , to this road to ruin that is undermining the tax receipts of the Member States , and to the detriment of whom ?
Of the taxpayer and of SMEs , which do not have the resources of the big transnational companies to play the Member States off against each other .
The consolidated tax base is therefore , in our view , the prerequisite for the introduction - in line with what we are doing for VAT - of a progressive harmonisation of tax rates for companies , beginning with the setting of minimum thresholds .
Finally , establishing a sustainable basis for the Member States ' tax regimes will require much deeper changes : reducing the charges on income from employment and offsetting this reduction through the introduction of a progressive tax on energy - on non-renewable energy resources - and of a tax on financial transactions and profits .
However , as my grandmother used to say , that is another story .
In the meantime , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance congratulates Mrs Alvarez and Mr Domenici on their excellent work , which has not merely repeated the past positions of the European Parliament , but has made them more ambitious and more practical .
I will finish by also saying a word of farewell to Mr Kovács .
I was not here when you arrived .
My colleagues have told me that the impression that you have given them through your actions is much better than the one you gave us when you were first appointed .
You have therefore pleasantly surprised us .
I wish you all the best .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs and other shadows for the hard work they have put into producing these reports .
Taxation , particularly any form of harmonisation , is always a sensitive issue .
We need to balance the need to operate an efficient single market with the need to protect Member State competence on taxation .
I would advise Mr Lamberts that the best way to minimise tax evasion is to have simpler taxes and lower tax rates .
Tax competition is a jolly good thing .
It protects the taxpayer from rapacious governments .
Member States must be free to sign bilateral agreements with third countries .
The UK and the US readily share information because of their history of cooperation in fighting terrorism .
If this information was to be shared across the EU , many third countries would refuse to sign similar agreements in the future .
Cooperation would cease and national security would be put at risk .
I urge Members to approach these reports pragmatically .
We need to ensure that we do not indulge in needless harmonisation which endangers national security .
Mr President , without doubt , the reports in question make a positive effort towards creating a legislative framework in terms of administrative cooperation at European Union level in the field of direct and indirect taxation other than VAT and excise .
However , I must say that the reports , the proposals for directives and so forth touch on the problem of tax evasion and tax fraud .
However , there are two aspects of tax evasion which have stood out during the crisis .
The first has to do with tax competition within Europe ; the last thing this promotes is solidarity and economic and social cohesion between the Member States .
We need to address and resolve this problem .
The second has to do with offshore companies .
As we all know , these companies are tax evasion and money laundering vehicles .
The Greek Government 's intention , for example , to simply levy a 10 % tax on such transactions is scandalous .
This being so , and as numerous Members have stressed , in these times of economic crisis , with all the Member States facing financial problems , not to mention the fact that the way in which the European Central Bank and Stability Pact operate is inadequate and they are exacerbating rather than resolving the problem , we need common solutions to common problems , one of which is tax evasion .
We need to come down on tax evasion and tax fraud , so that governments have revenue at a time at which there is an urgent need for redistributive and development policies .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , taxation as a concept has not really changed very much in the last 3 000 years , has it ?
The rich and the powerful stealing money from ordinary people to make their own lives more comfortable .
Where there has been a change in modern times is that now taxation is ' for the benefit of the taxed ' : that somehow we are being taxed pro bono .
In order to perpetuate this myth , we invent periodic scares to frighten people into submission .
The latest of these scares is of course that , if we do not cough up green taxes , we will all boil to death - reminiscent of the medieval religions , is it not , which played the same game : pay up or burn in hell .
Tax harmonisation is a concept dreamed up by the modern political class to make sure that no government steals too little from its people : a sort of thieves ' cartel if you will .
May I suggest , if you really want tax harmonisation , that the Commission and the bureaucracy pay the same taxes as the electorate , that they bear the same burden of tax as the rest of us , before the electorate storm this building and hang us from the rafters , as they have every right to do .
( DE ) Mr President , we need to overhaul the democratic process .
As a young author and journalist , I used to pay 62 % tax out of conviction , because I was convinced , and had the impression , that we were governed by good people .
However , since becoming a Member of the European Parliament , I have seen what actually happens to tax revenue .
Back then , we used to pay millions of schillings every year .
What bothers me in this debate on the promotion of good governance in tax matters is the fact that we are not looking at our own spending , but simply talking about evil tax fraudsters .
Back then , when the tax rate was 62 % , my tax adviser was Christoph Matznetter , who later became Austria 's Secretary of State for Finance .
He told me : ' you are from Vorarlberg , go across the border , to Liechtenstein or Switzerland ! '
I did not do it , but others did .
However , if , in the light of these experiences , you approach this with the sober and rational mind of someone who was not a civil servant , who was not an expense to the social security system , who was not active in any public domain , as the majority of Members here are , then you have to ask yourself how in all the world can I my save my hard-earned money from this wastefulness ?
My suggestion therefore is as follows : let us begin at the point where we can demonstrate that a sensible administration will use money sensibly , that is , with ourselves .
Why do we need another 200 new jobs ?
Why do we need to fund school skiing lessons this week ?
What is all that for ?
If you really want to take the fight against tax havens , the recovery of tax claims and the attraction of people to the project of the European Union seriously , then we have to begin with ourselves and show people that the institutions we stand for are spending the taxpayer 's money responsibly .
Otherwise , we will continue to lose tax revenue , without any justification for calling those people to account .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , a 4 % GDP decline , 21 million unemployed EU citizens , deficit proceedings against 20 Member States , 80 % State indebtedness .
With the European Union in such a state , I ask : can we afford the luxury of allowing billions in taxes to just drain away ?
It is intolerable that while we sacrifice huge amounts on economic stimulus and on keeping workplaces open , there has been no progress at EU level for finding ways , for instance , to move the recovery of cross-border tax liabilities up from the shameful 5 % level .
Or whether we should extend the automatic exchange of information uniformly to all income , thereby eliminating the need for governments to get information from stolen data storage media about their citizens ' untaxed income invested here and there .
At the moment , the rate of tax fraud in the EU amounts to two and a half times the total EU budget .
I strongly believe that Member States ' tax authorities must cooperate in order to track down tax fraud .
Nobody should be able to hide behind bank secrecy , and let us abolish quasi-tax havens inside the European Union , even when , my fellow Members , it hurts the Member States concerned .
The interest of Europe as a whole must take precedence over partial viewpoints .
Honest taxpaying citizens of the EU expect no less from us than rules that are binding for everybody , without back doors .
The Domenici report gives an account of how to close those back doors .
Our topic now is not tax harmonisation but how to recover taxes levied according to each Member State 's rules , with the help of others , if need be .
All other elements of the tax package before us serve this same purpose .
On behalf of the EPP , I have added several suggestions to the Domenici report which had the support of other political groups as well .
In the first place , I suggested setting up a system of incentives that would guarantee that the Member State acting on behalf of the one seeking recovery of cross-border taxes would receive a portion of the recovered sums .
This way , we could give a push to the halting cooperation between tax departments .
Secondly , by using a system of comparative profits , we could take effective action , especially against multinational companies that manipulate transfer prices in order to evade taxes .
I know that Commissioner Kovács has doubts about this , but I think work could begin in that direction .
Finally , I am glad the Commission supports the need for tightening the requirements for tax information exchange as stipulated by the OECD model agreement applicable to 12 States .
I think that by continuing on these paths , we can move towards a more honest tax policy .
( SV ) Mr President , this evening , we are debating a number of measures to combat tax fraud and tax avoidance of various kinds .
These are matters of great importance .
It would be a very good thing if we in the EU were able to strengthen our instruments and our cooperation for combating tax evasion in the manner proposed .
The economic and financial crisis has hastened the need to make our tax systems as effective , reliable and fair as possible .
I take a positive view of the proposal to extend the application of the reverse charge mechanism .
Among other things , this is a crucial step in the development of our climate change work .
When emissions rights start being auctioned in 2013 , we need to have a credible trading system in place that is not plagued by VAT fraud and similar problems .
The reverse charge mechanism is likely to be an excellent way of preventing such VAT fraud .
It will ensure both the credibility and the effectiveness of the system .
The work on the report on the reverse charge mechanism has been very constructive .
I am pleased to see that the Commission , the Council and my fellow Members concerned were determined to come up with a good solution quickly .
A central element of the report is the creation of a comprehensive assessment system - a system that is based on uniform criteria .
It is very important that we monitor carefully how well this reverse charge mechanism works in practice in the area concerned .
The measures to combat tax evasion now being proposed are an important step along the way , but should be regarded as a small part of a more extensive , long-term process .
There remains much to do in this area .
EU cooperation should be reinforced and the EU should lead the way in creating effective international agreements to combat tax evasion .
( FR ) Mr President , this seemingly rather technical package in reality relates to some highly political issues .
First , administrative cooperation between States on fiscal matters is a key question for the internal market .
I believe that it is important to stress this , because the free movement of persons and capital constitutes one of the precious European Union acquis to which we are so attached .
However , it must not result in an unjust taxation situation in which some well-advised and mobile citizens evade their fiscal obligations , whilst the more sedentary citizens remain subject to them .
Nor should it act as an incentive for competition between States , by which I mean an incentive for fraud or evasion .
This explains our position in favour of a consolidated tax base for taxation on companies and the automatic exchange of data between Member States , which has already been discussed .
If Mrs Lulling had done us the honour of staying with us , I could have told her that the question of civil liberties does indeed arise when we are talking about the exchange of sensitive data , but that , in my view , there is a major difference between the data that we can exchange between Member States of the European Union - in other words in the framework of the internal market , and in the service of the internal market - and the data that we exchange with other countries , even friendly countries such as the United States .
The second , highly political issue , especially after the crisis , is the fight against tax havens , but also against grey areas - or indulgent practices - which unfortunately still exist within the European Union or in associated territories .
Following the G20 declarations , the citizens are expecting results and a credible Union .
This has been the thrust of many amendments , and I believe that this Parliament must attach renewed importance to the issue .
Finally , to conclude , I would like to say a word to Mr Kovács - it is quite rare to be able to say goodbye to someone on the very evening that their mandate is ending - and , above all , to give a piece of advice to the Commissioner-designate , Mr Šemeta , whose initial steps in this area we have welcomed , just as we have welcomed the initial steps of the Barroso II Commission , which seems determined to tackle the issue , especially by entrusting Mr Monti with the task of drafting a report on the internal market containing all of these aspects .
I believe that , however resistant and reluctant the Member States may be , it is up to the Commission to do as you have been able to do , Mr Kovács , and use its power of initiative , but perhaps to a greater extent .
The Member States ' coffers are empty .
Taxation is another way of filling them and , provided that this is done intelligently , we are in favour .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to Mr Domenici 's efforts , the report on which we have to take a final vote this week is a high quality document .
I sincerely hope that it will be adopted on Wednesday at our plenary sitting .
Many of the advances that it contains on the issues of financial transparency , fiscal policy and the fight against tax havens , the major consequences of which are rightly stressed here , are simply without precedent .
First , we should welcome the fact that the text acknowledges the considerable limits of the fight against tax havens as it has been carried out until now .
Tax treaties and the OECD lists of non-cooperative jurisdictions , to reproduce the terms officially in use , are unsatisfactory and even represent part of the problem that they are meant to be solving .
That is why the proposals in this report , which aim to go beyond this approach , to adopt a new definition of tax havens and to introduce new tools - including sanctions - to help in this fight are hugely important .
This is obviously the case for the proposal to introduce automatic exchange of tax information , both within the European Union and at international level .
It is also the case for country-by-country accounting , which the report is demanding and which will make it possible to measure the real activities of companies in the countries in which they are established and to verify that they do indeed pay the taxes which they legitimately owe there .
These are two fundamental demands which have long been supported by many experts .
We can only welcome the fact that the European Parliament is adopting them and , in so doing , will become one of the institutions that is most involved in this fight .
Ladies and gentlemen , the problem of tax havens is not a mere technical issue .
It relates to fundamental choices .
Do we wish to give developing countries the means to benefit from their own resources instead of seeing these confiscated ?
Do we wish to ensure that all of our companies and our fellow citizens contribute within their means to the financing of civic life ?
By voting for Mr Domenici 's report , we will be giving a positive answer to these two questions .
An answer of which , I believe , we can only be proud .
On a personal level , I would like to thank Mr Kovács for the seminar that we jointly organised in Brussels on 9 December to put this subject on the agenda .
Thank you and good luck .
( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , today we are debating a package of economically and politically contentious proposals that are supposed to bring about significantly improved cooperation in the field of taxation .
Tax fraud is undoubtedly a major problem which reduces State budget revenues .
However , what are the causes of tax evasion and what are the motives of those who resort to tax fraud ?
Firstly , high rates of tax .
The higher taxes are , the more taxpayers will look for ways to circumvent their tax obligations .
We should bear this well-known economic truth in mind particularly today , when most politicians assume that public finance deficits will be resolved through higher taxes , in other words , on the revenue side of the budget rather than through major cuts in spending .
I would like to make one more remark , which is that tax havens exist for this very reason , because people move their capital to locations with lower taxes .
If you want to shut down or limit the existence of tax havens , you must cut taxes .
The second important reason for tax evasion is the opacity and complexity of tax systems .
The more exemptions , the more fraud .
Statistical data and various studies confirm that the complications of , for example , VAT collection , are caused primarily by confusing explanations and the thousands of widely-varying exemptions .
Unfortunately , neither the Commission nor MEPs are suggesting that Member States embark on tax cuts or fundamental corrections that might bring about transparency in tax jurisdictions .

The contentious proposals are as follows : the introduction of the principle that there is an obligation to share information on taxpayers ; secondly , the mandatory information on taxpayers is precisely defined and is clearly highly sensitive ; thirdly , the obligation to share information on all types of tax is being applied for the first time and fourthly - a legislative novelty - banking secrecy is breached .
( PT ) Mr President , this debate is very important because what governments and the Commission itself have said to us is that in the years ahead , the crisis exit strategy depends on plans for radical cuts in public investment and social spending .
And what the constant information from the various reports that have been discussed today tells us is that there is ultimately another way forward , a better way forward , a way forward that will encourage honesty and satisfaction among taxpayers !
And this way forward is also the way forward in overcoming the crisis from a revenue point of view - mainly from a revenue point of view - as it will put an end to the nightmare that has been caused by tax havens and to the nightmare that has been caused by widespread tax evasion and tax fraud among large companies and the banking system .
And this is exactly why I very much agree with Mr Domenici 's report when it says that not enough is being done to put an end to bank secrecy .
And this is exactly how we must proceed because it is true that a little justice in the economy never did anybody any harm .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , the question is not : are we for or against combating tax fraud .
Of course we are in favour .
The question is rather , what means do we wish to employ in order to achieve this objective .
The situation among Member States at present is that there are States that do not willingly exchange information on taxpayers with other Member States , even when requested to do so .
The proposal under discussion concerns the introduction of an automatic system , in which all information on nationals and businesses residing abroad will be exchanged between tax authorities .
To my mind , what is important is not to increase bureaucracy , whichever way we exchange information .
Right now , the European Union is in crisis - in Spain , unemployment is nearly 20 % , in Latvia it is over 20 % , in many other countries , it is well over 10 % .
Unfortunately , this is an upward trend .
As a result , Member States are being forced to reduce government spending , something that is actually directly opposed to increasing the size of the bureaucratic machine .
We cannot afford to increase the size of the bureaucratic machine .
However , introducing this system of automatic information exchange would inevitably involve increasing the size of the bureaucratic machine .
In my opinion , European taxpayers simply cannot afford to sustain this at this time .
There is , to my mind , another proposal that we should discuss , namely , perhaps not to go to extremes , i.e. to exchange all information automatically , but instead to ensure at least that all Member States exchange all information upon request .
To sum up , then , an automatic exchange of information upon request . Thank you .

Mr President , with over EUR 200 billion lost annually , combating tax fraud and tax evasion in the EU must continue to be a priority for this Parliament , the European Commission and the Member State governments .
I cannot believe that anyone in this House believes that a right to privacy is a right to evade tax .
There is , of course , a global consensus that a lack of good governance in tax matters encourages tax fraud and tax evasion .
Tax fraud has a major impact on national budgets .
It robs public services , health , education and research of vital resources .
Moreover , according to a major charity , tax evasion by the super-rich and by global corporations has a severe impact on the lives of more than five million children in the developing world .
Governments in the poorest developing countries are being swindled out of EUR 92 billion a year in tax revenues , while the World Bank estimates that just a third of that - EUR 30 billion to EUR 34 billion - would pay for the UN 's Millennium Development Goals .
More shockingly still , a UK charity , Christian Aid , maintains that around EUR 7 trillion is hidden away in tax havens .

Therefore , the actions and recommendations proposed in these reports are essential to supporting a level playing field and to tackling the distortions and abuses which underpin those systems of tax evasion and fraud .
Assets held offshore are now equal to a third of global assets ...
( The President asked the speaker to speak more slowly for the sake of the interpreters )
... half of the world 's trade passes through tax havens , and action to crack down is already being stepped up .
Tax havens are under investigation , with proposals in the EU and in the OECD being taken forward .
Stronger tax cooperation is the only way forward .
This does not weaken national sovereignty but , on the contrary , strengthens and enhances national tax systems , stopping those who seek to undermine the integrity and functioning of those systems .
If we have learned one lesson from the global financial crisis , it is that we need more openness and transparency on financial transactions .
That is why I support the proposals to move towards a global agreement and standard on automatic exchange of tax information tabled by our rapporteurs .
I would like to finish by saying that those who seek to water down these proposals , hiding behind scaremongering on data privacy , are neither serious nor ambitious in supporting global action to tackle the scourge of tax evasion and to promote good governance , good citizenship and social responsibility .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , VAT fraud is not a mere peccadillo .
It is a criminal act and a problem which either escalates or diminishes over time .
According to the latest estimates , citizens , and thereby taxpayers , lose up to EUR 100 billion every year , perhaps even more .
At a time of accelerating public debt and crisis , citizens have no sympathy for the fact that the European Union has so far not been able to tackle this problem successfully .
This is why I welcome a fresh attempt to introduce the reverse charge procedure , on which we will be taking a vote the day after tomorrow .
What we are trying to do with the reverse charge procedure is effectively eliminate the problem of VAT evasion or at least reduce it .
We have to wait and see , however , whether or not this procedure will generate the desired increase in VAT receipts and deter new cases of fraud .
However , it is certainly worth the attempt .
We will monitor closely the results of the procedure , the application of which is currently limited to 2014 , and carry out a critical assessment .
However , I would have liked an amendment to one specific point : I am in favour of enterprises which duly discharge their duty of care in the context of a review of their VAT registration numbers , being exempted from any liability , even if the recipient commits fraud .
I explicitly regret that my amendment to that effect did not command a majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Mr President , tax fraud is a crime that not only robs governments , but also robs every single taxpayer - every single citizen who does pay their tax on time .
There has been much good work by the OECD , the G20 and indeed the various rapporteurs in Parliament on the work to help combat tax fraud .
I would like to speak specifically on Mr Domenici 's report and to thank him for the great transparency that he has shown in working together across Parliament to improve this document .
However , I do have three concerns .
The first one is that combating tax fraud should not be used as a back door excuse for those who want to open up the debate on tax harmonisation across the EU .
There is wording in the document about the common consolidated corporate tax base , and I think we should wait until the Commission comes to us later on this year with their impact assessment before jumping to a conclusion on any of the pros and cons of that debate .
The second point is on the controversial matter of exchange of information .
It is very clear that in certain circumstances , better exchange is needed , and indeed , like the savings tax , the automatic exchange does have benefits .
This document goes much wider and demands automatic exchange in all areas .
I would rather we looked at each specific circumstance to see where we need it .
Thirdly , the Domenici report suggests an EU-wide levy on financial movements to and from certain jurisdictions .
There are different sanctions and different incentives , as the Commissioner has pointed out , that could be used to promote good behaviour in this area .
I am very concerned that we could be going back with just one suggestion which could be hugely controversial by having these words about an EU-level levy .
( PT ) Mr President , in addressing these four reports , which appear to have a very prominent technical structure , we are debating weighty political issues .
Firstly , and to make things clear : the fight against tax fraud and tax evasion should be ongoing .
This is for reasons of respect towards those who pay tax and abide by the rules .
I also want to make it clear here that this is not a matter specifically related to any crisis .
This is a matter of public ethics .
And just as this matter should be debated , another matter relating to tax competitiveness should also be debated by the European Union and the Member States , with a view to encouraging economic growth through taxation policies .
It is also necessary to view the fight against tax fraud and tax evasion in a legislative light .
Laws must be straightforward .
Laws must be transparent and administrative bodies must also act in an appropriate manner .
This is exactly why the issue surrounding the exchange of information is relevant , where we must consider the decisions that have been made by international organisations that have really studied this matter such as , first and foremost , the OECD .
Exchanging experiences is essential in this respect , so that measures that sound good in theory are not counterproductive in practice .
Specifically on the subject of tax havens , we must support the decisions and progress made at the G20 and , above all , we must remember that the measures in this area should be suitable , proportional and effective .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , here are some facts that are worth remembering : according to the OECD , assets amounting to EUR 5 to 7 trillion were stashed away in tax havens in 2008 .
In the European Union , tax evasion , already mentioned today , amounts to between 2 % and 2.5 % of EU wealth , which is to say double the EU budget .
Nowadays there is also no doubt that tax havens , the vagueness of new financial products , the lack of administrative cooperation , the failure of regulation and supervision in the markets and the excessive ambitions of operators have all contributed to the terrible crisis we are experiencing .
On a global level , progress is being made and we are learning lessons from this - lessons that were established in the initiatives of the International Monetary Fund , the OECD , the G20 , and the Financial Stability Forum .
The European Union , particularly under the guidance of Mr Kovács , who I would like to congratulate , has been involved in a series of initiatives .
These include administrative cooperation , the Savings Tax Directive , debt recovery assistance , a code of conduct , as well as increased cooperation by Belgium , Austria , Luxembourg , the Isle of Man and even neighbouring countries : Switzerland , Monaco and Liechtenstein .
However , it is important that this collective effort does not lead to what was so well described by Mr Domenici 's fellow countryman , when it is said in Leopardo that many things must change if everything is to stay the same .
This is an example of what cannot happen !
European citizens are now suffering from unemployment , threats of tax increases and the loss of basic retirement rights .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are not getting credit and sacrifices are widespread .
These citizens are the ones who expect us - as their representatives here in Parliament - to learn the lessons and truly guarantee competition , justice , transparency and honesty within the European Union .
These four reports , particularly those of Mr Domenici and Mrs Alvarez , are along these lines .
I hope that these reports receive widespread support from the Members of this House and , in fact , that they provide the European Union with the political drive it needs to learn the right lessons and also encourage these lessons to be recognised on an international scale .
( SV ) Mr President , we are all aware that taxes are a sensitive issue , as we have heard .
Member States quite rightly see taxes as being primarily a national matter ; in the wake of the financial crisis , however , more and more countries are realising that cooperation within the EU must improve .
Tax competition is a good thing .
However , the rules must be fair and no Member State must benefit from its rules being used to dodge taxes .
Tax fraud is illegal , immoral and distorts the situation in individual EU Member States .
We may criticise the tax burden in our own countries .
I have been known to do so myself .
However , we must work to change the policy in our country rather than shirking our responsibilities .
The most effective way to exchange information is to do so automatically .
The EU has often been critical of tax havens of various kinds .
It is therefore important that we show that we are also working internally to improve transparency , openness and cooperation in the area of taxation , while respecting the sanctity of private life .
In order to avoid unnecessary administrative expense and to create a clearer legal basis , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has submitted an amendment to the effect that the Member States must not be forced to assist another Member State if the matter concerns less than EUR 1 500 per year .
I believe that this sets clear limits on the authorities ' powers and , as I understand it , Mr Kovács accepts this amendment .
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Kovács , Commissioner for 18 hours more , or whatever .
It has been a privilege to cooperate with you .
You did not achieve it all , but you did your best .
Thank you and good luck .
( PL ) Mr President , in its sixth term , the European Commission adopted a series of legislative proposals as part of the fight against tax fraud and tax avoidance in the European Union .
A key factor here is the proposal for a directive on administrative cooperation in the field of taxation .
Thanks to its adoption by practically all Member States , the directive which is currently in force was , undoubtedly , the first step in the direction of administrative cooperation in this field , although it was evident that specific results were lacking in terms of its implementation .
However , in this proposal , we have a strengthening of the internal sovereignty of individual Member States in the field of taxation by the application of more specific and effective management of tax receipts by each country , and also an intensification of the process of European integration , which is becoming increasingly necessary in the field of taxation , both from the political and economic as well as the administrative point of view .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you Commissioner Kovács for your excellent work .
Administrative cooperation between EU Member States in tax matters , which is my remit , is an ambitious project .
It is necessary because tax evasion is no mere peccadillo .
It affects countries across borders .
We have to work together to fight tax fraud and dubious tax havens .
The view of the Member States that not everything can be solved at European level is a blatant error .
Exploring the possibility of purchasing illicitly acquired data on fraudsters , which is legally problematic and an issue which we in Germany have been grappling with , should not be our only course of action .
It may well be though that such purchase is necessary .
In this directive , I welcome , firstly , the planned automatic exchange of information between tax authorities ; secondly , the enhanced procedure for the mutual exchange of staff between administrations ; and thirdly , the urgently needed measure to relax bank secrecy laws far beyond the EU .
Admittedly , we need to remove some obstacles , particularly the clash between data exchange , on the one hand , and data protection , on the other .
We need to strike a balance between the two and not allow one interest to prevail over the other .
Furthermore , cross-border dual taxation should be a subject of greater focus .
I have spoken to a series of small and medium-sized enterprises operating simultaneously in different Member States .
They say that the situation is far too complicated and that there is not enough transparency and experience , which is why they find themselves unable to take the right investment decisions .
We have to consider that .
We also need to reduce red tape and pay greater attention to what is actually necessary , so that tax administrations can help us work more closely together and simplify our procedures .
If we can achieve that , if we can embed such simplified procedures into the everyday lives of businessmen , we will be making clear progress .
This directive is an essential statement of our intention to do that .
( RO ) Our debate on the subject of the proposed taxation reforms is taking place in a situation which is inevitably making an impression on fiscal policies .
The economic and financial crisis is causing the rise in deficits worldwide which , in turn , increases the importance of the resources assigned to the public budget .
As has already been said , the latest reports on this subject highlight the alarming magnitude of tax fraud in the European Union , amounting to more than EUR 200 billion annually , equivalent to 2-2.5 % of GDP .
Our fellow Members who have worked on these reports , to whom I would like to express my appreciation for their efforts , have presented us with a glaring picture of the extent of the fraud .
The economic recovery plan proposed by the European Commission aimed at reducing the crisis 's impact requires costs amounting in total to 1 % of GDP .
I believe that the situation requires strong anti-fraud measures and closer cooperation in tax matters between Member States , all the more so as the crisis has highlighted more than ever the negative aspect of the interdependencies between national economies .
Against this background , the proposal for a directive marks a step forward as it will bring European tax legislation into line with both economic developments and the strengthening of the European integration process .
In this sense , the automatic exchange of information , the lifting of banking secrecy and measures to improve mutual assistance in recovering claims may contribute significantly to making administrative cooperation between the 27 Member States more efficient .
Finally , I would like to wish Commissioner Kovács every success in his future endeavours .
( SV ) ( initially without a microphone ) ... the present directive is very welcome at a time like this when tax revenues around the world are diminishing .
In a common market , there is no way we can accept the present situation in which taxable income can be concealed and remain untaxed in another Member State .
As has been mentioned , the EU 's Member States are losing out on billions of euros of tax revenue every year because of failures in the exchange of information between the Member States .
I would also remind you that so long as some people are hiding their income and thus avoiding paying taxes , the rest of us have to pay more tax to make up for it .
That can hardly have been the intention - at least , not in my view .
It is astonishing that some people are defending the prevailing system , which actually allows people to avoid paying their taxes .
I realise that some Member States have a lot to lose , but are they actually presenting a credible argument ?
No , they are not .
We should promote international cooperation on tax and draw up common standards to prevent tax fraud , both at EU level and globally .
At the same time , I would remind you that there are those who believe that the protection of privacy is important and must be adequately safeguarded .
It is important to bear that in mind , since the system we are in the process of creating will otherwise lack credibility in the eyes of our citizens , and that is essential if we are to succeed .
Mr President , I think it has been painfully clear in this economic crisis that we either fail separately in the EU or we succeed together .
It has been a very long process to get to the point where we might really have proper automatic exchange of information concerning taxation issues in the EU and full transparency , with effective administrative cooperation between the officials and nation states .
While we are asking the private sector - the banks - to be more transparent and more reliable after the financial crisis , I really do think that we need to urge it of our nation states and ourselves as well .
I therefore welcome the steps that have been taken here , but there is a long way to go .
I urge the Commission to be very ambitious and very strong concerning international cooperation in order to have an international agreement on tax havens and automatic exchange of information .
Mr President , taxation is absolutely vital for the running of countries - I think most citizens would agree with that .
Nevertheless , many citizens do not welcome the paying of taxes with open arms and with a smile .
This goes back to the time of our Lord , when he pointed out that one of the most despised species in his time was the tax collector , who was seen as a villain .
I am not sure if their status has gone up a whole pile in the meantime .
Now they are regarded as Revenue Commissioners , but they probably would not win any popularity contests .
Nevertheless , side by side with that is the fact that , historically , those who evaded tax were sometimes seen as almost heroes , outfoxing the government .
Now , thankfully , that too is changing , but at the same time , taxation evasion is rife throughout the country and throughout the world .
Even in my own country , in the 1980s and 1990s , the banks themselves were providing offshore addresses for people for the purpose of evading tax .
When that was found out , then , of course , the individual had to pay .
Now , what we need to do in the future is to ensure that tax evasion is cut down .
The OECD estimates that 2.5 % of global GDP is lost through tax evasion .
Cigarette smuggling is a case in point , where cigarettes have moved from low-tax to high-tax economies , causing terrible damage to health and , of course , also to finances .
At the same time , the EU is limited by what it can do , because the Lisbon Treaty does not give it great competences in the area of tax .
That came up in the Lisbon Treaty in the guarantees given to Ireland .
For that reason , there can be no common consolidated corporate tax base , and the principle of fair tax competition must remain .
So what we have to do is , by collaboration , cooperation , conviction and persuasion , try and get things moving ahead - but we cannot do it by compulsion .
( FI ) Mr President , these proposals represent excellent efforts to facilitate the fight against tax fraud and improve cooperation between authorities .
We would do well to remember that taxation is never an end in itself , but is society 's tool for implementing politically agreed objectives , including the equalisation of income distribution , the taxation of harmful practices , and the creation of an economic basis for common welfare services .
A good tax system relies on a fair and broad tax base and reasonable levels of taxation .
Tax evasion and tax fraud eat away at the tax base and honest citizens and companies are left to foot the bill for the taxes that fraudsters avoid paying .
As we have heard here , gross domestic product is now at crisis point in different parts of Europe .
Tax fraud and evasion result in poorer GDP results to the tune of around EUR 200 billion a year .
We really cannot afford this .
I would like to make a few comments about the reports themselves .
When ways to combat VAT fraud are being considered , the notions of cost benefit , legal certainty and the proportionality principle need to be borne in mind .
These are highlighted very obviously in Mr Casa 's report .
It is reasonable to focus , in particular , on goods and services that are susceptible to fraud in the fight against VAT fraud , and the reverse charge mechanism gives these Member States an opportunity to apply a reverse order arrangement , by way of derogation from the main principle of the VAT Directive .
Administrative cooperation is a way to supplement national legislations , but we need to remember that it will never replace them or result in their approximation .
Most controversial of all with respect to these directives has been the matter of information exchange .
Effective information exchange between the customs and tax authorities in the Member States helps to combat abuse , and that is why I think that we should be promoting the exchange of tax records and not blocking it .
In Finland , tax records are public knowledge and the country is one of the least corrupt in the world .
This being the case , I cannot see how the automatic exchange of tax records might threaten to violate civil rights in the way some of my fellow Members seem to think it would .
( DE ) Commissioner Kovács , Mr President , financial legislation is , of course , a national responsibility and excites the self-interest of Member States .
Here in the European Union , however , we should be thinking of how we are going to sustain the internal market , in particular , the four freedoms , in the future .
One of the main problems which we have to tackle here is , of course , dual taxation .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which cannot keep track of all the legislation in this area , have particular difficulty offering their services in other countries .
The Commission should therefore come up with a proposal on how dual taxation should be managed , and it must be one which puts in place a straightforward and transparent taxation system for these enterprises because , ultimately , it is the credit rating of a company that determines whether it can survive in the market and whether it will stay solvent .
I would also very much welcome a one-stop-shop for SMEs , so that they can have a specific point of contact and so that tax refunds can be paid out quickly , efficiently and transparently .
( RO ) I would like to mention the e-Government systems which have already been developed in different Member States to implement the following types of applications : payment of taxes via electronic means , as well as payment of VAT via electronic means , or initiatives such as e-Invoicing .
We are talking about a new digital agenda for the next five years , which means that Member States need to use information technology to improve administrative cooperation in fiscal matters as well .
I believe that , at least as far as e-Invoicing is concerned , a high-level group was already created in 2008 which finalised a report and recommendations for the European Commission last November .
Commissioner Tajani also made the commitment that during the subsequent period , he would come up with initiatives aimed at supporting e-Invoicing so that it would become widely adopted across all Member States .
I would like to ask the Commission if and when it is going to come up with such a proposal .
Mr President , discussing tax cooperation during the current euro crisis is rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic .
The southern nations are known in English by the harsh acronym PIGS ( Portugal , Italy , Greece , and Spain ) .
However , those being crucified on the euro are not pigs but people , scourged by utopian one-size-fits-all dogma .
Their economies will either die of a thousand cuts or be bailed out , to the ruin of taxpayers in Britain and elsewhere .
There will be very little tax to cooperate over .
There are two ways out : either abolish the euro and return to the captive nations of this Strawberry Soviet their own currencies , or expel the ' problem countries ' from the euro .
That might be the PIGS .
More justly , it would be Germany and her French collaborator , because running the euro according to German interests is the root of this shambles .
This endless crisis will destroy the federal project - tax cooperation and all .
The tragedy is that it will grind so many innocent victims into poverty before it does so .

( RO ) I would like to congratulate Mr Stolojan for all his efforts in drafting the report on the recovery of claims .
The EU needs common legislation , enforced uniformly in all Member States for combating tax fraud and evasion .
The internal market and a Member State 's budget can be affected by non-payment of any kind of taxes or duties .
The free movement of capital and persons has necessitated the extension of the legislation 's scope of application .
Compulsory social security contributions will also be included from the start of this year .
One important step in the process of recovering claims within the EU is the rapid exchange of information .
The existence of common standard instruments and forms , which will be translated into all the official EU languages , will facilitate the relevant authorities ' daily work .
A common automated system will enable queries to be resolved more quickly and at a lower cost .

( DE ) Mr President , even as we today congratulate Mrs Alvarez , Mr Domenici and our other fellow members on their excellent reports , even as we congratulate Commissioner Kovács on his committed work and wish him all the best with his future work , and even as we express the hope that he will pass on to his successor the passion with which he has fought for a common tax policy , we must also then mention Member States , those Member States who continue to hesitate in taking action that is more than necessary in this crisis situation , action which will finally usher in better cooperation .
It is quite shocking that we still have not made any breakthrough on the question of the tax base .
Anyone who thinks that they will be able to defend their sovereignty in this way will lose it , just as they will lose their tax revenue .
Therefore , the main message of these reports is that we must forge better cooperation in Europe .
Only that will lead to progress !
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against tax fraud is a necessity .
Of course , tax evasion and tax fraud are not the causes of the economic and financial crisis .
It seems important to me to make it clear once again in this House that we must regain the confidence of the taxpayer through simple tax systems and through low and fair taxes .
However , that is not to say that we should not actively fight tax evasion and tax fraud , because any tax evasion undermines our sense of justice .
That also brings us to the subject of tax havens .
Germany 's neighbour , Switzerland , has voiced concerns that it is being placed under pressure .
On this point , I would like to ask the Commission specifically : are proposals being made , or rather , are measures being taken to place Switzerland under particular pressure ?
My personal view is that Switzerland cannot afford to treat the EU any less well than the USA .
Therefore , that means that Switzerland must actually join in our concerted efforts to fight tax evasion .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , I have found the debate interesting and inspiring .
Like most of you , I am persuaded that our efforts to combat tax fraud and evasion and to increase tax cooperation are worthwhile .
I am grateful for your support and for the work of the four rapporteurs , and I am very grateful for the support for these important Commission initiatives .
Promoting good governance in tax matters is a complicated dossier containing several different issues .
Your reports have covered virtually all of them , from the formal legislative proposal promoting administrative cooperation to our work with third countries .
I was pleased to hear that many of you encouraged the Commission to be more ambitious .
I fully agree with you , and I am sure that , with your support and with that of the governments of the Member States , the new Commission will be able to tackle the challenges ahead .
I know that these files remain a priority for my successor .
The Commission , Parliament and the Council should continue efforts for the approval of the legislative proposals which are on the table or in the pipeline and the work of the Code of Conduct Group on business taxation .
On the external aspects of the principles of good governance in tax matters , all actions mentioned in the communication should be promoted , with special attention to those related to developing countries .
As regards the specific proposals on administrative cooperation , mutual assistance in the recovery of tax claims and the optional and temporary reapplication of the reverse charge mechanism , I also want to thank you for your comments and views .
I am glad to see that the European Parliament and the Commission share views on the action to be undertaken to better combat tax fraud and evasion in the European Union and beyond .
I also see general support for the three proposals .
Achieving rapid progress and unanimous agreement on the proposal on administrative cooperation is one of the priorities of the Spanish Presidency .
It is also now a priority for most Member States .
The EU urgently needs to reach a unanimous agreement internally to be able to show , on the international scene , its determination to move ahead from the OECD standard and the G20 recommendations and pave the way for a future evolution at international level by proving it is able to develop fully fledged administrative cooperation .
It is clear that there is no one single and global solution for eliminating tax fraud and evasion , but the proposals we have discussed today are important steps forward within the framework of the European Union 's anti-tax fraud strategy .
Finally , just one day before the end of the mandate , I would like to repeat my thanks for the support for the Commission 's tax and customs initiatives and , in particular , for the cooperation of the ECON and IMCO Committees .
Mr President , I should like to refer to the reasons why we go beyond established OECD standards concerning automatic exchange of information .
Many arguments could be adduced in this regard , but clearly the OECD model relates to the broader framework of international relations in which the rules of the game are very different from those which apply in the European Union .
As Mr Kovács stated , there is a single economic area within the European Union in which tax information should enjoy the same freedom of movement as people , so that each Member State can apply its tax regime .
What we have in the Union is a single market in which there are no barriers for goods or for people .
There is therefore no reason to have barriers where tax information is concerned .
The Member States are part of a political project and the relationship between their tax administrations must be consistent with that political project .
Political principles are at stake here , over and above issues of practical desirability .
I should also like to emphasise that national fiscal sovereignty is strengthened rather than weakened by combating fraud .
In other words , the fiscal sovereignty of Member States will be strengthened as more effective instruments for the implementation of their own tax system become available to them .
Thus , we should bear all this in mind and it is therefore incumbent on us to support this directive .
In addition , as Mr Klinz has rightly said , fraud is an offence .
It cannot be justified by resorting to such feeble arguments as the high tax regimes in certain fiscal systems .
On the contrary , I would go so far as to argue that if tax fraud were reduced , taxes could be lowered .
We must certainly persevere in our efforts to simplify the various fiscal systems .
In conclusion , I should like to emphasise that the four reports and the four directives we are supporting have a strong deterrent effect , because when taxpayers realise that as a result of these provisions , fraudsters will have less room for manoeuvre and fewer safe havens available , the temptation to engage in such activity will be much less .
Even if some individuals do attempt to engage in this activity , we shall have more effective instruments available with which to deal with them .
Finally , I must mention that these measures come at a most opportune moment , as the crisis has highlighted the dangers of a lack of transparency , transmission from certain countries to others , and the need for public stimuli .
In this connection , I should like to refer to Mr Lamberts ' support .
He has made it clear that in times such as these , public finances must make a special effort to adopt measures aimed at economic revival and social protection so as to mitigate the effects of the crisis .
For all these reasons , today 's citizens are more than ever aware of the seriousness of tax fraud and of its consequences for the economy in general .
They are also eager for their representatives to take appropriate measures to deal with the matter .
I have listened attentively to the views expressed by my fellow Members .
I also noticed the abstentions on the automatic exchange of information .
However , I firmly believe that we in this Chamber , at European institution level , must show every European citizen who honestly pays duties and taxes that we are determined to adopt every measure to keep tax evasion to a minimum so that the decisions on recovering claims for duties and taxes can be properly enforced , no matter which Member State the debtor resides in .
I , too , listened attentively to all that has been said and if I had to draw a conclusion from this important debate , it would be that we all agree that we must employ every means available to fight tax evasion and the different types of fraud that take place in various countries .
We must accomplish this by means of measures such as those that have been proposed today , without harming the trade sector - particularly SMEs - and without increasing bureaucracy .
On the contrary , I recommend that we must continue to reduce red tape in areas that frequently impede the trade sector .
We have to ensure that we do not penalise honest citizens who pay and do not evade tax .
This also applies to those in the business sector , those who deal in cross border trade , and who do not evade taxes and therefore , who are not criminals .
Therefore , I believe that with these proposals , we will strengthen the credibility of the Emissions Trading Scheme and its related payments .
At the same time , as I have pointed out , we need to reduce the administrative burden on honest businessmen and , moreover , we are ensuring that Parliament is kept informed throughout the whole adoption process of the reverse charge mechanism .
Like my fellow members , I believe that I should thank the Commissioner for all the work that he has carried out these past years .
Mr Commissioner , obviously we have not always seen eye to eye , yet when we look back at the taxation sector I believe that today we have a fairer and more efficient system for our citizens , namely the citizens of the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my thanks for the comments on our reports , the products of a collective effort .
I hope that these comments are a good omen for a positive vote by the European Parliament .

I believe that - as Mr Stolojan and Mr Casa also said - our reports deserve support , if only on behalf of all our fellow citizens : honest taxpayers , who are the first to suffer from fraud and tax evasion .
The aim is to make everyone pay , so that each individual has to pay less .
I would just like to make two comments .
Mrs Lulling spoke , at the beginning of the debate , about tax colonoscopy .
I know from experience that a colonoscopy is not a pleasant examination , even if it can be very beneficial to human health .
In the sphere of tax , there is a very simple way of avoiding it : it is simply not to conceal , not to hide one 's own income and not to evade one 's legal obligations .
The second comment is that it is right to always be concerned about how public money is being used , but it is also right to do so when governments are forced to use that public money to bail out banks and financial institutions that have speculated their money .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 10 February 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
VAT fraud is a criminal activity which has a huge impact on budgets , with illegal refund schemes being used in all Member States , Romania being no exception ( for example , carousel fraud ) .
The reverse charge system introduced by some Member States , including Romania , has worked very well .
However , it was also necessary to adapt VAT Directive 2006 / 112 / EC to the current situation in order to keep the risk of illegal VAT refund schemes ( the type based on fictitious exports ) to an absolute minimum .
This is why applying a reverse charge to products at a high risk of tax fraud is a reliable procedure which has a positive overall impact on the budget , even though there is a delay in payment to the national budget of the VAT accruing on the transactions liable for such a tax .
In conclusion , faced with the choice between receiving the VAT only at the end of the economic cycle when the finished product or service reaches the end user and avoiding fraud involving illegal VAT refunds , the first option is the correct choice .
The ideal scenario would be for the reverse charge to be applied as a rule rather than the exception .
However , this step should be taken after an in-depth analysis of the impact on the budget .
in writing . - I just wish to raise one particular point regarding cooperation on taxation between Member States .
This was a major issue of sensitivity during the Irish referendum campaign on the Lisbon Treaty .
There is just a note of caution I wish to give my colleagues in Parliament .
Cooperation between Member States is the foundation of this Union ; however , that cooperation has always been based on mutual consent .
What we must be careful of in the field of taxation is not taking into account the needs of certain Member States .
Certain countries need to apply rules differently : if , for example , a country is an island , or does not have a population to support a large , functioning market , it needs to use every advantage at its disposal to attract investment .
I call on colleagues to bear this in mind when making proposals on this matter .
Proposals should not interfere with subsidiarity .
Any proposals will need the approval of Member States .
It is not an unimportant element of this debate .
The tax-related initiatives discussed today play a particularly important role in the battle against cross-border tax fraud and evasion , issues which have a major political aspect and serious consequences for Member States ' budgets .
The promotion of good governance in tax matters requires action at EU level and outside the EU , as well as across Member States .
We need strong measures , simple , transparent laws and , by extension , less bureaucracy .
Last but not least , we need to ensure that citizens have access to assistance .
Measures such as guaranteeing transparency , exchanging information at every level , improving the assistance given to Member States , establishing effective cross-border cooperation and fair tax competition are essential objectives , especially now during the current financial crisis , when we have all seen how important the sustainability of tax systems is .
The Member States with good governance in tax matters have been able to respond much more quickly and effectively to the economic crisis .
I welcome the Commission 's initiative and the work done by the rapporteurs .
I believe that there is the political desire to promote good governance in tax matters . However , we need to ensure that these proposals are more than just political sound bites and take action to implement them as quickly as possible .
in writing . - ( NL ) Madam President , the tax authorities face a challenging task in the globalised , all-digital world .
The detection of fiscal and social fraud is complex even in the internal market .
Moreover , the lack of current European legislation on cross-border administrative cooperation between tax authorities is problematic .
Therefore , the establishment of a taxation liaison office for each Member State to accelerate and simplify administrative cooperation between Member States merits our support .
Currently , requests for tax information sharing take so long that tax administrations often simply decide against waiting for the information .
The option of an automatic exchange of information proposed by the Commission receives my full support , for two reasons .
Firstly , it will enable Member States to collect their taxes more efficiently , which , in times of crisis , is only fair and by no means a luxury .
Secondly , it will mean operators in the internal market being treated equally .
The principle of reciprocity in tax information sharing is also in line with the agreements within the OECD and the G20 .
This is an unmistakeable message for which the Belgian Court of Auditors also - rightly - made an urgent call not long ago .
Therefore , I shall be endorsing the report by Mrs Alvarez with conviction .
GM / Opel : current developments ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on GM / Opel : current developments .
Madam President , honourable Members , the present debate concerns a question of great interest to the European public : the public financing of the restructuring of the Opel / Vauxhall group by one or more European governments .
The Commission has monitored this question closely .
On 14 July 2009 , Commissioner Kroes and I raised the case of the Opel / Vauxhall group with you here in the European Parliament .
The Commission has also organised several informal meetings with the European ministers responsible for this matter .
As you know , in autumn 2009 , General Motors decided to keep hold of Opel / Vauxhall and to restructure the company .
At the end of November 2009 , General Motors presented a summary of its restructuring plan to the services responsible for competition .
Although the role of the Commission does not usually involve prior assessment of the industrial and commercial rationale behind a restructuring case , in the absence of information from the Member States on potential State aid for the plan , the Commission 's services undertook such an assessment at the request of the Competitiveness Council .
On the basis of the content of the General Motors restructuring plan and of the information supplied to the Commission , it would appear that this restructuring plan is not based on non-economic considerations , which would damage the future viability of the Opel / Vauxhall group 's European operations .
The current General Motors plan shares a number of characteristics with other restructuring plans prepared previously by General Motors itself and by other interested investors , and does so in certain key areas .
It is consistent with earlier General Motors decisions taken before the start of the crisis , in particular , on the issue of allocating a particular model to a particular production site .
Moreover , General Motors has given an economic justification for its decisions relating to the reorganisation of its production plants across Europe by referring to the specific situation of the individual plants .
These decisions seem to be motivated by considerations such as the range of models allocated to different sites in Europe , the respective life cycles of the various models , the respective production volumes for a given model that is currently produced at more that one site , the relatively low level of extra investment required to further centralise the production of a given model , the value to the plant of certain upstream processes , and so on .
I understand that General Motors has yet to discuss this plan with the workers ' representatives , who are expected to make commitments in order to allow significant cost reductions to be made in Europe .
The Commission will remain vigilant and will ensure that , where State aid is involved , the restructuring of Opel / Vauxhall will remain based on economic considerations , that it will not be influenced by non-commercial conditions linked to State financing and , in particular , that the geographical breakdown of the restructuring efforts will not be affected by political demands .
The Commission will continue , of course , to monitor closely all developments within the Opel group .
In this context , you are surely aware that , on 21 January 2010 , General Motors officially announced its intention to close the Anvers site in 2010 .
I understand the concerns caused by the announcement of thousands of job losses at that plant .
It is sad to see that the Opel / Vauxhall group deems plant closures necessary .
I must stress that this decision was taken by General Motors alone .
The Commission cannot , and must not , seek to stipulate the location in which these reductions will be made .
It is unable to avoid them , but it can anticipate their consequences .
The Commission , in coordination with the Belgian authorities , stands ready to use all of the resources at its disposal to assist these workers .
The possibility of Belgium presenting a request for assistance under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund has been discussed .
This is certainly one option to be explored and , at first sight , it would appear that this request for assistance , were it to be confirmed , would meet the required criteria .
You say you mean to remain vigilant , but I think that is rather insufficient .
We believe that the position of General Motors in Europe is unacceptable .
General Motors is counting on securing State aid from several national and regional governments in the European Union , one of the intended purposes of which is to cover the social costs of the closure of the Antwerp plant to which you refer .
This kind of thing is unacceptable , Commissioner : unacceptable both to the workers and to Europe .
In our opinion , this dossier is a very important test for you , a very important test of the credibility of the European Commission .
We cannot allow such things , as this would set a huge precedent for other dossiers in future .
Commissioner , this is an example of the protectionism that keeps rearing its ugly head , and it is unacceptable .
It undermines the foundations of the EU and , moreover , it is always the smaller countries who have to suffer , as this case has proven once again .
In the last few months , the EU governments have let themselves be divided like altar boys , as it were , by the Americans of General Motors , and it is clear that this cannot be repeated .
It can be prevented only by means of a common European approach .
In today 's German press , your colleague , Neelie Kroes , the Commissioner for Competition , says that State aid in the automobile sector is possible only if this aid is channelled towards the development of innovative and environmentally friendly products .
We agree with this , but it is much better that such things be coordinated at European level than , as is currently happening , that they be the subject of separate negotiations between the various European countries and General Motors , as this is a road to nowhere .
Besides , making a single , joint European offer to General Motors would put us in a much stronger position , of course , and also enable us to demand guarantees in the social field - which must surely be close to your heart - and the employment field .
After all , why should it not be possible to open up new prospects for the workers at the relevant Opel plant in Antwerp , and naturally also for the workers at the other Opel plants in Europe who have been affected ?
It is not yet too late for this , Commissioner Špidla .
We believe that , in the case of such cross-border restructuring operations , the European Commission itself must take the bull by the horns and set to work on a proactive policy instead of just watching and waiting .
What does this mean in specific terms ?
It means launching a common strategy , taking much more dynamic action and , primarily , making much more vigorous use of all the European instruments at our disposal and combining them , instead of acting in disarray as we are doing at present .
In my opinion , we have been far too soft in our action on this dossier up to now .
The European Commission stood by as General Motors triumphed .
This has to change , in the interests of the workers , as they are the ones to suffer from the current lack of European political will .
My second point is just as important , Commissioner .
Today , the European Ministers for Industry are meeting in Spain to launch a European action plan for the automobile sector .
I believe we have an urgent need for this .
You , the European Commission , must bring together the major industry actors to ensure that our automobile sector , too , does not become swamped with Chinese products in the near future .
This coming Thursday , the Heads of State or Government of the European Union are meeting for an extraordinary European summit in Brussels at the instigation and on the invitation of our President Herman Van Rompuy .
There is just one item on the agenda : the enhancement of European economic cooperation .
Commissioner , let us begin with the automobile sector , as this is and remains our most important industry .
It is a real pacesetter for economic renewal , and has the potential to be a powerful force for employment .
I urgently requested that this issue be discussed in plenary once more , not only because it concerns thousands of workers in my back yard , Antwerp in Flanders - you will see that many Members of the European Parliament will take the floor on this issue - but also , in particular , because it concerns a pan-European restructuring operation involving the closure of one plant and the loss of thousands of other jobs .
Thousands of people - men and women and their families - face a gloomy future .
I believe that these people are looking to the European Union today with a mixture of hope and fear .
Do they have good reason to hope ?
Perhaps . I should like to ask you , Commissioner and Commission , what your further plans are , as I make no secret of the fact that I am extremely disappointed with Commissioner Kroes ' further reiteration today that , in the event of the dossier coming up for discussion , she will apply the rules on State aid .
I am also disappointed with your response and position today , however .
Naturally , if the closure ever goes ahead , we shall have to ensure that people are offered assistance .
Yet today , we are looking for a quite different European Commission , one that takes this dossier to heart and plays the political role it should be playing .
It can start by requiring Opel 's European management to put the business plan on the table at long last and to provide full access to the economic and other arguments forming the basis for this decision .
After all , as I am sure you know , the European management in Antwerp , for example , has received very large amounts of aid and resources from both the Flemish and the Belgian authorities in recent years to enable it to remain competitive .
Now all of that is being brushed aside , and there is no strong European Commission to do anything about it .
My second message , which is also a very definite request to the Commission , is that I should like to see the Commission taking much clearer action and being much less compromising in future when it comes to restructuring operations .
If two businesses merge , the European Commission must be notified , so why can this not be the case with restructuring ?
Why can the Commission not apply the same economic and social criteria to restructuring operations ?
Only then will there be a clear vision for both industrial policy and a social Europe .
That is what the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament is calling for .
First of all - as has already been said here , of course - the events in Antwerp have dealt a heavy blow to thousands of families , and also to the workers in the supply companies .
Yet I have to tell you , Commissioner , that I was rather shocked by your words .
Firstly and most importantly , you say that General Motors bears responsibility , as though no responsibility lies with either the regional , Belgian , or European authorities .
As I said here last time , given that we are talking about a cross-border matter - one involving several countries - and about the restructuring of a company , the Commission should actually have taken ownership of the matter in order to ensure compliance with the European rules .
It did not do so , instead leaving it in the hands of the Member States - Germany - and then of the management of General Motors .
I would urge the Commission , in future cases of the restructuring of multinationals in Europe , to take ownership of such dossiers within the framework of its industrial policy rather than merely acting as coordinator between the various Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs .
Secondly , Commissioner , I was shocked to hear you say you are still not in possession of that dossier .
It is all over the press that EUR 2.7 billion in State aid is to be handed out , and then the Commission comes and tells us that it does not yet have a business plan or dossier .
In my opinion , it is high time the Commission not only obtained the dossier - simply went to get it - but also , at long last , looked into whether this is a case of unlawful conduct .
After all , it is indeed a case of unlawful conduct .
State aid can be provided only for the development of new , innovative products .
Yet it appears that the EUR 2.7 billion requested from several EU Member States to keep their companies open is simply to be used in the context of general aid to keep the European plants , the European activities , going .
It is time the Commission took this in hand and not only made statements - as Mrs Kroes and you have done - but also had its services actually obtain the business plan and take a look at whether or not illegal aid has been granted .
I do not know whether you realise this , but the credibility of Europe , of the European Union , is at stake here in the minds of thousands of families , of a large proportion of the European population .
We have already held this debate , last September .
Even then , it was clear that the reaction of the European Commission was actually very hesitant .
Commissioner Kroes did say at the time that she would investigate the matter for proper compliance with the competition rules ; but , since then , little has happened , as Mr Verhofstadt pointed out .
Evidently , the European Union does not have access to the business plan , even though - as we all know from the press - Opel is to request EUR 2.7 billion in State aid .
Hence we all - MEPs and ministers in the regional and federal governments - feel that we are running behind the facts .
That is unacceptable , Commissioner ; these are vital matters .
I have to say that , since Mr Reilly of General Motors communicated the decision to us , I have received masses of emails with subject lines such as ' Worthless Europe ' and ' Europe can get lost , it does nothing for its inhabitants ' .
This is the way people feel .
Therefore , when I hear one of your colleagues , Commissioner - Commissioner De Gucht - say that the Commission does not even have access to the business plan , I find this absurd .
At a time when we shall soon have to look into whether it is permissible to promise that EUR 2.7 billion in State aid on the basis of a recovery plan , of a study by an independent consultancy , and at a time when all of us in Flanders know that Opel does indeed have prospects , I say to you , Commissioner , that you are being defeatist here .
This is your last speech in Parliament , but I expect more decisiveness from you in this House .
I expect more decisiveness from the Commission .
I also expect - and here I agree with Mr Belet - very tangible plans to put the car industry back on track and give it a real future oriented towards what the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance calls the Green New Deal : a combination of the mobilisation of resources for the benefit of the climate with an environmentally sound approach .
Following the closure of Opel Antwerp , the question arises as to what scope remains for industrial policy .
General Motors is a company that has lost its competitiveness as a result of the excessive pension costs exacted by American trade unions .
The centre of American car manufacturing has already shifted to the southern United States , where the trade unions are weaker , and this includes German and Japanese car manufacturers .
General Motors is an illustration of what happens if labour costs become too high .
The Flemish economist Geert Noels said recently that labour costs in Belgium have risen sharply since 2000 ; which , incidentally , was during the government of Mr Verhofstadt , who is present here today .
In Germany , labour costs have been falling since the same period .
Noels believes this is the reason for the closure of Opel Antwerp .
Industrial policy requires that we maintain our competitiveness , Mr Staes .
Let us look to the future for once .
What is the situation with the chemical industry in Flanders ?
It employs 64 000 directly and a hundred thousand indirectly : well over 160 000 people earn their living from the chemical industry .
Recently , however , the German chemical company Bayer decided to relocate from Antwerp , and that is a bad omen .
The car industry must also contend with the consequences of an anti-car policy propagated by the Greens .
One cannot demand an anti-car policy whilst also demanding that car plants be left open .
Cars are being rendered unaffordable , as people should be taking the bus .
Cars are becoming too expensive for people on lower incomes .
The result is that less cars are being sold , and now look at Opel Antwerp .
The chemical industry has to contend with European climate policy .
Now that the conference in Copenhagen has failed , will Europe start to go it alone in reducing its CO2 emissions by 20 % by 2020 ?
That would put paid to the Flemish chemical industry in the same way as high labour costs have put paid to Opel Antwerp .
Madam President , an end to the Flemish chemical sector would be Opel Antwerp times 54 .
If Flanders neglects its chemical sector , it will become Greece on the North Sea , as the Flemish entrepreneur Thomas Leysen put it , and I hope my Flemish friends take note of this .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( NL ) I should like to say to Mr Eppink that , between 2000 and 2009 , we did make sure that Ford remained open in Belgium , that Volkswagen stayed open and that the Audi 1 is going to be manufactured there , and that this was achieved through a reduction in costs : labour costs , through shift work .
As a result , these companies have stayed in Belgium and made new investments .
It is my conviction , therefore - and I ask Mr Eppink if he shares this conviction - that Opel is indeed a profitable plant that would be able to stay in Belgium if we continued with that policy .
( NL ) I think Opel Antwerp would have had a future if it had not been for the crisis and the collapse of the whole concept of General Motors .

What Mr Verhofstadt cannot deny , however , is that recent years have seen a decline in the car industry in Europe and also in Flanders , and Mr Noels , the economist to whom I referred , has said that high labour costs were one of the reasons for the Americans closing Opel Antwerp instead of one of the others .
Opel Antwerp was an efficient plant , but then that is also said of Opel in Luton , United Kingdom , and also the German plants , hence my belief that high labour costs always have an erosive effect on industrial policy , one that must be prevented if we want to maintain employment .
Madam President , Commissioner , I have heard your explanations and I must tell you that I am alarmed .
All that you have done is defend the General Motors plan .
If you supported the general interest , you would defend and speak a little more about the workers .
General Motors is not closing Opel Belgium because it is in difficulties : it has made a EUR 3.4 million profit , but this has not prevented it from getting rid of 2 600 jobs .
Let it not be said to us that this is for geographical reasons , because General Motors is getting rid of 10 000 jobs all told .
In truth , they are closing down here so that they can go and exploit workers in South Korea ; that is the truth of the matter , Commissioner , and we should be told as much .
I would add that this is not happening against a backdrop of European solidarity because one Member State - Germany - is promising additional aid to Opel and is allowing the Anvers plant to close .
In other words , there is no solidarity between us .
And you , you are endorsing the closure by telling us in advance that a small amount of social aid will be used as a sticking plaster to ease the workers ' pain whilst General Motors continues to reaps its profits !
Well , this kind of management is antisocial ; it is working against the territories of the European Union and is creating an enormous mess , as we can see currently at Toyota , where hundreds of thousands of cars are having to be recalled .
It is even a threat to driver safety .
Radical change is now required .
The Commission must serve a purpose ; let it serve the interests of the European people .
Those are the reasons why I shall be calling on the new Commission to draft a European directive which makes consultation of works councils and group-level works councils mandatory and which gives them powers to monitor the use of State and European Union aid .
Such aid must be accompanied by a clause guaranteeing employment , training and wages , but it must also give impetus to a European strategy for cooperation between car-making groups in the fields of research and of the production of new , clean vehicles .
To this end , the European Central Bank must refinance national banks with a loan , which would be all the more beneficial because it would be used for employment , training and investment in research and for the development of a new generation of environmentally friendly vehicles .
Finally , we propose to draft a European regulation that obliges groups to include their financial companies and all of their holding companies in their accounts , so that the authorities and the trade unions have an overall view of a group 's economic situation , rather than a case-by-case , factory-by-factory view , the sole aim of which is , in fact , to disarm the workers and confront them with a fait accompli .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , may I first say that I have sympathy with the workers in Antwerp , but I would like to point out another couple of issues regarding the EU and General Motors .
Spyker Cars becomes Saab Spyker in a EUR 400 million deal but , make no mistake , this is not a normal commercial deal where one company pays and another company is paid .
This is a Commission-style deal which is more suited to a command economy .
Spyker pays , but using money from the European Investment Bank .
In other words , the European taxpayer pays and the whole deal is underwritten by the Swedish Government .
Of course , only the risk is underwritten .
General Motors will still take a share of the profits and Saab Spyker will be obliged to buy fully assembled cars from another General Motors plant , one located in that well-known European nation of Mexico .
Why are we saving jobs in Mexico with European taxpayers ' money ?
Can we not rebody Vectras at the Ellesmere Port plant in my constituency ?
For that is all Saab has been reduced to .
And it is also common knowledge that General Motors and the European institutions have a special relationship .
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has pumped over EUR 160 million into General Motors ' operations in Russia and Ukraine , and it owns a 30 % equity stake in the General Motors manufacturing plant in St Petersburg .
So I would like to ask the Commission why such extravagant financial support is available to countries such as Ukraine and Mexico but is never available to British companies .
Rover could have been saved for a fraction of the price , and jobs probably could have been saved at Rolls Royce in Netherton on Merseyside , in my constituency , but at the moment , General Motors jobs in my constituency in the north-west of England are still at risk and yet the Commission is using my constituents ' tax revenues to secure General Motors jobs in Mexico and Russia .
( NL ) The closure of the Opel plant in Antwerp is a disaster , not only for the workers and the supply companies , but also because a development is clearly perceptible whereby all forms of industrial production in Flanders and elsewhere in Europe are being cut back .
The Commission is to investigate whether State aid , if this is forthcoming , complies with strict conditions .
Yet it should be possible to grant temporary State aid to a company such as Opel Antwerp provided such aid is channelled towards a conversion to more innovative production .
Obviously , the aim cannot be to keep whole industrial sectors alive artificially for ever more , but we must bear in mind that Opel Antwerp is a profitable plant with highly skilled workers , high productivity levels and modern equipment .
I refuse to believe , therefore , that we are dealing with a kind of industrial dinosaur that is doomed to extinction in the very near future .
In this debate , we have heard renewed pleas for another big rush ahead .
Some say that Europe should take on even more powers , on the assumption that more Europe automatically produces a better Europe .
Yet it would be good if the EU were to take a flexible yet consistent position within the framework of its current powers , for example , by ensuring that the rules apply as much to Germany as they do to Flanders , that the larger Member States do not get away with more than the smaller ones .
I should like to conclude by addressing a few words to the representatives of the Belgian parties in office .
You are partly responsible for making Belgium one of the most expensive countries in Europe for industrial production .
You have ensured , by dint of an oppressive tax burden , that Flemish workers cost significantly more than their counterparts in other countries and that , at the same time , they have less to show for it - this is also a factor - and it is time you gave this some more thought .
( DE ) Commissioner Špidla , Madam President , the Commission should protect European interests and on that point I agree with what previous speakers have said .
The Commission should reconsider its approach .
From tomorrow , General Motors will be trying to rake in EUR 2.7 billion worth of public aid across Europe , without contributing a single cent of their own .
We have to make it clear that Europe , i.e. the Commission , will not make any money available if that means that further plants will be shut down or that production will relocate outside Europe .
However , at the same time , Member States should not support General Motor 's plans to that effect and should not think only about saving their own plants .
We should not allow workers to be played off against one another , nor should Member States allow themselves to be so , because any such divisions would result in further off-shoring .
The European taxpayer and Opel 's other workers in Europe should not foot that bill .
Nobody will understand that over there !
People want to understand what the European Union is doing .
Whatever plans General Motors might have for Europe , the Commission should ensure that they play to European rules .
The European Works Council has proposed a solidarity-based solution and a sound financial rescue plan for Opel , whereby all the plants would remain in Europe and whereby adjustments would be made in all plants on the basis of solidarity .
Management should not be allowed to ignore this plan , nor should Mr Reilly and his colleagues disregard the consultation process with the European Works Council or the rights of consultation and participation which we have secured for European workers .
A solidarity-based European solution for Opel is possible , but the Commission must get involved .
( NL ) I am delighted that the Opel dossier is back on the agenda today , although I note that the European Commission statement contains very little news .
Commissioner , you spoke at length about the informal meetings that have been held based on a summary of a plan , but I did not hear you say anything about a real business plan .
You also said you did not have the impression that the plan was based on non-economic considerations ; I should like you to tell me what aspects of that plan or dossier you are referring to .
You say that the Commission has no control over where the jobs are to be lost .
This is true , but you could look into things , you could test criteria in respect of the business plan , you could examine whether they are indeed in line with European restructuring and competition legislation , but we have heard nothing about any of this today .
Yet your colleague , Commissioner Kroes , made us very clear promises in the September plenary .
She said that the Commission would never accept taxpayers ' money being used to serve national political interests .
When I note that , apart from Mr Belet , no members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) are speaking here today - and certainly no German ones - I think this is very telling .
The way I see it , Germany has hauled in the loot ; but this is very tough on the Antwerp Opel workers .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Opel case shows us how debatable it is - as has emerged clearly from our discussion - and how difficult it is to intervene via political decisions in solutions to the economic woes of commercial enterprises .
Some months ago , we discussed here the possibility of financial assistance to Opel from the German Government .
We all understand very well the important position of that company and the effects of its potential difficulties , particularly on the thousands of employees , as well as the related impacts on supplier firms and also , of course , on increased costs for State social systems in case of a catastrophic course of events .
Despite this , many of us warned against political decisions on large subsidies from the public purse .
As we can see today , neither the so-called scrappage schemes nor the sizeable planned financial subsidies have solved the problem .
On the contrary , they seem only to have postponed the issue and added to the economic problems of the company , and we are not even sure whether these are real problems or tactics of the company .
A crisis situation is currently affecting a certain section , with the Antwerp firm getting into a very difficult position .
We can only speculate as to why it is that the problem is affecting precisely that part of the company which lies outside the country of the parent company .
The Opel case is acquiring one further dimension .
We are getting into a disagreeable solution for a multinational company when we start discussing the nationality of specific parts of the firm .
The problem of the firm then becomes a problem of various countries and a solution at the European level becomes very difficult .
In the given situation , the European Parliament should remain in the position of a body demanding compliance with the adopted rules of the EU Member States in such a way as to avoid interfering with the competitive environment while accepting the principle of subsidiarity .
It is , at the same time , very dangerous if such complicated economic problems of large firms can provoke rivalry between EU Member States with signs of protectionism in a specific branch of industry .
( DE ) Madam President , I am an Austrian and I have asked for the floor because European law is being broken and because this case is topical and , as such , it concerns us all .
The case of Opel Antwerp is not , as Opel Management would constantly have the public believe , primarily about shutting down plants in order to address surplus capacity arising from fewer cars being sold .
This case is about off-shoring to South Korea , a breach of contract on the part of Mr Reilly , Head of Opel-Vauxhall , a violation of workers ' rights and their rights and those of their representatives to information , consultation and participation .
Ultimately , this is about cherry-picking , in other words collecting , or attempting to now collect , EUR 2.7 billion in public aid .
Mr Reilly negotiated the Delta Framework Agreement with European Works Councils only to then break it .
The car models that were supposed to be manufactured in Antwerp are now most probably going to be manufactured in South Korea , and European workers will ultimately have to foot this bill through pay restraint .
Another point which causes me much concern is the issue of management overheads , which are also supposed to be reduced by 30 % , but those of Mr Reilly are being increased from the legally stipulated 7 % to 21 % .
This means that the German right of participation is being flouted .
I therefore call on the Commission to pay regard , not only to the question of efficiency in the determination of State aid , as you have said Commissioner Špidla , but , above all , to compliance with the rights of information , consultation and participation .
( SV ) Madam President , we are currently facing what is probably one of the worst economic crises that any of us in this House has experienced .
The car industry is one of the industries that has been hardest hit .
Once again , we are facing a situation in which there is the risk of closure of a European car plant .
This affects not only the car plant itself , but also its subcontractors and those who work for the subcontractors .
This is not just a personal tragedy for the employees who will lose their jobs , but also a major problem for Europe because it weakens a very important branch of industry .
Globalisation will bring changes and we are seeing enterprises relocate their operations to other parts of the world .
When enterprises relocate to other countries because employees in those countries have worse conditions , poorer working environments and fewer union rights , then there is cause to review the arrangements in our trade agreements and other instruments .
We also need to discuss what we can do together to address this problem of competing with countries that offer workers worse conditions - both within the Union and in respect of third countries .
We also need to act in unison to prevent enterprises playing off one Member State against another .
A European plan for the car industry must be forward-looking and based on knowledge and development , not on poorer conditions .
( ES ) Madam President , I should like to begin by expressing our full solidarity with Opel workers and with their families .
We also stand in solidarity with workers employed in companies supplying Opel and their families .
These people have endured several months of uncertainty leading to a plan which calls for State aid and sacrifices by the workers .
This situation will affect the plant at Figueruelas in Spain too , and all who are employed there . Consequently , and also in order to prevent similar situations arising in the future , we call on the Commissioner and the incoming Commission to devise a new active industrial policy , notably for the automotive sector .
Such a policy must involve monitoring and acting to avoid non-investment such as that which left several companies like General Motors and Opel in impossible situations whereby the workers bear the brunt of the consequences .
The Commission cannot remain a mere observer .
Thus , we also therefore call on the Commission to rigorously verify and check the content of the Opel plan , as it still seems very imprecise as regards issues pertaining to viability .
The only areas in which it is clearly defined relate to the sacrifices expected of the workers and the local area .
We also call on the Commission to act as is incumbent upon it to ensure that any action taken regarding financial viability is agreed to by the workers and their representatives , which has not always been the case in the past .
As to securing the future of Opel Europe , once again we call for future projects to comply with genuine economic and industrial viability criteria in a European framework , to avoid a repetition of situations such as the one we are now faced with and ensure that the European automotive industry becomes an innovative and sustainable sector with a future .
The citizens who follow our discussions and decisions on the vehicles of the future still wish to travel in safer , more comfortable and more sustainable vehicles that comply with the high European quality standards to which they have become accustomed .
Consequently , they also wish to see European workers continuing to deal with these cars in the future .
Madam President , firstly , I would like to empathise with my Belgian colleagues as I am involved with the Dell workers in my own constituency who lost their jobs when the factory relocated to Poland .
I can understand their position perfectly well .
From my experience , I would point out a few things to them .
Firstly , it is absolutely paramount that the help is activated as quickly as possible because , once the clock starts ticking , the Commission 's hands are tied and they cannot extend it without legislation , and that will not happen for some time , if at all .
Secondly , whatever help is given must be worker-centred , not to workers fitting into preordained courses , etc. that state agencies may have .
That is absolutely crucial .
I am involved with the workers at Dell and that particular issue at the moment .
So I would say to my colleague , Ivo Belet , and others that it would perhaps be interesting for us to get together , exchange experiences and keep working as this process progresses .
I endorse it completely .
( RO ) I would like to begin with three vital questions .
What lies ahead for Europe 's industrial policy ?
Which direction is the European economy 's competitiveness going in ?
Lastly , what is going to happen with Europe 's labour force and , by extension , European citizens ' quality of life ?
At the start of this year , the unemployment rate in the European Union reached 10 % .
This figure is 20 % in countries such as Latvia and Spain .
This is why I believe that this is such an important subject .
It is also the reason why I think that , in the case of a European multinational corporation where a restructuring process is being carried out , it is important for trade unions from other Member States to be involved in the consultation process , as well , as part of the European works council , and not only from the State where the corporation has its head office .
I believe that , as Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs , you , or the person who is going to take up this post , can impose this measure .
( PT ) Madam President , Opel had a large factory in Portugal , in Azambuja , and employed a total of almost 2 000 workers .
However , the company closed down , abandoned production in Portugal and moved to Spain .
This left behind a trail of unemployment affecting thousands of workers who were either directly or indirectly affected by Opel 's strategy .
It should be noted that the company did not do this because of wages , which were lower in Portugal than they were in Spain .
The company did this as a means of increasing production , without considering the social consequences of its decision .
It is therefore necessary to remember Opel 's history and to act in an effective manner when monitoring its activities .
We must remember that as far as State support for multinationals is concerned , we have to support industrial production , workers ' rights and the rights of communities in affected areas , and we also have to guarantee trade unions and other workers ' representatives that we will intervene in an effective manner .
Madam President , it appears that the main law or the main rule of globalised neoliberal capitalism is for a small group of the rich to privatise profit and to nationalise the losses and the damages and have it paid for by taxpayers , most of whom are poor people .
What does this have to do with justice ?
What does this have to do with morality ?
Or are these not concepts that can be used in the context of the economy ?
Is this not a system that is fundamentally wrong ?
Is there not something structurally wrong with this system ?
And should we not as the European Parliament and the European Union start reconsidering the whole structure - the whole system as such ?
( PL ) Madam President , the latest announcements of group redundancies in EU Member States , including those announced by the Opel concern , are in line with the broader wave of problems being experienced in recent times by the motor industry and other industries as a result of the economic crisis .
In the context of the problems of the motor industry , we should ask ourselves the following question : in order to save jobs , is it acceptable to give State subsidies to motor concerns or other producers ?
Over the last year or two , we have had many examples of such State protectionism being extended to the producers of various goods , and also a variety of reactions and decisions from the European Commission .
This has met with a dubious reception from public opinion .
On the one hand , it has been pointed out that such subsidies distort competition in the international market while , on the other , it has been stressed that it is essential to fight rising unemployment and that State aid certainly serves this end .
In my opinion , in a period of economic crisis , a more flexible policy is needed in this area - a policy which has been agreed by Member States and the European Commission and is the same for this sector as for other sectors .
( DE ) Madam President , I have a comment to make on what our fellow Member has said about there not being enough German MEPs attending this debate .
Although I am a German Social Democrat , I share your criticism of the Minister of North Rhine-Westphalia , who is a member of the CDU , having said that he was pleased that it was the plant in Antwerp , rather than the one in Bochum , that was being closed down .
We , the German Social Democrats , are in favour of a European solution , in other words , the plan put forward by the European Works Council .
Let me say this very clearly once again : I have no idea why the German Conservatives and Liberals have shirked this debate .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate has touched on a range of issues , some of which are topics of discussion for the next Commission , in my opinion .
The discussion will undoubtedly be very profound , covering the overall concept of industrial policy , the overall concept of State aid and other issues as well .
As far as the case raised here is concerned , in other words , the Opel case , it does not involve industrial policy as such .
It is clear that the Commission has room for manoeuvre within the framework of the treaty .
I think I can state with some satisfaction that the Commission has so far made use of all the possibilities open to it under the treaty and has made use of them even in ways that were not entirely conventional .
I could mention the two meetings planned by my colleague , Günter Verheugen , where Member States discussed the situation as it stood and , to some extent , this undoubtedly enabled a coordinated approach .
The assessment of plans ex ante was similarly unconventional .
I have to say that the structure of EU law does not offer a form of solid legal basis for such approaches .
Despite this , in view of the importance of the issue , it was used .
As far as the issue of State aid is concerned , no State aid has been negotiated so far , no state has been proposed and it is up to the Commission to assess finally whether State aid is being provided within the framework of the rules .
I firmly believe that the procedure here must be as strict as possible , because we cannot allow such a serious decision to be motivated by factors of a non-economic nature and for a situation to come about where , instead of competition between companies , we have states competing to offer the largest subsidies .
From this perspective , the Commission will assess the plan for State aid very strictly , as well as all of the circumstances connected with the State aid , of course .
In my last speech about three months ago , I stressed that we were doing everything to ensure compliance with all of the rules over employee consultations .
This is what we did and this is what we continue to do .
We will not hesitate in the meantime to adopt all the measures which the legal structure of the European Commission affords us .
I believe that my successor will be no less strict in this .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this case opens up a whole series of questions which must be discussed and I also believe that the Commission has a duty to make the best use of all available options in this area .
I would like to stress one final thing which I mentioned earlier in my introductory speech : if any employees are laid off - and it has been mentioned in the debate here that General Motors is considering laying off around 8 000 to 10 000 employees - then the impact of this affair will undoubtedly reach beyond Antwerp .
The Commission is again using and mobilising all of the instruments at its disposal which are useful in such a case .
This includes the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
We will make every effort to ensure that this matter is decided on as quickly as possible .
Parliament has an active role here of course , because the proposals put forward by the Commission can become a reality only after they have been discussed by Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , all EU aid must first be directed at people and not at companies , and that is also a fundamental framework for all of our decision making .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I simply wish to express my solidarity with the families of all those affected by the dreadful news of the closure of the Antwerp plant .
We are thinking not only of all those who will be directly affected and lose their jobs , but also of all the subcontracting companies that will suffer as a result .
We must keep them in mind too .
The Figueruelas plant is in my region , Aragón , so this matter affects us directly .
We therefore advocate an active policy for the automotive sector , with new models that are more environmentally friendly and innovative and lead to the creation of new jobs .
Equality between women and men in the European Union - 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Marc Tarabella , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on equality between women and men in the European Union - 2009 - .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I wish to congratulate the European Commission on its excellent report .
In fact , this report on equality between women and men , which we vote on each year , has special resonance for me .
It is the first report that I have presented within the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , of which I am an active member .
Moreover , it is a report that is absolutely essential this year given the economic , social and financial crisis that the European Union especially is going through .
This is why I have been keen to stress , in my report , the impact of the crisis on women .
First of all by observing that men suffered more redundancies at the start of the crisis - that is to be expected given the impact on heavy industry , in particular - but recent months have seen unemployment of both women and men grow in the same way and at the same rate .
Moreover , in a good dozen Member States , the unemployment rate remains higher for women , and women are over-represented in part-time employment .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Member States to supply accurate statistics on the impact of the crisis on women and men , and on the Member States , before they implement any budget austerity policies , to carry out gender-based impact studies so as to prevent women from being disproportionately affected .
The fight to eliminate violence against women is also , in my opinion , an important point .
Twenty to twenty-five per cent of European women suffer physical violence during their adult life , that is a fact , but 10 % of them are also victims of sexual violence .
I believe therefore that men must also make a commitment to combat violence against women .
The Spanish Presidency of the European Union has decided not only to make the fight against violence against women one of its main priorities by creating , among other things , a European inter-gender violence monitoring centre to provide harmonised data , but also to create a European protection order for victims .
I therefore support this approach and would also call for the creation of a European Year for combating violence against women so as to raise awareness in all the Member States and to ensure that this fight becomes a priority .
Let us turn to employment .
Here is a fact : women have made a huge investment in the labour market .
59.1 % of women work today .
The Lisbon Strategy set an objective of 60 % .
We are almost there , but the difference is still significant in some Member States , as is the average pay gap , which varies , depending on which study you read , between 17 and 25 % .
I would therefore ask the Member States properly to apply the directives on equal treatment between women and men in employment matters .
I would ask these same Member States to introduce legislative measures to promote gender balance in positions of responsibility , especially in private companies .
Obviously , I believe that we have to combat sexist stereotypes .
In my previous role as a minister for training , I met a woman who had to give up training to become a school bus driver because her trainer was making fun of her .
I hope that , in future , no one will be surprised if a man does the washing up or a woman drives a school bus , as I have just mentioned .
In short , the Commission and the Member States must be called on to launch awareness campaigns on this issue in schools .
Sexual and reproductive rights are an important chapter because women must have control over their sexual and reproductive rights .
Thousands of women have put their lives at risk to fight for these rights and , today , 24 of the 27 European countries have legalised abortion .
The European Parliament has a duty to protect this acquis , which is absolutely fundamental for women , and we insist that women must have control of their sexual and reproductive rights , not least by having easy access to contraception and abortion .
Let us turn to paternity leave .
Here is a fact : men have a right to be fully involved in the first few days following the arrival of their child in the family .
It is true that , in this regard , we can ask the Commission to support any steps aimed at introducing a form of paternity leave at European level .
We consider that maternity leave must be linked to paternity leave .
I will finish , Madam President , Commissioner .
When it was presented within the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , this report received high praise from representatives of all the political groups in the European Parliament .
The vote in that committee went very well too , and the report was adopted by a comfortable majority .
I therefore invite all of my fellow Members to support my report again when the vote takes place on Wednesday , but I shall be listening carefully to the debate that is due to take place , and I will then be able to reply to your questions .
Madam President , honourable Members , the current Commission welcomes the report and the draft resolution on equality between women and men in the European Union 2009 .
I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Tarabella , for the support expressed by Parliament for the approach adopted and the actions taken by the European Commission to promote equality between women and men .
Gender equality is one of the European Union 's fundamental values and a prerequisite for the achievement of the European Union 's growth , employment and social cohesion objectives .
On this basis , the European Union has built a real policy to promote equality between women and men .
Whilst unquestionable progress has been achieved in this area , major challenges remain .
The Commission shares the rapporteur 's view that it is essential to continue with our efforts .
During my mandate , gender equality and women 's rights have been at the centre of my concerns .
During these last five years , the Commission 's commitment to gender equality has been formalised in the roadmap for equality between women and men .
In the course of implementing this roadmap , the Commission has introduced several notable initiatives .
By way of illustration , I will mention three of these .
The Commission has proposed some practical actions to overcome the pay gap between men and women .
This discrepancy , which amounts to 17 % , is quite simply unacceptable .
In 2010 , the Commission will report on the analysis of the effectiveness of the European legislation and will present courses of action to overcome the pay gap .
The Commission has noted the interesting ideas contained in the European Parliament 's resolution .
I would also remind you that , in March 2009 , the Commission launched an awareness campaign aimed at mobilising all of the parties involved to combat the wage gap .
Given the success of this campaign , it will be extended into 2010 .
During my mandate , I have also been careful to promote greater representation of women in economic and political life .
On that basis , in June 2008 , I introduced a European Network for Women in Decision Making .
Some progress has been made .
The current European Parliament , for example , has its highest ever percentage of women : 35 % .
However , significant efforts are still required , especially at national level , where women on average make up only 24 % of all national members of parliament , and in companies , where women make up less than 11 % of the board members of the major stock exchange-listed companies .
The third notable initiative is the introduction of the European Institute for Gender Equality .
I am pleased to be able to say today that , despite a slower start than we had imagined , the institute has begun its activities in Brussels and is already installed in its offices in Vilnius .
The current crisis is having serious repercussions for the labour market , threatening the recent progress made in relation to female employment , given that women are less likely to be able to find a new job and that they are more disadvantaged to begin with .
Ladies and gentlemen , during my mandate , I committed myself to improving the work-life balance .
I agree with the European Parliament when it stresses the importance of enabling fathers to play a greater role in family life .
This is why I have asked my services to begin a cost-benefit analysis of a potential Commission initiative in this area .
The European Parliament 's report also rightly stresses the importance of eliminating violence against women .
The Commission will work towards this goal with purpose and with great determination .
I would not wish to end this speech without stressing the very good cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
This cooperation has been a key factor in the progress made in relation to gender equality .
Gender equality is not merely an end in itself .
The achievement of the European Union 's growth , employment and social cohesion objectives depends on it .
Thank you for your cooperation and your attention .
Madam President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality voted for this report by a tiny majority of three votes , since six of its 33 members were absent .
I do not believe one can talk of a ' comfortable ' majority .
It is clear that we share all the concerns about the discrimination that still exists in relation to equality between women and men , despite the very good European legislation that we have had in this area since 1975 .
Why has this discrimination persisted so ?
It is either because these directives are badly applied , or because those discriminated against are unable , for some reason , to assert their rights before the courts .
Rather than continually demand new directives with the risk of dilution that this entails , let us ensure that the existing body of legislation is fully applied by governments , by the social partners and in the everyday world of work .
This report once again echoes every complaint , every gross generalisation about poor , battered and raped women ...
Some affirmations therefore need to be put into perspective by means of amendments .
What I find more serious is that this veritable glorification of the social or solidarity-based economy is meant to make us think that , by shoehorning women into it , we would successfully demonstrate their employability , and thus enable them to improve their social status and to become more financially independent .
The opposite is true in fact .
They would sink into widespread poverty , lose any incentive and motivation to earn wages based on merit and have any responsibility taken away from them .
Furthermore , the proposals to create a European charter of women 's rights , and therefore a new form of protection in addition to human rights - which , fortunately , women already enjoy - and a new form of bureaucracy in the shape of a European inter-gender violence monitoring centre , even though we have enough departments to carry out this work , are either counterproductive or incompatible with the principle of gender equality which is , in fact , firmly established in the treaty .
If ridicule could kill , some members of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality would no longer be around .
Finally , I deplore the obstinacy of some members who , on every occasion , irrespective of whether it is appropriate , advocate including in this report non-essential abortion on the pretext that , to ensure sexual and reproductive health , one must advocate free and easy access to abortion .
No . The priority must be to promote improved information for young girls , especially with regard to contraception .
The latter exists today to prevent pregnancy at a very early age .
It was not around when I was young .
We have therefore proposed separate votes so that we do not have to vote against the report by Mr Tarabella , who is not to blame , but who has again fallen victim to the extremism of some of his comrades .

Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Tarabella and all the Members who have helped to develop this report for the work they have undertaken .
A year ago , we debated a report very similar to the one on the table today .
Unfortunately , we need to continue focusing on key issues on which we have yet to make progress regarding equality between men and women .
These include gender violence , which is deemed to be one of the main scourges of society , not just in Europe but also the world over .
Then there is the pay gap that remains unchanged and which we have been unable to bridge .
Other issues include sexual and reproductive health rights , reconciling family and professional life , women entering the labour market on equal terms with men , the situation of vulnerable groups of women , such as disabled women or women in rural areas , plus the representation of women in public life .
We have raised these issues year after year and have been unable to make much progress .
Allow me to quote one single piece of information , namely , that only in 3 of the 27 Member States do women account for more than 40 % of Members of Parliament .
I believe it is essential for us to insist on the need to intensify our work on promoting equality between men and women .
It is vital to support initiatives like those taken by the Spanish Presidency , which has declared equality between men and women to be one of its priorities .
This is a commitment to the women of today and also to the women of future generations .
Progress has been made , but there is still a long way to go , and we must be ambitious when devising policies to ensure that one half of the population of Europe enjoys the same rights and opportunities as the other half .
First of all , my compliments to the rapporteur .
I should just like to start with a few small points on which I do not agree with him .
When it comes to the impact of the economic crisis on women , I actually think it very important that we put our public finances back in order and restore them to health as quickly as possible ; it is this , not the prolongation of public debt , that will benefit women .
I also think that the report contains a few proposals that may sound very appealing but tend towards symbolic policy , such as a year for this , a monitoring centre for that .
Let us just concentrate on specific measures .
Nevertheless , the report also contains a number of things that I very much welcome .
The first - thanks to an amendment tabled by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - is a reference to the position of single-person households .
I would appeal to the European Commission to carry out a study on the subject for once , as we have a European family policy , but few people realise that one in three households in Europe is a single-person household .
These people often suffer severe discrimination in terms of social security , tax issues , housing and such like .
Secondly - and here I am also looking at Mrs Lulling - I am actually delighted with the very plain references to sexual and reproductive health and the sexual autonomy of women ; and access to safe , legal abortion is part and parcel of this sexual reproductive health .
Whilst I fully agree with Mrs Lulling that information is certainly very important , I note that - in my home country , at least ; it may be different in Luxembourg - it is actually the Christian Democrats who always put paid to this kind of thing .
Therefore , if we are able to work together on sound , straightforward information for young people , you can count on my support , and I also think that we must put an end to the hypocrisy ; we cannot be throwing women into prison or condemning them to unsafe abortions .
Finally , Madam President , regarding violence against women , I very much welcome the initiative of the Spanish Presidency to make this one of its priority areas .
After all , few people realise that violence against women claims many times more victims each year than terrorism , yet is still - entirely wrongly - regarded as merely a women 's issue .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , we have a relatively new European Parliament , and we almost have a new European Commission .
This is basically the first time with the Tarabella report that we are voting on the action that the new Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality wants taken in the coming years .
The Greens are very happy with this quite progressive report .
It is brimful of plans that we want carried out .
We finally want legislative action to be taken to further the sharing of care between men and women , with a call for paternity leave .
We finally propose to further women in decision making by looking at the Norwegian practice of a quota for boards of directors .
The Greens are also really happy with the attention paid to the effects of the crisis on women : women 's unemployment differs , and the effects on women of cuts in public spending differ .
We should look at that seriously .
We very much hope that Parliament will show the courage and the readiness to combat discrimination of women , and further equality with concrete measures that might actually bring results , by voting in favour of this report .
We hope that the Commission will take action accordingly .
Madam President , through its proposal to make abortion easily available in the European Union , this report breaches the exclusive competence of Member States in this area .
However , this is not the most important reason to vote against this document .
No faith at all is needed , today , to see a person in an unborn human foetus .
A simple ultrasound examination , available in every town in Belgium , even the smallest , is sufficient to enable us to see an on-screen image of an unborn human being .
Therefore , every responsible legislator should do everything possible to make the number of abortions fall .
For making abortion more accessible is an indicator of how our culture has fallen , and shows our departure from human values .
Therefore , I would ask for this to be borne in mind , before anyone in this Chamber votes in favour of this harmful document .
Madam President , as reality shows and Eurostat itself confirms , the economic and social crisis is having a serious effect on women .
This is because of rising unemployment , precarious work and low wages , combined with pay inequalities between men and women , which have risen again and exceeded , on average , 17 % at EU level .
It is also because of the resulting poverty , whether from the issues surrounding low wages and income , including retirement and pensions for elderly women , or from the difficulty in gaining access to low-cost or free quality public services .
There are also the issues of the trafficking and prostitution of women and girls , violence at work and at home and the various forms of discrimination against women in more vulnerable situations .
As is emphasised in the report , and I would like to congratulate our rapporteur here , it is therefore necessary to pay particular attention to the economic and social situation of women when developing Community policy .
This requires studying the social impact of new Community strategies , to prevent an increase in discrimination and inequality , to ensure equality in social progress and not in the decline of economic , social and employment rights , and to protect the social purpose of motherhood and fatherhood .
It is vital to invest in a true strategy for development and social progress that gives priority to employment with rights , to production , to quality public services and to social inclusion .
It is time to take significant steps towards improving the lives of the majority of women , including in the area of sexual and reproductive health , and putting an end to the hypocrisy that still surrounds the issue of abortion .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , there is an ideology that is gaining ground in Europe that teaches inequality between men and women .
It says that women are of a lower status than men .
It says that , under inheritance law , a man 's portion must be double that of a woman .
It says that , in a court of law , two female witnesses are required against the testimony of a single male witness .
It says that , in a rape trial , it takes four male witnesses to convict a man but the testimony of a female is not accepted , not even that of the raped woman .
By the way , the four witnesses must be Muslims , not non-Muslims .
You have guessed that I am speaking about Sharia law .
Now , apparently , some Muslims believe that suicide bombers are rewarded with 72 virgins in Paradise , but I cannot find any reference that female suicide bombers are rewarded with the male equivalent .
Surely this is a case of blatant gender discrimination .
The British Government has already officially recognised Sharia law in some tribunals .
While bigamy is still illegal in the UK , polygamous Islamic wives are officially recognised as dependants for the purposes of tax relief and benefits payments .
Europe is boldly marching backwards to sixth-century Arabia .
If we want genuine equality , then individual European States must not recognise Sharia law in any way , shape or form .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , more women have entered the labour market .
However , more jobs does not always mean more quality jobs .
There are high numbers of women in part-time work and in jobs that have been particularly hard hit by the present crisis .
Approximately 60 % of all university graduates are women , and yet , there are barriers effectively stopping women from making the most of their potential .
That is why we have to establish binding minimum standards : EU-wide minimum standards for parental leave , improved child care and improved health care .
That is how we can break many gender-based stereotypes and finally achieve the imperative of real equality between the sexes .
( HU ) Mr Tarabella will surely forgive me if I do not start by thanking him now , but direct my thanks first of all to Commissioner Špidla , since he is here with us probably for the last time in his capacity as commissioner .
I would like to emphasise his dedication in dealing with gender equality , women 's employment and similar problems .
Several questions came up in connection with the report .
I wish to draw attention to at least two points : one is the wage gap between men and women .
The most recent statistics indicate a difference of more than 17 % .
Improvement is not only slow but also ambiguous , since this figure is higher than it was two years ago .
And we do not really know yet what the consequences of the crisis will be .
Daily experience suggests that improvement in the short term is not likely .
What is fundamentally unacceptable , however , is the fact that wage differences show up not in the case of those who are at the start of their careers , but when mothers return to the labour market after maternity or parental leaves .
In a Europe struggling with a demographic crisis , this in itself is disturbing and totally unacceptable .
Such discrimination is obviously forbidden by EU regulations .
As has already been mentioned , the pertinent legal standard dates back to 1975 , and it is obvious that this directive , like many others , is completely ineffective .
I am very glad Commissioner Špidla announced that we can expect a report in 2010 on steps the Commission intends to take in order to make legislation more effective .
I would like to add just one more sentence concerning the Charter of Women 's Rights .
It is probably more important and urgent to improve the effectiveness and accessibility of existing laws than to create a new legal standard which will be just as ineffective as the previous ones .
( PT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his outstanding work and I hope the proposals contained in this resolution are adopted .
During the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , we are seeing the face of poverty become increasingly feminine .
The majority of the almost 80 million people living in poverty in Europe are women and children .
Women are suffering more than anybody else in the economic and social crisis .
Women are the last to enter into the labour market and the first to be unemployed and , in addition to this , in 2004 , the pay gap between men and women was 15 % and in 2009 , it was more than 17 % .
I would like to draw to your attention some proposals that I feel are innovative and of great importance and would like to ask for the support of fellow Members in these proposals : the much-needed creation of the European Charter of Women 's Rights , as has already been mentioned , the proposal for a directive to prevent and combat all forms of violence against women , domestic violence and the trafficking of women , the inclusion of paternity leave in European legislation , which already exists in the overwhelming majority of Member States , as a means of promoting a balance between work life and family and personal life , and boosting the birth rate .
I would like to finish by thanking Commissioner Špidla for everything he has done in promoting gender equality and for his involvement with the European Parliament .
I wish you every success Commissioner .
( BG ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Tarabella , for this report .
I firmly believe that this report provides a response to the need to combat stereotypes and incidences of sexual discrimination .
This report may be run of the mill for many of my fellow Members , but I regard it as a renewed , more effective commitment to gender equality at European level aimed at boosting the socio-economic status of women , especially of those from the new Member States , as well as at ensuring their broader representation in political and business life and promoting their career development .
Given that social , legal and economic institutions determine the access women and men have to resources , their opportunities and relative power , I feel that it is extremely important for women to be guaranteed equal rights with regard to their involvement in politics , occupying important political and management positions in business and their representation at the highest level in company boardrooms .
This also applies to raising educational qualifications and offering them the same opportunities as men for career development , especially following a lengthy period of maternity leave .
At the same time , consideration must always be given to maintaining the balance between career and family obligations .
We need to devise an institutional mechanism for initiating a consistent policy on this issue because the battle against sexual discrimination is won by introducing long-term positive incentives and legislative reforms , and by increasing incomes and the quality of life .
Otherwise , we would not be discussing this matter in this Chamber today .
In order to make significant progress in terms of equality before the law , equal opportunities , including equal remuneration for work done , and equal access to human resources and other production resources which provide more chances , we - the European Parliament and European Commission - have the opportunity to and must encourage Member States and civil society to adopt effective measures .
I believe that women 's equal involvement in the management of resources , in economic opportunities , and in government and political life , will have a positive impact on the economic development of our society , thereby strengthening countries ' ability to develop , reduce poverty and be run efficiently and better .
In this respect , the promotion of gender equality is an important component of the strategy for exiting the economic crisis and providing a satisfactory solution to the demographic crisis .
This will provide women and men with the opportunity to tackle poverty and improve their standard of living .
Madam President , I would like to draw the new Commission 's attention to two aspects of the report which are particularly important for our group , the Greens , and I hope that these comments can be forwarded to the incoming Commissioner responsible .
Two points : the first one is the long-awaited revision of the Directive on equal pay for equal work .
We think that this is crucial for women across Europe .
The pay gap is unacceptable : we are now in 2010 , and it is time that action was taken to close that gap .
You , Mr Špidla , have recognised that we need new legal action .
We are really looking forward to receiving a proposal from the Commission on new legal action in the course of this legislative period .
The second point concerns paternity leave entitlements .
Here , I would like to underline that this report is about equality between women and men .
We want equality for men also , so that they can share time with their kids and have that responsibility if they so desire .
We need equal choice for women and men on how to live , how to work and how to take care of their families and their children .
So , while we think that is crucial for the European Parliament to send a signal to fathers , we would like to send more than signals : we would like to open the door to a modern society .
We are relying on the Commission to finally introduce a very modern , forward-looking directive on this question .
Finally , we are looking forward very much to the Spanish Presidency 's proposals with regard to eradicating violence against women throughout Europe , and we hope the Commission will take those proposals up .

( SV ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Tarabella and his colleagues on the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality for a good report .
I would like to highlight two things in particular .
I hope that plenary supports the importance of paternity leave .
Paternity leave not only sends an important signal that children are the responsibility of both parents , but also has other positive consequences .
Studies show that fathers who have taken paternity leave continue to take greater responsibility for the home , family and children in later life .
In other words , getting fathers involved creates a sound basis for further equality work .
The second point that I would like to raise , and which I support , is that women must at last be granted the power to decide over their own bodies , their sexuality and their reproduction .
Giving women that power means that when children are born , they are wanted and are genuinely able to develop - something that is every child 's basic right .
We want to see an end to women 's lives being harmed , to the fact that women are dying even today because of illegal abortions .
Give women the right of self-determination - not just when it comes to finances , politics and society , but also over their own bodies .
( DA ) Madam President , I , too , feel that this issue is important and therefore , as I sit and listen to the debate I cannot help wondering at the fact that it seems all the political groups , with the exception of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group , think that the fight for women 's equality is something for women to deal with alone .
You might get that impression at any rate , listening to the otherwise excellent speakers here today .
I think there is a striking lack of male speakers and I am glad that my group has been able to send two .
Having said that concerning the style and form of the debate , I would like to say that in my opinion , the report itself concentrates heavily on solely socio-economic considerations .
There is plenty about the labour market , pay differentials , training , rules on directors of companies and the like , and those things are indeed important ; but there is one area in particular - as a previous speaker has already mentioned - that is completely absent , and that is the huge cultural problem that we face as a result of immigration from the Islamic world .
I think it slightly shameful that a report that is supposed to deal with the equal rights of women does not even mention problems such as forced marriage , enforced headscarf wearing , honour killings , circumcision , lack of access to education , and so on .
These elements must be included if we are to have an accurate picture of Europe in the year 2010 .
( HU ) I wish to propose that the European Parliament take a new approach to the question of abortion .
I ask that we put an end at last to the stunning lie purporting that abortion is some kind of beneficial thing for women , perhaps even a yardstick of women 's freedom .
No !
As many people know , women and men alike , abortion is a painful and harmful intrusion on a woman 's body and soul equally .
Precisely for this reason , instead of talking constantly about easier access to abortion , let us talk at last about preventing abortions , emphasising this and helping women in this regard .
Let us help women to prepare for planned pregnancies , and should an unplanned pregnancy occur , an unplanned child be conceived , that child ought to be allowed to come into the world and be brought up with love by women , by couples , because they should get all the help and support in order to be able to do so .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , the motion for a resolution by Mr Tarabella , who joined us in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality at the last European elections , is ambitious .
I refer , in particular , to paragraph 20 : ' Parliament wishes to see a European Charter of Women 's Rights established ' .
Anyone familiar with the history of European integration will remember that the Treaty of Rome already provided for the principle of gender equality in the labour market .
Laws on equal treatment between women and men exist in every Member State .
It is an easy solution to ask for new charters .
It is more of an effort to apply the existing instruments .
In reality , if we do not remove paragraph 20 from this motion for a resolution , we will be adding to the Council of Europe 's European Convention on Human Rights , to the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights and to the brand new European Institute for Gender Equality a fourth instrument which would take the form of a special new charter dedicated to the promotion of women .
I have some questions .
What would be the use of a new charter of women 's rights ?
What added value would it bring ?
There is none .
It is a mistake to believe that a charter will solve women 's problems .
Natural law , which ought to guide us in our thoughts and in our responsible political action , does not admit of special rights .
No one can say that the legal instruments ignore women 's rights .
That would be intellectually dishonest and factually incorrect .
That is why I am voting against paragraph 20 .
The charter is the main issue .
If paragraph 20 remains in the motion for a resolution , I am unable to support it .
Finally , Commissioner , I thank you for your cooperation with the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality during your mandate .

( FR ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Tarabella , on the quality of the report that he has written and on his successful handling of this task , in which he addresses a whole range of issues relating to gender equality .
We must acknowledge that definite progress has been made with regard to equality .
However , much effort is still required , in particular , in a context of economic and social crisis that is having an even greater impact on one already extremely vulnerable section of the population , namely women .
We must also emphasise the double discrimination that sometimes affects women due to a handicap , to age or to their membership of a national minority .
I want to emphasise three particular points .
We need to equip ourselves with common , reliable and consistent indicators at European level .
This should enable us to propose solutions that reflect real-life conditions , which can be measured using credible data relating to gender equality .
If we truly wish to move towards real equality , then paternity leave must be introduced at European level .
This is an important factor when it comes to equality of opportunity in employment and family life .
My third point , finally , is that gender equality necessarily relies on women having control of their own bodies .
This very clearly means that contraception and abortion must be made as accessible as possible to women .
I regret that this issue still results in such sensitivity , to say the least , but it is evident that , until women are able to control their sexual rights , we will have failed to achieve our objective in our battle for true equality between men and women .
( ET ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , my compliments to Mr Tarabella , but now to the report .
Equality between women and men is not an objective in itself , but it is a precondition for achieving our general objectives .
Equality in everyday life is in everyone 's interests , both men 's and women 's , but this problem will not be solved merely by individual pieces of legislation .
The fact that we are still talking about this today , and have been talking about it for 40 years , is a sign that only a multifaceted integrated policy will bring us closer to our objective .
I want to stress , therefore , the great importance of implementation and supervision .
Second , the proliferation of outdated gender stereotypes keeps men and women in essentially medieval roles in society and reinforces gender inequality .
We want to change the situation , but we should also set an example ourselves here .
Tomorrow , we will be ratifying the new European Commission , of which women make up only a third .
We can no longer change that today .
I would ask that when a new Commission is next elected , two candidates for Commissioner should be nominated from each Member State - a man and a woman .
And thus , we will decide not on the basis of gender , but on the basis of their competence .
Education statistics show that women should not be afraid of this , and thus I am sure that we should not be ashamed .
Finally , I want to thank Mr Špidla and I hope that he fulfils all the aims that he has set himself .
( EL ) Madam President , this important 2009 report quite rightly states that violence is a fundamental obstacle to equality between men and women .
However , it does not refer specifically to domestic violence .
Unfortunately , this problem is rife and it affects every community .
In Greece , for example , 35 spouse murders have been recorded over the past eighteen months .
And yet , support structures for abused women are basic or even non-existent .
The European Parliament should encourage the Member States , including Greece , to create support structures for abused women in every local authority , with full psychological , legal and professional counselling and properly staffed hostels for women .
The Member States should also take account of the amendments proposed by women 's organisations and lawyers to remedy the ambiguities and loopholes in the law in connection with domestic violence .
Finally , anti-sexist education programmes should be introduced in schools in a bid to change social stereotyping .
( SK ) I would like to begin by saying that I consider it right for the European Parliament to be closely involved in the issue of gender equality .
I cannot help thinking , however , that our European policy suffers from a serious , a very serious form of schizophrenia .
I would like to quote from one recent agency report .
Sixteen year old Medine Memi from the town of Kahta in the Turkish province of Adiyaman was buried alive by her family in a hen coop next to the family home .
The police found her resting in a sitting position buried two metres below ground .
In the post-mortem , it was found that the girl had large quantities of earth in her lungs and her stomach .
The father of the girl calmly admitted the deed to the police and said that he had buried her because the girl had befriended some boys .
Ladies and gentlemen , in Turkey and similar countries , women and even girls are murdered in this way for example only because they have spoken with other men .
If we take gender equality seriously , how can we possibly entertain the notion that a country with such an attitude to the fair sex could be part of a civilised Europe .
Gender equality is not just about calculating small differences in income but , first and foremost , about the right to life and human dignity which is repeatedly denied to women in many of our neighbouring states .
( NL ) Madam President , today we are debating the progress report on equality between men and women in the European Union .
A good deal has been discussed , but if one subject is absent from the report , it is the appalling inequality between men and women in the European Muslim community , where women are totally subordinate to men on the basis of the rules in the Koran .
Participation by Muslim women in working life or higher education is barely open to discussion for the men and , if at all , the women must wear the burkha or a headscarf , which greatly reduces their chances of finding a job .
Therefore , the European Union should be fighting not for the right to wear the burkha but for the right to work without wearing it .
The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) supports France in seeking to ban the burkha in public places , and would like to see such bans introduced at national level in the other Member States , too .
Madam President , something must be done about the shocking subordination of these women .
The PVV wants to see this backwardness combated with vigour .
These women have a right to freedom of expression and to freedom to study without having to fear an Islam that would have them isolated .
It is time for a new wave of emancipation .
The PVV will not be endorsing the present report , therefore , as it fails to address the really important issues , which we think is a great shame .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard it said many times today that women in Europe continue to suffer inequality in the workplace .
Yet , their employment rate increased from 51 % in 1997 to 58 % in 2007 .
Today , women are highly qualified , but the number of women in executive positions has remained unchanged over the past few years , and yet the number of female students enrolling in economics , business and law is higher than that of male students .
We must recognise that , in 2007 , 31 % of women were employed in part-time jobs , which is four times as many as men .
On average , women earn 17.4 % less than men , they are at the greatest risk of poverty and , especially in old age , they are hard hit not only by loneliness and a reliance on care , but also poverty .
We have to change that .
Women in business , women at work - that is what we clamour for .
We call for special arrangements , for parental leave and maternity protection to be put on the same footing , and somehow we have achieved the opposite : women are too expensive and so do not get the jobs .
It is the economy that is coming up with all the solutions .
The actual injustice of that situation lies in women 's inferior position and the fact that there is little recognition for their family and housekeeping duties .
Commissioner , you have just said that you would like a cost-benefit analysis of this situation to be carried out , but you cannot calculate this any more than you can pay for it .
We must recognise that mothers and fathers would be happy to choose looking after their families if this were not regarded as inferior and if it were not generally disadvantageous to career progression .
People who do family work do a very important job in society , because they generate our future ; they acquire skills , and even empowerment , for their future occupational activities as well .
Therefore , the economy should be working to support families and women .
Rethinking how our societies work is much more urgent than establishing new European monitoring centres and institutes .
( EL ) Madam President , the international economic crisis is clearly having a negative impact on men and women .
It has caused job losses and resulted in financial austerity policies .
However , under no circumstances should it be used as an excuse to stop promoting equality policies , because these policies can drive social and economic development and recovery in Europe .
At the same time , the crisis is a unique opportunity for , and challenge to , the European Union and the governments of the Member States to create conditions for increasing competitiveness at global level , by reviewing and incorporating the gender equality dimension into every policy , in order to address the long-standing democratic deficits at the expense of women .
We need to step up our efforts to stamp out unequal pay , violence , the glass ceiling , discrimination and poverty .
We need to find ways of reconciling work and home life , improving care facilities for children , infants and the elderly , supporting working women and working couples and single-parent families and people with disabilities .
First and foremost , however , we need to effectively put all the equality laws into practice .
( DE ) Madam President , we have the European Year against Poverty and Exclusion .
Women are still at a very high risk of becoming poor or having to live in poverty .
There are many small steps which land them in that position : girls tend to choose jobs which do not pay so well .
They then decide to have children , which often leads them to only be able to work part-time .
Alternatively , they might decide to look after their parents or grandparents , which again puts older women in a situation where they are unable to return to work .
These periods add up and , as a result , women 's professional careers progress much more slowly .
This is also reflected in the fact that they have lower pensions , for example .
There are many aspects to this , and many have been included in this report .
The really important message we need to put across is that there are already many opportunities out there , but girls and women need to make use of them .
The awareness that a girl is studying engineering , and that she is brave enough to do so - that is what we have to promote in schools .
This also applies particularly to immigrant women .
I would also like to make another point : if you look around the Chamber today , you will see that two thirds of us attending this debate are women and one third are men .
We must also win men over to taking a much greater interest in this subject , so that , one day , we can have the two remaining thirds of men attending and supporting women 's issues .

( PL ) Madam President , in Mr Tarabella 's report on equality between women and men in the European Union , several very important suggestions have been made to the European Commission and the Member States .
Once again , the problem of inequality in terms of women 's pay has been highlighted , as well as the lack of a legislative proposal from the Commission in order to reduce these differences .
The question of women working in small family businesses has been raised , where women are often without social security affiliation and their work is not included in records of the length of time they have worked , and so is not counted towards their pension entitlement .
The importance and necessity of careers advice has been stressed , which would help to activate women who have lost their place in the labour market , very often because they have given birth to a child or have stayed at home to care for an elderly person .
Emphasis has been given to the need to give assistance to women who want to set up their own business .
A call has been made for the promotion of technical professions among young women who stand at the beginning of their working life , to increase the proportion of women in jobs typically done by men .
Emphasis has been given to the need for priority treatment of groups of women who are in especially difficult situations , such as women with disabilities , elderly women and women with dependants .
However , in my estimation , among these significant and fundamental issues there are also unnecessary provisions concerning reproductive health , and others which give broad and unlimited access to abortion .
I would like to draw the attention of fellow Members to the fact that decisions on matters related to abortion lie within the competence of the governments of individual Member States .
We are fighting for equal treatment of women and men , but we should not make this dependent on choices related to areas of sexuality .
This kind of practice may considerably reduce support for the report we are discussing .
( LT ) Firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Tarabella , for the work he has done .
In order to overcome the economic downturn , it is very important to invest in human capital and social infrastructure , creating the conditions for women and men to exploit their full potential .
The European Union has now moved closer to the Lisbon Strategy goal of reaching a female employment rate of 60 % by 2010 .
However , female employment varies greatly from one Member State to another .
Therefore , the Commission and the Member States must take effective measures to ensure the implementation of the Directive on equal treatment of men and women in matters of employment and occupation .
Today , men 's and women 's pay in the Member States varies greatly and therefore , we must urgently call on Member States to apply the principle of ' equal pay for equal work ' .
The Commission has yet to present for debate a proposal related to the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women .
It is imperative to encourage the equal sharing among men and women of responsibilities in personal and family life and better distribute the time allotted to paid and unpaid work .
The Member States must take all possible measures on access to pre-school child care institutions .
The matter of paternity leave has yet to be resolved .
Therefore , we must find a common solution on the consolidation of this leave in the directive .
Moreover , in the Commission 's consultations on the new 2020 strategy , insufficient attention is paid to matters of equality between men and women .
Matters of gender equality must be strengthened and integrated in the new strategy .
In conclusion , from the bottom of my heart , I would like to thank the Member of the Commission for our long cooperation in the areas of gender equality , employment and social affairs .
Thank you and good luck !

( PL ) Madam President , changes are taking place in Europe - as can be seen from the report - which favour improved education and rising employment among women , although there are still great differences .
This improvement is taking place in areas in which women are deciding for themselves and are showing initiative and fortitude .
However , in areas where they have little influence , stereotypes are functioning which do not allow them to advance or to participate in public life .
This is why the number of women in managerial positions is not rising , and why their participation in politics is rising very slowly .
Therefore , it is crucial , here , to fight the stereotypes and take action intended to promote equality of the sexes in public life and in politics .
The report talks about intensifying this action , but that is not enough .
We must , together , make such proposals .
We must encourage the Commission and Member States to start a debate and take action to increase the participation of women in politics .
Where women are more involved in politics , more thought is given to social matters , child care facilities , women 's affairs and the equality of women in general .
In Poland , we have started a debate on the subject of priority in politics .
A group of women has started a grass-roots initiative to draft a law on parity in politics , so that 50 % of the candidates in elections would have to be women .
We have collected over 100 000 signatures in support of the law and have submitted it to the Polish parliament .
A huge debate has begun , and I do not know if the idea will be successful - if parliament will vote in favour of our proposal .
I do not know if it will be a great success , but the debate itself which is under way has changed the awareness of society very much .
We have the results of polls which show this .
I appeal , therefore , for the commencement of such a debate on the participation of women in politics in the countries of the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , it is good that the resolution under discussion includes item 38 , which stipulates that women must have control over their sexual and reproductive rights , notably through easy access to contraception and abortion , and the possibility of a safe abortion .
This is significant , especially for citizens of countries which have restrictive anti-abortion laws and in which deceptive pro-life propaganda is being spread .
In my country - Poland - the political Right , which is under the thumb of the clergy , does not allow proper sex education , and restricts contraception and legal abortion .
Even the word ' abortion ' has been almost totally eliminated from the Polish language , and has been replaced by the expression ' killing of a conceived child ' . In order to put an end to legal terminations of pregnancy , of which only several hundred are performed annually , attempts have been under way for several years to add a clause to the Polish Constitution which would protect life from the moment of conception .
The figure of 100 000 illegal abortions does not trouble the so-called pro-life campaigners , who hypocritically pretend that these abortions do not take place .
The European Union must put an end to Member States ' contempt for the reproductive and sexual rights of women .
Mr President , women represent half of Europe 's talent .
We must not waste this creative potential .
If we succeed in channelling this potential into the economy , we will make a huge leap forward , with regard both to the attitudes still present in European societies and to the Union 's new agenda for more growth , jobs and competitiveness .
Equal opportunities do exist on paper .
The Union has produced at least 13 directives on gender equality .
The principle is anchored in the treaty and in the constitutions and legislative acts of Member States , but the real-life data speaks a different language .
Never before were women so well educated , but , when it comes to entrepreneurship , women are still largely under-represented .
On the gender pay gap , virtually nothing has moved in recent years .
When doing business , women rarely default when it comes to reimbursing their loans , but access to finance is more difficult for women , and this is determined by the banks ' quest for collateral .
You need to have more money in order to borrow money , but only 1 % of the world 's assets are owned by women .
Despite higher qualifications , despite higher education , women remain totally under-represented among decision makers .
Getting more women into decision-making positions is the key to everything .
Women can promote their case and market their agenda , but the real power lies in decision making , and that is why women ought to take part .
Critical mass is essential to bring about change .
One single woman in a decision-making body will soon have to adapt her behaviour , to be accepted by the male majority .
As a starter , having a few women on a decision-making board could already make a difference , yet all these strategies will help little if we do not succeed in removing the biggest obstacle for women : reconciling family and working life .
Remaining obstacles call for a policy response , and that is why we still need policies geared towards gender , both at national and European level .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to endorse what has been said by my fellow members , the many women and numerous men , and our rapporteur Mr Tarabella , whom I congratulate , and to say that we all passionately support any action and initiative to stamp out any form of discrimination between men and women .
That goes without saying , because that is how we need to operate in the open , democratic , liberal society in which we all want to live .
Important efforts are being made and we need to emphasise that .
At European level , I would remind the House of Directive 2006 / 54 / EC , which requires the Member States to stamp out all forms of discrimination between the sexes by August 2009 .
I would also remind the House of the European Roadmap for equality between men and women 2006-10 .
I also welcome and would remind the House of all the initiatives being taken on this issue by the national governments in the Member States of the European Union , the most recent being that by President Sarkozy 's government to promote legislation to ban the burkha in public places .
These are all specific steps , but more are needed if we are to change , first and foremost , our attitude in terms of preventing all forms of discrimination .
Unfortunately , discrimination still exists and one vulnerable category I should like to mention is that of new mothers .
I was astonished to read in a European Commission report on the Barcelona objectives and on child care facilities in the European Union that almost all European mothers state that they are unable to raise their children as they would wish , due to the excess of responsibilities which they face on a daily basis .
We need to understand , and to place the utmost emphasis on the fact that the inability to achieve real equality between the sexes is endangering today 's children , who are deprived of a stable family environment in which the mother 's presence is acutely felt .
It is endangering the psychological equilibrium and the development of a stable personality in today 's children , who are tomorrow 's citizens of the European Union .
Mr President , the economic crisis has underlined the fact that women 's rights and gender equality are interlinked with ongoing economic issues .
In countries that have introduced gender equality-friendly legislation , women 's representation on the labour market tends to be significantly higher , as well as the percentage of birth rate .
These states tend to have a healthier economic , social and pension situation .
Besides , women 's salaries are of crucial importance in the family .
It is clear that the upcoming EU 2020 strategy needs to outline a clear commitment regarding gender-equality mainstreaming in all European policies .
The strategy has to be coordinated with the new roadmap for gender equality and also with the future charter for women 's rights .
As my colleague , Marc Tarabella , put forward in his report , women 's health and sexual rights are an equally important tool for women 's socio-economic empowerment as well .
We need to provide access to knowledge , information , medical care and assistance to give all women the choice and position of equal rights and access .
I would like to say thank you for the five years I have worked together with Vladimír Špidla , because this is the last chance to say hello to him .
Thank you very much for an excellent contribution from you and from your team .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this extremely interesting debate has already covered just about everything .
I can hardly think of anything new to contribute to it .
However , there is one brief point I would like to make : we should all aim to ensure that women are no longer in a situation where they have to choose between family , on the one hand , and work , on the other .
We need to create the conditions for that to become a reality .
It should be possible for us to take swift action in order to ensure that a woman can fulfil her maternal and occupational roles as well as possible .
Realistically , exclusion from an existing salary scheme is probably inevitable .
However , it should be possible for a woman , once she returns to work , to make up for lost working time .
I believe this is the solution we should and ought to be working towards , particularly in challenging economic times .
If we are successful , and we in the European Parliament can contribute a great deal to such success , then we will achieve a modern Europe of real equal opportunity .
It is clear to us all that this is really only possible with consistent equality between women and men .
( DA ) Mr President , Mr Tarabella 's report on equality between men and women gives an excellent account of the great challenges that we face in the area of equality in the EU .
One of these challenges is to bring about an increase in the proportion of women on the boards of public and private enterprises - not least within the financial sector .
We are in the middle of an economic crisis in which we need to utilise all the talent we have if we are to create the necessary growth .
Quite simply , our competitiveness is at stake .
The EU should therefore learn from Norway .
Back in 2002 , the then Norwegian trade and industry minister took the initiative to propose that at least 40 % of each sex be represented on the boards of enterprises based on a cold calculation : Norway needs to utilise all the talent it has if the country is to compete internationally .
The current form of recruitment , in which men primarily recruit men , is destructive as regards generating innovation and growth .
We must exploit the potential of both sexes and take the initiative in the EU for legislation similar to that of Norway .
In 2002 , there were around 200 women sitting on boards in Norway ; today there are nearly five times that number .
At the same time , studies show that businesses with both sexes represented on the board do better in purely economic terms .
It is therefore sheer common sense to fight for equality .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the principle of equality between women and men is part of the central current of the great river that has already freed foreigners , slaves , black people , and that is the principle of human dignity , the same for everyone .
The Tarabella report and that of the Commission are therefore both commendable , because it is right to always insist thoroughly on this principle .
There are , however , two critical remarks that I feel I should make .
The flow of human dignity and equality should concern everyone , absolutely everyone , including those who are waiting to enter the world , unborn children .
It is therefore unacceptable to do as point 38 of this report does , that is , to speak of abortion as an aspect of sexual reproductive rights , or women 's rights .
No one is denying the complexity of problems where difficult and unwanted pregnancies are concerned - there are serious problems - but , in any case , these things should not be spoken about except in relation to the need to nurture respect for life and to offer mothers all kinds of help so that they can freely choose to continue with their pregnancy .
My second criticism concerns the extension of the concept of sexual and reproductive health , as is done in recital X , beyond physical and mental aspects , to include social aspects as well .
I wonder what it means that all sexual behaviour , whatever it may be , must receive from others justifications of wellbeing , and therefore recognition and praise .
Does this not mean that we end up violating not only freedom of conscience , but also freedom of opinion ?
I will merely ask this question because I do not think it is a banal one .
Mr President , let me agree with colleagues who say that more legislation is not the answer if we are not implementing existing legislation on equality .
Secondly , as someone who grew up with the movement for more equality , I worry that young women think the battle is over .
Therefore , we need to invigorate the debate amongst young women and young men about the equality agenda .
On the economic crisis , yes it is affecting women , but , of course , when men lose a job , women are also affected .
I think we need to be very clear that the economic crisis affects everybody , particularly families .
On paragraphs 34 and 35 , I fully agree and would endorse the call for those countries which have not done so to ratify the European Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings .
I hope that the Irish Government lives up to its commitment to do so this year .
Domestic violence is a horrible reality : many women are indeed murdered in their own homes .
We have had a recent court case involving an incident of that kind in Ireland .
Paragraph 38 , however , fails to respect the subsidiarity clause in relation to abortion , and I think it needs amending .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when the struggle was under way about a hundred years ago for voting rights for women , it was not a privilege that women were fighting for but the just recognition of their basic civil rights .
Let us also try to take that path today .
I firmly believe that the greater involvement of women in political life , especially at the national level , will be assisted by genuinely free competition between candidates in electoral contests .
Under such conditions , women will undoubtedly hold their own .
For example , during the last parliamentary elections in the Czech Republic , a free contest between candidates would have increased the overall number of women elected from all parliamentary parties from a paltry 15 % to an acceptable 26 % .
We find similar results with other types of election .
Women must not be in the role of supplicants .
If they have an equal chance , they will win through .
However , as long as electoral systems are contests between selected groups of candidates for predictable seats with no real chance for other candidates to be elected , there is no equal opportunity .
Let us strive , therefore , for genuinely equal opportunities for all , in other words , for women too .
Then there will be no need for quotas .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a short while ago , I gave a speech about my work in the European Parliament , about my tasks here and about my many appointments .
Then a man asked me this question : ' What does your husband say to that ? '
I have heard this question many times .
I know that women get asked it , but I believe that , the other way around , no man is ever asked the question : ' What does your wife say to that ? '
( Heckling )
Yours has ?
Well then , in your case , we can talk about real equality .
Let me give you another example : A young married couple , friends of mine , have just had a baby and the parents share one job , that of looking after their baby .
For the wife , it is considered normal , but the husband gets asked why he spends half the day changing nappies and does he not feel this has set him back career-wise .
That is not equality , either .
In conclusion , let me touch on equal pay , which we have discussed today .
Although there are companies which pay union wages , there is evidence that women work in departments where they have fewer opportunities to progress and where they are paid smaller allowances .
One final example : companies whose management consists of at least 30 % women achieve better business success .
Equality does pay off !
( RO ) I welcome this resolution and am pleased that a key place has been given to the issue of women who work in agriculture and do not enjoy any clear , definite legal status with regard to right of ownership and their role in the family household .
This issue , which has possible major consequences , is also on the agenda of the Council 's Spanish Presidency as an important objective .
We must look for the best applicable solutions for this matter .
I also hope that the role played by women in the European economy will have an important place as well in the future EU 2020 strategy , which will be discussed this very week at the information summit in Brussels .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would very much like to thank my fellow Member , Mr Tarabella , for his report .
The fact that this report contains more than 40 paragraphs is clear evidence that equality and equal opportunities for women are not a subject that we can do justice to in just under an hour .
There is enough material here for several debates .
Today , however , I would like to focus on two points .
The first one is paragraph 8 of the report , which is critical of the fact that gender mainstreaming in the current Lisbon Strategy is basically non-existent .
I would like to join the call that the Commission and Council include a gender mainstreaming chapter in their post-Lisbon ' EU 2020 ' strategy .
Furthermore , it is essential that Member States carry out a gender-based impact assessment , because if we want to be serious about fighting the effects of the current crisis , we need action which will take into account the particular position of women .
I think that Member States really should be urged to take action based on such data and impact assessments in order to promote economic recovery .
I am also of the opinion that women have rights over their own bodies and health .
( RO ) While welcoming this report , I would like to highlight one thing .
I do not think that legislation is relevant , especially because this equality between men and women is a major component in a people 's civilisation and culture .
I believe that positive measures must be adopted at the start of every individual 's development and begin with a form of upbringing which removes stereotypes and gives strong support and a purpose to gender equality right from childhood .
Unless we adopt this mindset and carry out integration in this way , we will continue to have the same discussion about investigating this matter and less about doing something .
I would like to emphasis one further thing .
Inequalities become narrower in a knowledge society or new form of economy .
I believe that these are important steps towards equality .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to point out that the outdated Barcelona objectives referred to in this report conflict with the recommendations of experts .
It has been proven by experts that the youngest children , those who are up to two years old , should not be placed in institutions and it is therefore impossible to impose such a target on Member States .
For the healthy mental development of infants and toddlers , it is fundamentally important for them to be looked after all day long by their mother or father .
This report , moreover , interferes with the rights of Member States , since it wishes to change their pro-family policies .
Our job , of course , is to struggle for effective European measures to combat people trafficking and violence against women and children .
I believe , and I would like to point out , that this report does not respect the right to life of the unborn child .
I consider this report to be lacking in balance .
I would like to conclude by thanking Commissioner Špidla and wishing him every success .
( SK ) It is true that the European Union has done much over the past thirty years to improve the position and rights of women .
However , the most striking difference , which still persists and which even continues to deepen , is in the pay of men and women .
Women earn almost 20 % less on average , while pay differences between women and men also have a significant effect on the lifelong earnings and pensions of women and what we increasingly refer to as the feminisation of poverty .
The differences in pay are connected to many legal , social and economic factors , the extent of which is broader and goes beyond the issue of equal pay for equal work .
We should also mount a Europe-wide campaign to try to eliminate deeply ingrained prejudices concerning the supposedly natural fact that there are those who wear trousers and there are less valued persons who wear skirts .
We must speak openly about the topic of domestic violence and human trafficking , which is still taboo , and , of course , about taking gender equality into the education process of pupils in primary school .
I would like to end by asking one question for everyone sitting here today .
How can society value and protect women as unique and exceptional beings , as the bearers of life , when we consider International Women 's Day to be a socialist hangover ?
( PL ) Mr President , I am very pleased that men , too , are speaking today , although , as can be seen , we are in the minority .
I would like us to look at gender policy in categories of a huge , untapped social potential , and , therefore , within the next 10 years of this generation , the disproportions should be evened out in every area if we want to think of a rapidly developing society .
There are three problem areas : firstly , the disproportion in the academic world .
Women are better educated , but they do not gain promotion .
Secondly , the participation of women in politics should be significantly greater , and this is why I think rules on parity should be put in place in all Member States .
Thirdly , the area of entrepreneurship .
Women cope better with , for example , micro-enterprises , but their participation in the management of large companies is quite small .
The current rate of growth suggests that women will achieve equal participation only in the year 2280 .
This must be changed .
There are three conclusions .
Firstly , the monitoring centre should look at best practices .
Secondly , I want to express immense thanks to Mr Špidla for allowing , in the European Social Fund , the European Union 's great financial instrument , the possibility of investing in kindergartens .
Thirdly , I would like to declare that , if I plan to have a child during this term , I will take paternity leave , if Mr Buzek allows me .

( RO ) I believe that an effective career planning system is required in order to ensure equal opportunities for men and women , which means that there must be sufficient child care facilities , such as crèches and nurseries .
The European Union currently has waiting lists for children to be registered in crèches and nurseries .
There are even a large number of children who cannot be registered in such educational institutions due to an insufficient number of places .
Every euro invested in developing child care facilities means a return of six euros for society , resulting from the jobs created and the improvement in European citizens ' quality of life .
This is why I hope that in the future , the European Union and Member States will invest more in these care facilities for children of a very young age .
Last but not least , I would like to draw your attention to the situation of single-parent families and to the difficulties encountered by single parents bringing up children on their own .
( PL ) Mr President , in my opinion , there are two keys to the equal rights of women and men .
One key is equal access to economic resources , and the second key is equal access to decision making in public life .
In my opinion , differences between pay for women and men , which stubbornly continue to exist , are unacceptable .
There should be equal pay for equal work .
Furthermore , I would like to stress that it is very important , in my opinion , to have greater participation of women in political life and in public life in general .
I am profoundly convinced that greater participation of women in public life , in greater numbers and on fairer principles , will mean that the budgets and policy which will be created , and the plans which will be made , will , to a greater degree , reflect the dreams , needs , aspirations and plans of the whole of society .
( RO ) Against the backdrop of the economic and financial crisis , the unemployment rate for women rose by 1.6 % in 2009 , compared with the rate for men , which rose by 2.7 % .
There has been a significant increase in women 's involvement in the decision-making process in politics .
The percentage of women in the European Parliament has risen from 31 % to 35 % , compared with the previous parliamentary term .
The percentage of women representing Romania is 36 % .
Taking the example of Romania , the election of a woman , a former MEP , as President of the Romanian Parliament 's Chamber of Deputies marks a first .
On a personal note , as a young woman embarking on a political career , I stood as an independent candidate for the European Parliament , managing to obtain the necessary number of votes , without the help of a party list .
In the private sector , women are much better represented , with a third of them ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the title of the debate here this evening is ' Equality between women and men ' , yet most speakers , when dealing with the issue , said ' between men and women ' .
That , I think , in part answers the question asked by Mrs Lulling about why more progress has not been made since 1975 .
The reason is tradition .
It is cultural .
Women were seen to have an inferior , subordinate role .
That still exists in many countries worldwide and it is a big challenge to change it .
Thankfully , however , the EU has made good progress and nowhere probably more than in this Parliament where , numerically and attitudinally , there is real equality .
That needs to continue through legislation , through targets and through directives .
The point was also made that we should have more information for young girls .
I agree , but we also need more information for young boys , particularly to offset the damage that has been done by many films and many television programmes which are not at all conducive to creating an equal society in the spirit of equality .
There is a lot of work to be done there and we need to start doing it .
( PL ) Mr President , it is usually the case that , in difficult times , more problems with ensuring the everyday welfare of the family rest upon women .
Not only should they receive gratitude on all sides for this , but they should be given substantial support as part of social policy .
I think we have a lot to do in this area .
Gender equality and women 's rights stem from human rights .
It seems that creating excessive legislation to uphold this fundamental right may be perceived as an outright denial of the principle .
Finally , we can do most in the area of equality between women and men by having a system of appropriate education , because respect for women is not enough , and it cannot be fully defined and incorporated in the best documents if it is not part of our culture , customs and upbringing .
In Poland , there is a saying that the woman holds up three corners of the house , and the man only one .
We could say that this situation distinguishes and values women , or that it excessively exploits them and is an example of inequality .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate has been unusually extensive .
I have attended many debates in Parliament and this has certainly been one of the most prolific .
In my opinion , it also showed clearly that the policy formulated by the European Commission and Europe as such is a policy that has its own inner sense and its own inner logic and it must be continued .
Equality of opportunity is , in my view , a really fundamental element of our make-up , emanating no doubt from human rights , and it is also clear that we must secure it for all .
We cannot accept that there will be isolated areas where equality of opportunity is not consistently applied .
The policy formulated in our plan for equality should , in my view , continue in the future and I similarly agree with the opinion that in the forthcoming ' Europe 2020 ' strategy , we should reinforce gender issues .
As has already , been said many times in the discussion - and I am in complete agreement with this - a modern society that wants to be successful cannot afford not to make use of its full human potential .
In my opinion , equality of opportunity represents a unique competitive advantage for Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have also discussed measures , cultural aspects , lawmaking and many other aspects of this complex issue .
I believe that we cannot adopt a negative or positive opinion a priori on any remedy .
Existing legislation must certainly be applied consistently .
There is no doubt about that and there are many problems here .
It is also clear , of course , that new and very bold legislation can often fundamentally change a situation .
The Norwegian example of quotas for the administrative bodies of large joint stock companies was mentioned here and this law has clearly changed the situation and I think it would be interesting to study the Norwegian experience .
Despite this , however , I believe that emphasising the full application of current valid legislation should remain a priority .
Ladies and gentlemen , the importance of the work-life balance has been clearly pointed out and , in my opinion , it has also been stated clearly that equality of opportunity is an issue for both men and women . I am therefore delighted that we have held this debate on the basis of the experience of both sexes and I think that this should always be the case .
Commissioner Špidla , I would like to join in the chorus of thanks given to you from different quarters of the Chamber and in all the good wishes .
I wish you all the best and God bless !
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate the Commissioner on this final effort - yes , I who have often challenged him in other forums - and to simply thank everyone for this very rich debate , in which many Members have spoken .
I have listened carefully to all of them , and it is true that a number of men have spoken , which I am pleased about .
At any rate , the proportion of men was higher than in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , since , of the 61 members , there are only four of us men , which is far too few .
I do , of course , agree with those who have said that this is a fight in which men , too , must participate .
I cannot respond to everyone , but Mrs Lulling said that the margin of the vote in committee was not a comfortable one .
Well , there were 15 ' yeses ' to five ' noes ' , three times more ' yeses ' than ' noes ' , and seven abstentions .
I know that we have spent a great deal of time on chapter 38 , which is devoted to reproductive health , to sexual rights and , in particular , to contraception and abortion .
I know that this issue is perhaps more sensitive than the others , and I did not want my report to become a ragbag , but I could not overlook that issue .
I make reference in particular to young girls , who end up suffering if they accidentally become pregnant because they did not have all of the information they needed .
What bothers me most is the frequent hypocrisy of some who wish to ignore these situations and poke fun at the problems of these young girls and yet , when it happens to one of their children , they have the resources to pay for them to have ' revitalisation ' therapy , in Switzerland or elsewhere , without it attracting much attention .
As for the pay gap , Mrs Bauer put it well .
We are talking about a figure of 25 % when we add up the effects of part-time hours , which are limited .
It is , of course , difficult to be precise .
This is not - and I will finish here because I have only a few seconds left - a ragbag report , even though mention is made of genital mutilation , the burkha and forced marriages .
Rest assured that I believe that , in a democracy , these practices are not cultural ; rather , they are practices that we must combat by means of democracy .
The fact is , had I put that in the report , it would have overshadowed all of the rest which , in my view , was more important .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 10 February .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Even though the number of women in the labour market is higher than the number of men for the first time in history , instances of gender-related discrimination persist .
A considerable proportion of the jobs done by women are usually on a part-time or fixed contract basis , with unsuitable pay .
More than half a century after the principle of equal pay was included in the Community Treaties , a woman in the European Union needs to work 418 calendar days to earn what a man earns in 365 days .
Even though the EU 's policy has been pioneering , the pay gap has remained stubbornly wide since 2000 .
We have the necessary legal instruments to act on this .
This is why I am calling for the future European Commission to be involved in transposing , in all Member States , Directive 2006 / 54 / EC on the implementation of the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of men and women in matters of employment and occupation .
While the recession has primarily hit the sectors dominated by men , there is the risk , including in Romania , that budget restrictions will lead to the loss of numerous jobs in the public services sector , an area where women are represented the most .
I believe it is vital that gender equality policies are not modified by discriminatory measures aimed at public sector employees .
The report on equal opportunities is proposing to give new impetus to equal opportunities within the European Union because the promotion of genuine , democratic equality between women and men remains a benchmark for creating a democracy which integrates the whole of society .
Equal opportunities offer a boost for social progress and must not simply remain a judicial instrument .
In most European countries , segregation by occupation and sector remains almost unchanged .
This is reflected in the lower salaries for women , the smaller number of women who work when they have dependants , as well as in the sharing of responsibility between men and women in family life .
Furthermore , we must not forget either the role of women in agriculture in Europe and their contribution to it : one-third of agricultural workers are women .
They are often unpaid and do not enjoy adequate social protection because they carry out their work on farms providing food for their own families .
I believe that the European Parliament must support the initiative in favour of setting up a European centre for monitoring violence against women and , by extension , European legislation aimed at protecting victims , as well as the establishment of a body promoting equal opportunities at United Nations level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Tarabella for his excellent report on equality between women and men in the European Union .
Inequality between women and men in the labour market is reflected in the fact that women still get 80 cents for every euro that men get doing the same job .
There are measures in place to achieve equal pay and now is the time actually to put them into practice .
For example , it should be made compulsory to undertake an assessment of the demands of a job and pay should be determined based on it .
Sanctions should be imposed on employers if no proper equality programme has been drawn up for the workplace .
Women should not have to confront obstacles to their career paths and see their career development brought to a halt on account of their sex .
Both companies and the public sector must pay more attention to ensuring that there are more women in top jobs .
When the European Commission is being formed , each Member State should propose both men and women as commissioners .
As the report states , there are also problems in reconciling work and family life that are relevant to equality between women and men in professional life .
The development of public services to facilitate care provision and more scope for parental leave are ways to even out the differences between women and men in the labour market .
The European Union needs social regulation .
The EU has already begun to work towards a more equal Europe : the status of European women has improved considerably , thanks to EU legislation .
The Union is heading in the right direction in matters of equality , but things do not happen by themselves : in the future , we will require a stronger EU social dimension to guarantee a more equal and more social Union than ever .
Equality between women and men is a fundamental principle of the European Union .
Considerable progress has been made in this regard down the years .
However , there are still significant discrepancies between Member States when it comes to offering equal pay for work done , the number of women occupying management posts and the percentage of women in the labour market .
In spite of current EU legislation , there is still a difference seen in Member States , on average , of 15-17 % between the salaries received by men and women .
This is because women have poorly paid jobs or work on a part-time basis .
As a result of the reduction in women 's earnings and pensions over the course of their lives , these salary gaps cause poverty among elderly women .
21 % of women aged 65 years or over are exposed to the risk of poverty , compared with 16 % of men in this situation .
To ensure equal rights for both women and men , Member States must exchange good practice in terms of guaranteeing gender equality .
Furthermore , I would like to stress the need for educational programmes in schools to avoid the legacy of stereotypes associated with women .
The most important task concerning the European Union 's policy for the promotion of equality for men and women is the evaluation of the successes and failures of the four-year schedule ending this year and plotting the outlines of the new strategy .
The roadmap beginning next year must stress - just like the present one - the phenomenon of multiple and ' sectional ' discrimination , while paying closer attention to women 's rights aspects of the situation of ethnic minorities .
The report correctly points out the harmful effects of the global economic crisis on the situation of women , particularly as far as jobs and the gender-based wage gap are concerned .
It is crucial , therefore , for the new strategy to consider the economic importance of equal opportunities for men and women , since gender-based discrimination is not only unfair but it slows down the economy .
Member States and the enterprises concerned must be urged , therefore , on the one hand , to incorporate into their crisis-handling strategies the consideration of gender equality and , on the other , to refrain from financial restrictions detrimental to equal opportunities for men and women .
The roadmap that comes into effect after 2010 has to maintain the priorities of the previous strategy , with greater focus on aspects involved in bringing down poverty and social exclusion , especially in a European year dedicated to that topic .
The new strategy must be a concrete action plan with realistic , verifiable goals .
In addition , much more efficient coordination is needed between the European Commission and Member States in view of their implementation .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 22.50 )
Opening of the sitting
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Presentation of the College of Commissioners and statement on the Framework Agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission ( debate )
I would like to give a warm welcome to our sitting to the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso , and the Commissioners-designate .
Welcome , everyone .
Welcome to our guests .
We have before us one of the most important decisions in this parliamentary term .
For it is to us that the citizens of Europe have committed the task of electing the best European Commission .
We have completed the hearings , and I have received 26 letters of recommendation .
For the first time in history , we are electing the European Commission as a co-equal legislator .
This puts us under an obligation to work especially closely with the European Commission .
We represent two institutions of the European Union .
In relation to this , we have entered , provisionally , into a new Framework Agreement , and today we are going to endorse it .
We are going to vote on this agreement at 12.00 .
The vote will be held at 12.00 .
Before that , there may be a short break , if we finish the discussion early .
We want the Union to be represented by institutions which are more dynamic , and this is why the agreement is so important to us .
We also have the good experience of recent months .
The hour of direct discussion with the President of the European Commission , here in plenary , has been a great success .
We are going to have similar contact with the Commissioners , with the Vice-Presidents of the European Commission , and so we are going to have an hour of questions and answers which will help us to understand the work of the Commission .
There are also many solutions in our new Framework Agreement which we did not have before .
In their work , the European Commission and the European Parliament must also take account of the opinions of national parliaments , which represent the principle of subsidiarity in the European Union .
I am sure this is not only the beginning of a new decade , but of a new way of working in the European Union .
We all believe this .
Thirty years after the first direct elections to the European Parliament , we stand before another great change .
This is a new era in the work of the European Parliament - a European institution .
At the beginning of our discussion I would like to ask Mr Barroso to take the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shall promote the general interest of the Union and take appropriate initiatives to that end .
It shall ensure the application of the treaties , and of measures adopted by the institutions pursuant to them .
It shall oversee the application of Union law under the control of the Court of Justice of the European Union .
It shall execute the budget and manage programmes .
It shall exercise coordinating , executive and management functions , as laid down in the treaties .
With the exception of the common foreign and security policy , and other cases provided for in the treaties , it shall ensure the Union 's external representation .
It shall ensure the Union 's annual and multiannual programming with a view to achieving interinstitutional agreements .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , that is the text of Article 17 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union , of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I read it out because it shows the importance of the Commission when it comes to carrying out the European project , a Commission which , pursuant to the same article , is accountable as a College to your Parliament .
Thus , today , we are seeing European democracy in action .
Today , your Parliament , made up of representatives directly elected by the European public , is being asked to give its verdict on the new College of Commissioners .
Supplementing as it does the vote on the President of the Commission , held on 16 September 2009 , this vote is an essential part of the democratic legitimacy of the Commission , and hence of the European project as a whole .
The team standing before you today is ready to rise to the challenges ahead of it .
It combines experience and new ideas ; it reflects the broad range of approaches and sensibilities that make Europe this wonderful land of ideas .
This is a team for which you can vote with confidence , a team that deserves your support .
And then ?
Then what ?
Will things return to how they were before ?
No , I refuse to believe - and our fellow citizens would not understand it - that , after these years of institutional debates , we will basically carry on as we were before .
Indeed , we are living in exceptional times .
The challenges that the economic and financial crisis , climate change , and energy security - to name but a few - are presenting us with are quite simply too great for us not to change our approach .
This is a time for boldness .
This is a time to show our citizens that we care , and that the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty will make a real difference in our ability to serve their interests .
I believe that our economic and social situation demands a radical shift from the status quo , and the new treaty allows this .
Our task is to use the new mechanics to bring on new dynamics .
So let us get away from the intellectual glamour of pessimism and constant denigration of the European Union that is doing so much damage to Europe 's image .
Let us move the discussion from institutional input to policy impact .
What Europe needs to succeed is policies focused on results , better governance structures and confidence in our own ability to solve the problems we face .
Our common currency , the euro , will continue to constitute a major tool for our development , and those who think it can be put in question must realise we will stick to our course .
The European Union has the necessary framework to address all challenges that can appear in this matter .
We can start by asking ourselves : does the European Union count in the world ?
And the answer is ' yes ' .
But does the European Union count as much as it should in the world ?
The answer is ' not yet ' .
Europe counts when we speak with a strong and united voice , when the European interest is clearly defined and vigorously defended : in trade , for example , and competition policy .
It is less successful when we act according to narrow national interests , in an uncoordinated way or in areas where collectively , the European Union is not able to defend and promote its collective interest .
So , in summary , we have to ask ourselves : are we doing everything we can to define and defend the European interest - an interest that is more than the sum of its parts ?
Frankly , I believe we have to do more .
We need to set our work in an overall , longer-term vision of where we want the European Union to be .
This will ensure coherence and offer a sense of direction that actors across Europe can recognise and support .
The political guidelines I presented to this House are the starting point for this vision of ' Europe 2020 ' .
They are the fruit of our experience over the last five years .
And , not least , they are the fruit of intensive discussions with this House .
Thanks to your strong support for these guidelines , I regard them as a useful point of departure for us .
The broad priorities are clear : making a successful exit from the crisis ; leading on climate action and energy efficiency ; boosting new sources of growth and social cohesion to renew our social market economy ; advancing a people 's Europe with freedom and security ; and opening a new era for global Europe .
I believe in a Europe that is open and generous , a Europe that is particularly dedicated to the Millennium Development Goals .
I believe in a Europe that shows solidarity to others , as we have shown recently in Haiti , where we have contributed in an important way with emergency aid , and we will also contribute with significant reconstruction aid .
But we can achieve more with better coordination at European level , and I will make proposals in this sense , exploring the new opportunities offered by the treaty ; also , the European External Action Service will be a very important instrument to make our foreign policy more coherent and effective .
I can promise you that , if this College is granted your support , we will set to work straightaway , turning the political guidelines into an ambitious work programme - a work programme which I want to discuss with you .
Our Europe 2020 vision is both a structural and comprehensive reform strategy and an exit and recovery strategy .
So we will make sure we embed short-term measures to get Europe working again into our longer-term objectives , promoting jobs through sustainable growth .
We will spend the next five years turning our vision into reality : making Europe a resource-efficient , inclusive , social market economy - reflecting what makes us special , the European way of life .
This means growth based on knowledge and innovation ; improving our productivity by increasing our R & D and innovation performance ; better exploiting the potential of ICTs and creating a digital single market ; raising education outcomes ; and promoting skills .
This means an inclusive , high-employment society : empowering people through high levels of employment , using flexicurity , modernising labour markets and social protection , fighting poverty with a view to building a more inclusive society .
This means greener growth : building a competitive and sustainable economy , tackling climate change , accelerating the roll-out of smart grids and genuine EU-scale networks , modernising the EU 's industrial base , and turning the European Union into a resource efficient economy .
To achieve these goals , we must recognise that the interdependence of our economies requires better and more coordination .
Some national politicians , let us face it , are not in favour of a more coordinated approach in economic policy .
But , if we want to overcome the crisis , reinforce the social dimension and establish a good basis for a strong economic future for Europe in the globalised world , if we want to reinforce our industrial base and launch new common European projects and not just bilateral ones , then stronger economic coordination is the only way forward .
Other very important challenges need to be tackled during this mandate .
We have already mapped out a very ambitious and far-reaching programme in the field of justice and home affairs .
This not only includes the fight against terrorism and crime ; it also includes addressing the very important priority of a common approach to migration .
In this area , we show to our citizens our commitment to both freedom and security .
During this mandate , we will also focus on the budget review and new financial perspectives .
We believe that we should concentrate on the quality of the expenditure , on its European added value and on its effectiveness , so that the financial perspectives become an instrument to realise the ambitions of Europe : for our strategy for growth and jobs , and also for the goals of economic , social and territorial cohesion .
This can only come from strong European institutions and a determination to raise our level of ambition , to deliver change .
So it is most welcome that a key change in the treaty is the strengthening of all the European institutions .
I intend to use this to reinforce the contribution we can all make to the European project , together .
This is no time for our institutions to pull in different directions .
But , of course , the Commission will always have a special relationship with Parliament , as , under the Community method , we are the two institutions with a specific role to identify , articulate and give reality to the European interest .
That makes us the two Community institutions par excellence , with a particular responsibility for ensuring that the European Union is more than the sum of its parts .
It was in this spirit that I offered in my political guidelines presented to you a special relationship with Parliament .
It is in this spirit that we have discussed a new Framework Agreement , the principles of which are embodied in the resolution before the House today .
This Framework Agreement should drive forward our common efforts to deliver genuinely European responses to the issues faced by Europeans today .
So , as well as updating the agreement to reflect the Lisbon Treaty , it must set out new ways in which we will make cooperation a day-to-day reality .
It must help us to fashion a new culture of partnership and purpose , to use our common leverage to offer a real advance for the European project .
Also , several of these issues imply cooperation with the Council .
So I would very much welcome a broader agreement which unites the colegislators , together with the Commission , on a set of principles for interinstitutional cooperation .
I said we need to be bold .
I said we cannot go on as if it is business as usual .
I have outlined many innovations , and our priorities to tackle the social situation .
I am convinced they will strengthen our institutions and help us achieve our goals , in full respect of our values .
Because let us never forget that our Union is founded on values : respect for human dignity , freedom , democracy , equality , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
Today , a new chapter in our European adventure opens .
Let us work together to make it a real success - for all our citizens .
( Applause )
That was the presentation of the College of Commissioners and a statement about the Framework Agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission .
The presentation was given by Mr Barroso .
We are discussing both of these matters .
The vote on the Framework Agreement will take place punctually at 12.00 , then there will be a break until 13.30 , and then we will proceed to the vote on the College of Commissioners - that is today 's order of business .
I would also like to greet the representatives of the European Council , the rotating Presidency and the Spanish Government .
We welcome all who are with us today and are listening to our conversation . Welcome .

Mr President , Mr López Garrido , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , today we are going to give our verdict on the appointment of the new European Commission , an essential act which confirms the prerogatives of this Parliament and which will determine the way in which the Union functions for several years .
However , before placing on record the confidence that my group and I have in the Barroso II Commission , I wish to voice my opinion on the context in which it will be required to work .
On this matter , I must say that the people of Europe are not yet convinced that the Treaty of Lisbon is working properly .
We expect a great deal of this treaty , and we must do our utmost to ensure that it is a new , positive stage in the European adventure .
Legislation is not everything , however .
The women and men who apply it must measure up to our ambitions .
They must ensure that Europe 's stature in the world is equal to its message , its wealth and its successes .
The fact is , the European machine is obviously still in need of some adjustments .
Thus , we are now endowed with a High Representative , who is also Vice-President of the European Commission and , as such , accountable to this House .
This key figure must be the voice of Europe in the world .
Her presence and her ambition must embody that of the Union , the world 's biggest economy in terms of GDP , the world 's biggest market , the biggest contributor to international aid .
The fact is , from Haiti to Iran , from Afghanistan to Yemen , from Cuba to the transatlantic relations that we hold dear , Europe 's voice has not lived up to our hopes thus far .
Our group calls for drastic action to ensure that we change our approach and start off on the right foot this time .
With this in mind , Mr Barroso , we are also counting on your personal commitment and on your leadership .
We are also counting on the new President of the European Council to embody the Union on the international stage , to initiate and chair meetings of the Heads of State or Government , and to act as a reference point .
We must give him time to make his mark , but I already note with satisfaction that his first steps are along the right lines .
From the Council of Ministers , I expect nothing less than close cooperation , on equal terms - and I mean on equal terms - with this House .
However , the example of SWIFT shows us the extent of the progress to be made .
Lastly , from the Commission - and I know that President Barroso shares this point of view - I expect an exemplary working relationship and relationship of trust .
Moreover , the Framework Agreement on which we will vote this lunchtime reflects this common will of our two institutions .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have come to the end of an exercise in which we have scrutinised the members of the Commission , and I wish to commend this exercise of modern democracy that , to date , no other parliament in Europe carries out .
Nonetheless , we still have a great deal to do before we are equal to our task , which is to be able to judge politicians from a political perspective .
We must improve our procedures still further , and make them more relevant and more focused on the content of European policies .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am well aware that , at this early stage in the introduction of the new treaty , not everything can be done straight away .


However , we must be ambitious .
This is the spirit in which we are approaching this debate , which must result in the appointment of the new Commission : a Commission which , under the leadership of Mr Barroso and with experienced commissioners , is well-equipped to tackle Europeans ' problems ; a Commission with which we share both the main political objectives and the prognoses concerning the problems to be addressed or the solutions to be applied to those problems ; a Commission that reflects the results of the 2009 European elections , and within which my political family , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , is the most influential force ; a Commission , lastly , whose main priority is to meet the expectations of Europeans hit by the crisis , Europeans who also often suffer from pessimism and who are concerned about the ability of their leaders to defend and promote the European model in the world .
That is why the PPE Group will vote to appoint the Commission .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , during the course of the hearings , my impression of the Commission was one of Abbot José Manuel with his 26 novices from the order of Trappist monks .
That is an order that has taken a vow of silence .
It seemed as though the Abbot had said to his novices ' better to say nothing than to say something wrong ' .
That was detrimental in the hearings for some of the new people .
It was surprising to see someone like Neelie Kroes , who is otherwise so eloquent , suddenly spouting out trite phrases .
Others , like Joaquín Almunia , Michel Barnier , the new Commissioner Maroš Šefčovič and even Mrs Georgieva , did not take the vow of silence and , once this vow of silence was lifted , demonstrated that , if you are so bold as to enter into dialogue with Parliament , you can achieve a higher profile than if you allow yourself to be manipulated .
( Applause )

At the same time , Mr Almunia and Mr Barnier revealed the roles they intend to play in the future Commission .
It was interesting to observe the division of the portfolios of the individual members of the Commission , including during the hearings .
There are so many contradictory assignments , so many structures that make conflicts of competence almost inevitable and that will require an arbitrator to ultimately decide on the direction in which to go - that was interesting .
On one hand , the commissioners are told ' I will speak here ' and on the other , ' in cases of conflicts of competence , I will ultimately decide ' .
I certainly do not want to do the Roman Emperor a disservice , but this , Mr Barroso , seems very much like you want to operate according to the principle of ' divide and rule ' .
This , however , is the wrong approach .
You need to understand that anyone who wants to turn a College into a presidential system is undertaking a huge task and , in the end , must be prepared to be told that the buck stops with him and that he must take the responsibility for the shortcomings .
The Commission is strong when it acts as a collegial body .
It is strong when it does not see itself as a technocratic administrative leader , but understands that the challenges facing us require transnational European responses .
The question that you raised at the beginning of your speech - does the European Union count in the world ? - is indeed on the agenda .
This question will not be answered by you tailoring everything to your own needs , but by you organising the responsibilities of your Commission so efficiently that , in cooperation with us , the European Parliament , the Commission can provide the answers .
The economic and financial crisis , the environmental crisis and the social crisis faced by this continent require transnational European answers .
They do not require renationalisation .
That is why we need a strong Commission that can find support from a strong majority in Parliament .
However , it must not be tailored to José Manuel Durão Barroso , but must instead reflect the wide range of capabilities that all of the commissioners bring .
( Applause )
An answer to the question of whether the European Union counts in the world could be seen in Copenhagen .
If we become fragmented when it comes to environmental legislation and if Europe pursues renationalisation instead of taking an ambitious Union-based approach , then we will also see in other areas what we saw in Copenhagen , namely that the decisions are taken by Barack Obama and Hu Jintao , without European involvement .
Anyone who does not want the world to descend into a new type of bipolarity needs a strong Europe and an ambitious Europe .
We therefore also need an effective Commission that will take on this role .
Mr Barroso , in the debate on the interinstitutional agreement , you made two concessions , which , in my view , are crucial .
The impact assessment , and the social impact assessment in particular , is , for us as Social Democrats and as Socialists and Democrats , an essential element .
The Commission needs to realise , and that means all of the individual Members of this Commission , that what made large parts of the European population turn away from the European idea had something to do with the fact that the people of Europe had the feeling that this Commission was only interested in the market and not , for example , in social protection for its citizens .
More and more people have the feeling that cold technocracy rather than social welfare is what determines the actions of the Commission .
If that trend now changes direction with the social impact assessment that we are agreeing on , then we will have made a great deal of progress .
That also applies , incidentally , to the measures in this interinstitutional agreement with which we are in agreement , namely that the future legislative resolutions of the European Parliament will be turned into Commission initiatives within a year .
That is also an enormous step forward in the cooperation between our two institutions .
A Trappist abbot , who , together with Herman Non-Country , the President of the European Council , is to represent Europe in the world - Mr Daul , that will not do .
What we need is effective cooperation between the European institutions .
However , Mr Barroso cannot be blamed for everything .
There are also 27 Heads of Government in Europe who believe that the Commission is the extended arm of their government offices .
The answer we need to this is close cooperation between the European Parliament and a Commission that feels duty-bound to work for social and environmental progress in Europe .
That is what will make the European Union count in the world .
If we address this together , then , following your response to this , Mr Barroso , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament will discuss in the break what we will ultimately decide to do .
After the discussion in our group , and following your response , I will then present this decision in the second round .
( Applause )
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I am delighted to be here today and to finally have the Barroso II Commission before us .
I believe that this is a good thing , because we are bringing to an end what was a bad period for the European Union .
The absence , for six months , of a Commission equipped with real powers is something that should not be repeated in the future , especially in this period of economic and financial crisis , in which there are major issues such as climate change , Copenhagen , and so on .
In any case , trust in my experience when I say that , in future , there must be no more periods in which the Commission provides no real governance , especially when they last for as long as six months .
I hope that this Commission will embark on its work as quickly as possible , as soon as we have voted .
For our part , Mr Barroso , we expect three things of you .
Firstly , that this new Commission will be the driving force behind the European Union ; we believe that this has not been the case over the last five years .
This time , we want a Commission that will leave the last five years behind and become the real driving force behind a far more intensive integration of the European Union .
Indeed , everything that has happened over the last few weeks and months shows that what makes Europe 's position in this multipolar world problematic is the fact that there is no common outlook and not enough European integration - I am thinking of Copenhagen and the lack of coordination in Haiti .
We therefore call for a Commission which , unlike what we have seen over the last few years , does not always seek an immediate compromise with the Council before coming and presenting it to us and trying to make us swallow it .
Our expectation of the Commission is that it will present ambitious projects to the Council - even if we know in advance that it will not receive 100 % support - and that it will subsequently call on the European Parliament , as its influential ally , in order to convince the Council .
( Applause )
The second thing that we expect of the Commission - and I am going to repeat what Mr Schulz has already said , but I believe that it is important - is that it will work as a College .
A Commission President who is strong is all very well , but a College , a Commission that is strong and which demonstrates its cohesion , is essential and is far more important still .
Therefore , we really do expect this kind of Commission because , for the first time - and you have acknowledged this , Mr Barroso - it is a Commission composed of the three main political families present in this House .
I am delighted that there are eight liberal commissioners in charge of some very important portfolios .
This Commission must now operate internally as a coalition between these three movements and these three political parties and must try to reach compromises supported by the entire Commission and by the entire College .
Lastly , the third priority of this Commission , in our opinion , is obviously to combat the economic crisis , and I believe that the most urgent task is to present as quickly as possible to Parliament and the Council a credible strategy for Europe 2020 .
That is the most important task .
Be ambitious on this point , Mr Barroso .
Do not listen too much to the Member States ; listen instead to the Spanish Presidency , because it has some good ideas on this subject .
Come armed with ambitious projects .
Do not think that weak coordination of national economic strategies is sufficient .
In tomorrow 's world and in the multipolar world , we need much more than that .
We need socio-economic governance of the European Union .
It is not enough to have a monetary pillar such as the euro area ; an economic and social pillar is also needed in the euro area and in the European Union .
This is the strategy that we expect from you because it will be crucial to the future of Europe and to the future of our fellow citizens .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must admit that this is unbelievable .
We have before us the coalition of hypocrites .
It is just before St Valentine 's Day , and Mr Barroso is being told : ' I love you , but I do not love you .
I do not believe you , but I am going to vote for you anyway ' .
So , this is really ...
Yes , Mr Schulz , you make a great statement when you say , ' we are going to think about it ' , when everyone knows that you are going to vote for the Commission .
That is a great political strategy , that is !
( Applause )
I wish to say something ...
I do not know why you are getting all worked up , Mr Schulz !
You are not the President of Parliament yet !
Calm down , my friend , calm down !
For my part - and Mr Schulz should have his speaking time cut by 30 seconds - I would like to say some very simple things , between ourselves .
We have some large groups , which are going to support the Barroso Commission .
They are incapable of producing a resolution together to explain why they support the Commission .
Incapable !
Why ?
Because they are not in favour of the Commission - and at least Mr Verhofstadt is clear when he says , ' I am in favour of the liberals ' , and the other one is in favour of the PPE , and the other one is in favour of the socialists ...
( Comment off-microphone by Mr Verhofstadt : ' and you are in favour of the Greens ' )
Me ?
No , there are none .
But , yes ... as you know , Mr Verhofstadt , ours is the only group to have been critical , even when there was a Green in the Commission .
This is not the way we do politics .
We need to know whether this Commission will have a vision , ambition and determination .
What has been said is true .
The majority of the Commissioners-designate - I do not say all - had no determination , vision or ambition .
However , when considering the Commission as a whole , the sum of the minuses is a plus .
That is the new mathematical formula of the Barroso Commission .
No , it does not work like that .
Therefore , Mr Barroso , I like it when you read the text of the treaty to us : initiatives , what initiatives ?
What initiative did the Commission come up with to address the crisis in Greece ?
Solidarity , where is it ?
In Spain , where is it ?
I have not seen it ; I have not heard it .
Let me give you a piece of advice .
One of Greece 's problems is its defence budget .
4.3 % of Greece 's GDP goes on defence .
What is the problem ?
The problem is Cyprus ; it is the relationship with Turkey .
Where is the Commission 's initiative when it comes to solving the Cyprus issue , so that Greece 's GDP is finally relieved of this stupid , idiotic conflict , which we , as Europeans , should be resolving ?
The Commission 's initiative : it does not have one !
The same point has been made with regard to Haiti .
Baroness Ashton , I know that you are not a fire-fighter , a midwife or any other such person .
However , I still want you to come up with ideas ; I want you to defend something .
You always tell us : ' it is important , we must coordinate , I am going to coordinate ... ' .
We do not know why it is important , we do not know the hierarchy of what is important , but we do know that you regard everything as important .
We will not make progress like that .
Therefore , I believe that we have a problem .
We have a fundamental problem here , and that is that we , as a Parliament , finally have to demonstrate our rapport with the Commission .
And , of course , we will work with the Commission , of course we will work with the commissioners , of course - I know - there will be a majority .
What I would like for once , however , is for us to stop all the trite comments , to stop all the meaningless statements .
We want a political Europe .
Every time the opportunity arises to have a political Europe , we blow it !
When , in Copenhagen , Europe was due to make progress , we blew it !
I would like it if , at some point , Mr Barroso and the commissioners - past and future - told us why they blew it , why Europe was not political , why Europe was not a global player .
Mr Verheugen is leaving the Commission .
He was the number two in the Commission , and he is telling Germany and anyone else who will listen that Europe was not a global player , that Europe did not play its role .
He is not saying why he did not play his role .
It is always someone else , and I would like it if , for once , in this Commission , in this debate , we heard no more of the meaningless comments that Mr Schulz , Mr Verhofstadt and Mr Daul come out with : ' the best thing would be to reject this Commission so that , together , we can finally get to grips with what is really happening in the world ' .



What is really happening in the world is that Europe is failing to cope with the economic crisis , the environmental crisis and the financial crisis .
There are enough of them .
There are enough of those who cannot stand being deceived by their soothing words - they have already tricked us , they tell us : ' we are against , we are against ' , and , in the end , they abstain .
' We are against , we are against , but we will vote in favour . '
That is unworthy of this Parliament .
Let us wake up , because Europe needs it !
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , President Barroso , my group , the ECR Group , supported you together with the Liberals and the People 's Party , and without this , you would not be sitting here .
We supported you when others did not and we supported you because of your longstanding reputation as a reformer .
We would be delighted if you fully lived up to that reputation in this election period .
I remember when , in 2005 , you came along with an interesting idea about simplifying European legislation and cutting through the now impenetrable undergrowth of community law .
I would like you to return to that idea , as it was a good one .
We are living in the period of the Lisbon Treaty , we are living in a period when the adoption of new legislation will be even easier and I would therefore like to ask you not to allow the European economy to be smothered with outgrowths of unjustified and ill-founded regulation , not to allow the victory of modish , politically correct themes which could become an excuse for further centralisation , further regulation and further bureaucratisation of the European Union .
If you take this route , you can rely on us .
If you take the path of reform , if you show yourself to be a genuine reformer , then you can count on our support and cooperation .
If , however , you stick to the old ways and tread the smooth and well-worn paths , then we reserve the right to disagree with you and even to oppose you .
I would like to hope , Mr President , that there will be far more of the former than the latter and that we will be able to cooperate to a much greater degree and to stand on the same side of the barricades , rather than on opposite sides .
I wish you much success in this .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , in September 2009 , I had to tell you that your political guidelines were continuing a failed Commission policy .
Your neoliberal guidelines do not reveal a strategy for more social justice , nor do they provide better protection for Europe against crises .
They provide no basis for the work to successfully combat poverty and social exclusion in Europe .
Now you are presenting to us the College of Commissioners that best suits your programme .
You can expect no applause for this from my group .
Already during this new parliamentary term , this Parliament has demonstrated that it takes democratic control and codetermination seriously , and I very much welcome that .
I am thinking of the new Framework Agreement between Parliament and the Commission and of the rejection of one of the candidate Commissioners , and I hope that , tomorrow , Parliament will once again be conscientious in its addressing of the SWIFT agreement .
Transparency and fairness are vital in the agreements between the institutions - only when we have these can we begin to talk about policy .
It is about the people of Europe and the rest of the world , it is about good jobs and more rights to a good education and fair pay , it is about their right to peaceful development and an intact environment .
Therefore , Mr Barroso , my group will not support your guidelines or your staffing proposal .
Prepare yourself for our harsh , but fair , exchange of views with you and your College .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , what we have before us here is the new government of Europe , a government that , with the Lisbon Treaty , now has enormous powers , not just a Foreign Minister and embassies , not just the ability to sign treaties , but the ability now to use emergency powers to literally take countries over , and yet what we have heard from the European Parliament 's big group leaders this morning is the demand that you take even more powers and do it even more quickly .
Perhaps it is worth reminding ourselves that this treaty that gives this Commission these powers does not have democratic legitimacy in the European Union at all .
You ignored referendums , you denied referendums , and you bullied the poor Irish into voting a second time .
I am struck that the common denominator with this Commission is the sheer number of them that were communists , or were very close to communism .
Mr Barroso himself was a Maoist .
Siim Kallas , far from being a student activist , was even a member of the Supreme Soviets - we have top-notch communists there .
Baroness Ashton ran CND and still refuses to tell us whether she took money from the Communist Party of Great Britain .
Now I could go on but we would be here for some time .
But we have at least 10 communists in this Commission and it must feel like a return to the good old days .
There must be certain nostalgia amongst the communists .
Whilst , 60 years ago , an Iron Curtain fell across Europe , today we have the iron fist of the European Commission .
We have seen it with Article 121 and with Greece effectively being turned into a protectorate .
Poor Greece , trapped inside the economic prison of the euro !
Poor Greece , trapped inside the modern day Völkerkerker for which it appears there is no way out !
What Greece needs , Mr Barroso , is devaluation , not sado-monetarism .
Goodness knows what that is going to do to them .
In 1968 , we had the Brezhnev doctrine of limited sovereignty .
Today we have ' shared values ' .
We have an ' ever-closer European Union ' and ' pooled sovereignty ' and that is what you have used , but of course it will not just be Greece , because the same is going to happen to Spain , to Portugal and to Ireland .
Article 121 will be invoked with all of those .
Mr Barroso , you said earlier that we will stick to our course , and that means millions of people in Europe will be put through pain as you attempt to keep together this disastrous project that is the euro .
It will fall to pieces ; of that there can be no doubt , as surely as it did for Britain during the exchange rate mechanism in 1992 .
You can laugh , you can smile .
It will not work .
It cannot work .
It will fall to pieces , and , as far as the peoples of Europe are concerned , the sooner it does the better .
We need democratic solutions to this .
If you go on pushing your extreme euro-nationalism , this will lead to violence .
We must vote against this Commission .
We must put the future of Europe to people in every Member State in free and fair referendums .
( HU ) The European Commission is the European Union 's defining decision-making body .
Requirements as regards Commissioners should be the following : the right person , based on his or her career path and preparedness , in the right position .
The manner in which Commissioners are nominated and elected , however , ensures that this positive outcome is achieved only incidentally .
Governments do not recommend people for a particular assignment , but for an office .
Anyone they nominate will - unless he or she withdraws - become an EU commissioner .
The President of the Commission is trying to find an assignment for the person in question , and thus the sequence is reversed .
This means that I am trying to find a coat to match the button .
Something else that is worth mentioning : the specialised committees ' hearings are not followed by a vote , but instead , a small circle of people write letters about the hearing .
You are always talking about democracy , and yet are still afraid of direct elections .
Whether it be the EU constitution , a referendum or a committee meeting about a potential candidate .
In the course of the hearings , the Commissioners-designate scarcely said anything concrete .
They did not want to make a commitment , to accept responsibility .
Even so , it nonetheless became clear that they are not breaking with the former Commission , but want a centralised Europe ; they have not drawn the lessons of the financial crisis , but continue to follow liberal economic policy .
There are many of us , therefore , who will not vote for this Commission , and that does not make us anti-Europeans .
We are simply doing what our voters - many million European citizens - expect of us .

( HU ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , in a significant number of European languages , the notion that something operates - it is able to operate - and that something is working , is expressed in very similar terms .
We are now at a time in the European Union when we can say ' back to work , Europe ' ; let us go back , let us work , let us operate .
The basis for doing so is guaranteed by the new Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the Treaty of Lisbon , a recently elected Parliament and the new Commission now being formed .
It is time for us to leave behind the days of institutional disputes and of establishing institutional ground rules , and truly to turn our attention to and focus on the cares and questions of European citizens .
This is of fundamental importance because we need to regain the support of those people whom we have lost along the way .
Ladies and gentlemen , honourable Members of Parliament , we all have work to do in this regard .
The proceedings of the past few weeks and months have not always been honourable .
For instance , this Parliament did not afford one of the Commissioners-designate a fair opportunity to be heard .
Let us therefore judge the Commission , let us judge the Council , let us work with it , but let us sometimes take a look at ourselves as well .
The close collaboration of these institutions is necessary in order to achieve results .
Mr Commission President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like on behalf of my party as well to wish you much success , for when we wish you much success , we do so not to several individuals but to the citizens of Europe .
May Europe , in the eyes of European citizens , be a true example at last of job creation , prosperity , development , an active presence in the world , equity , and now , on the basis of its new constitution , the Treaty of Lisbon , may Europe grow up and come into its own .
Ladies and gentlemen , when my computer is not working , I press the restart button .
Now we even have new software in this computer , known as the Treaty of Lisbon .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us press that restart button .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , your Commission certainly has both strong and weak points .
I would like to focus on the strong points .
We have a foreign policy team that you would be hard pressed to find anywhere else , with regard to both foreign policy and development policy .
Mr Szájer , you cannot deny that we have a better team now than we had at the time of the original hearing of the first candidate from Bulgaria .
I also firmly believe that Baroness Ashton will coordinate this team well .
The single telephone number that Henry Kissinger allegedly demanded is brought up again and again .
Maybe we do not have this single telephone number , but if you make a comparison with the United States - in connection with climate protection , for example - who should we call ?
President Obama or the Senate , which has so far refused to find a solution ?
With regard to the issue of disarmament , should we contact President Obama , who is in favour of disarmament , or the Senate , which has not come up with any solutions ?
Let us not always make ourselves out to be worse than we are !
We have an opportunity now to make a good impression .
( Applause )
Where economic policy is concerned , we have a strong team .
I hope and believe that those of our colleagues in the Commission who did not come across so strongly in the hearings will develop that strength as time goes by .
When it comes to social policy , we have a Commissioner who takes matters seriously and a Commission President who has also promised us that he will give priority to social affairs and social policy .
We are counting on this .
We are not only counting on it , we will also press for it to actually happen .
Together , we found solutions for a number of areas in the Framework Agreement .
We disagreed sometimes , but we worked well together .
It is a very good agreement if we take it seriously - you in the Commission and we in the European Parliament .
If we manage to get the Council to take seriously the principles of transparency contained in the agreement , then we really will be able to achieve something magnificent .
As a result of the Treaty of Lisbon and the Framework Agreement , from the beginning of the legislative process right through to its end , to implementation , there will be a level of transparency that is perhaps not the case in many national parliaments .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to take this seriously .
In the case of SWIFT , transparency has not been taken seriously - by the Commission or the Council .
We now have a Member of the Commission who was responsible for the Council .
This is a practice that we in this Parliament can no longer tolerate .
The reason for this mess is not that Parliament is likely to be obstinate .
Rather , it is because , even during the transition , when it was already clear that this Parliament still had more to say , the Council and the Commission - particularly the Council - did not understand that they had to involve Parliament .
That is the bottom line .
In this regard , Mr Barroso , with the legislative resolutions and the obligation on the part of the Commission to respond - either with its own draft legislation or with a clear explanation for why it is not going to take action - we have made significant progress .
Let us not pretend that the parliamentary right of initiative has always been as significant in the national parliaments .
They are essentially dominated by the governments , and what the government proposes is often implemented in the parliaments .
This is not the case here .
The Commission 's proposals are not yet legislation for us .
We work on them so that our own ideas , too , are incorporated .
Let us seize this opportunity with the new Commission , a new treaty and a new Framework Agreement .
Let us , as Parliament , be confident in our dealings with the Commission .
Now the floor will be taken for the first time in this debate by a woman .
It is a pity that this is happening so late .
Mr President , I hope it is worth waiting for .
I want to concentrate on the resolution on the Framework Agreement , having been part of Parliament 's negotiating team .
President Barroso , we had , I think you will admit , some very interesting debates on the meaning of words , especially in my language , but one of the phrases you used at the beginning of our meetings was that you spoke about your absolute commitment to the ' parliamentary dimension ' of the European Union , and I think you were absolutely genuine and positive in your use of that phrase , yet we never discussed that one .
Post-Lisbon , and post the resolution on the new Framework Agreement , this Parliament is much more than a mere ' dimension ' - it is a reality , a real force , a true parliament worthy of the name .
You might , I suppose , call the original parliamentary assembly a ' dimension ' , but not this parliament .
This parliament is now a full legislative partner , as per the resolution , to be treated on an equal , inclusive and informed basis with Council and not to be by-passed by resorting to soft law or other instruments , however worthy ; a parliament fully and rightly able to hold your Commission , as executive , to account .
We look forward to seeing not only yourself , Mr Barroso , but all of your fellow commissioners here for a question hour before this Chamber .
This Parliament will insist on its right of oversight in respect of subsequent changes to your team ; this Parliament is ready to play its proper role as the only transnational , directly elected parliament in international relations .
But , above all , this new forceful Parliament , containing a pro-European majority , wants you - please - to take a lead , and in that we will be your willing partner and supporter .
But , please , we are no mere ' dimension ' ; we are a true , real Parliament .
Mr President , the motion for a resolution from the Greens / EFA Group calls for a new political approach at national and European level and for new ideas and firm action .
We cannot overcome the economic , social and climate crisis we face using the same policies and mindset that created them ; we cannot build a more democratic and more effective Europe unless we do so within the real and changing political climate .
Today , in Wales , the national Assembly is starting the process for a referendum on more law-making powers .
In Catalonia , in Scotland , in Flanders and elsewhere , there are changes taking place .
Tomorrow , we discuss the enlargement of the EU to include countries currently outside its borders , but we have not even begun to address internal enlargement , the process whereby countries inside the EU 's borders gain independence .
These questions have not been answered in the debates on the election of the new Commission , despite the changes happening around us .
I would ask President Barroso , once again , to address those questions .

( PL ) Mr Barroso , five months ago , I voted in favour of entrusting you with the mission of creating the European Commission , because I thought you were the best of the candidates under consideration .
I do not regret that vote , but today , when we are discussing the College of Commissioners which has been presented to us , I cannot hide my disappointment .
After completing the hearings of Commissioners-designate , I know there are many people among them who are superbly qualified , but , unfortunately , we also know that among them are people with no experience at all , and who performed awfully during the hearings .
I do realise that in the process of electing the members of the Commission , you have limited room for manoeuvre .
I fully support the right of national governments to nominate their candidates , yet despite that , I do not think the proposed composition of the Commission is optimal .
In your speech , you asked if the European Union counts in the world .
The best answer to that is the recent decision to call off the European Union-United States Summit .
Do you really think this composition of the College will allow the Union to strengthen its position ?
Finally , I would also like to express my disappointment that , during the hearings , we did not receive enough answers to questions about the issue of energy security .

( DA ) Mr President , I would like to start by wishing Mr Barroso luck , because the President of the Commission has genuinely succeeded in putting together a Commission that reflects his political project involving the EU .
In my group , however , we completely disagree with this political project . Let me give an example .
Workers in many countries have found that the EU is increasingly synonymous with the undermining of the pay and working conditions that they have fought for .
We have repeatedly asked the President of the Commission what he will do in concrete terms to ensure that migrant workers can no longer be underpaid , can no longer be discriminated against and can no longer be used as sweatshop labour .
The problem is that we have not received a specific answer , neither have we been given any specific answer at the hearings .
I therefore draw the conclusion that this Commission accepts social dumping .
It is a Commission for which the internal market is more important than safeguarding the interests of the ordinary worker .
In one respect , however , there is some hope , since during the meeting with our group , Mr Barroso took great pains to stress how great a supporter he was of equality between the sexes .
Words are not sufficient , however .
When the first Barroso Commission was appointed in 2004 there were nine female commissioners out of 25 .
Today Mr Barroso presents a Commission for approval that has only eight women members out of 27 .
So that has got worse .
We can only conclude that in this area , too , Mr Barroso delivers only words , not action .
Quite simply , it is not good enough .
( FI ) Mr President , in Finland we are commemorating the Winter War .
Seventy years ago , the communist Soviet Union attacked tiny Finland .
We defended our independence and our right of selfdetermination .
This also continued during the Second World War , which was a terrible ordeal for Europe as a whole .
It left us with a strong desire for independence , and a strong desire to decide our own affairs .
Helsinki , Moscow and London were the only capital cities that were not occupied in the Second World War .
It is for this reason that I want every nation to be able to decide its own affairs freely .
As for the Commission , you certainly have good intentions and there are good people in the Commission , including Olli Rehn , who is Finnish , and who is a moral person with backbone .
The peoples of Europe , however - the Finns , the Germans , the British , the Danes - where have they been able to vote for and elect these commissioners ?
Nowhere .
How can they be dismissed ?
They cannot .
The EU is a bureaucracy and not a democracy .
I am in favour of cooperation between independent states .
I am Finnish , I am a European , and I love our continent , but that does not mean that I am a supporter of the European Union .
Each of us got votes ; I got 130 000 votes in Finland .
How many votes did the commissioners get and where did they get them ?
Here they might get 300 votes , but that is about it .
What lies at the heart of democracy ?
It is national sovereignty .
That means that only a people that forms its own nation , independent of all others , has an eternal and unrestricted right always to decide its own affairs .
This is a basic principle .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , we have come to the end of the procedure that precedes the appointment of the commissioners , with hearings that are completely run-of-the-mill .
The Commissioners-designate came to tell us that they were deeply attached to the European Union , that they would do their best to learn about issues with which they were unfamiliar , and that they would work hand in hand with Parliament .
None of that is very important or very interesting .
Nevertheless , so that Parliament could show its independence , there had to be a scapegoat , an expiatory victim .
That victim was Mrs Jeleva , against whom , I might add , there were , in the end , relatively few charges .
If this is about conflicts of interest , then the pasts of certain commissioners , who shall remain nameless - the Commissioner for Competition , the Commissioner for Agriculture , the Commissioner for International Trade - were certainly of far greater concern , and yet they did not present much of a problem to this House .
In reality , Mr Barroso , I pity you somewhat because you are now part of this system of the Treaty of Lisbon - Lisbon being the capital city of your country , a wonderful city and one that deserves better than to lend its name to such a document .
You are going to have many people to deal with .
From now on , with the Framework Agreement , you are going to have the President of Parliament and the Conference of Presidents , from which the non-attached Members are excluded , in flagrant breach of the provisions of the Rules of Procedure .
You are going to have the new - and permanent - President of the Union , whose appointment has not , however , spelt the end of the rotating presidents .
You are going to have Baroness Ashton , the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , who was an out-and-out pacifist in her youth when it came to the true Soviet threat , but who we have no doubt will be extremely combative towards Iran .
This will be a difficult policy .
There was laughter just now when someone recalled the Marxist past of some of you .
In reality , you are still internationalists , but you are no longer by any means proletarians .
You have become totally indifferent to the fate of European workers .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , perhaps I can correct Mr Gollnisch .

Is Mr Gollnisch aware that Baroness Ashton was a pacifist not only in her youth but that she was Vice-Chairman of CND at least until 1983 , which is something she did not disclose ?
( FR ) Mr President , I am not answering a question about Baroness Ashton 's past .
I know that , in my country too , ' pacifist ' was the name that was actually given to warmongers who were in favour of a communist victory .
( ES ) Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would like to express my wholehearted , firm and unreserved support to Mr Barroso .
This is based not only on what he has said today , but also on speeches he has made in Parliament that have encouraged us to support him more strongly and significantly than ever .
I would like to say that the main reason for that support is not the number of Commissioners that our Group , or our political family , has in the Commission , but rather it is fundamentally the belief that this is a unique and distinct time for the European Union .
This Commission is not just any Commission and this Parliament is not just any Parliament , not only because of the Treaty of Lisbon , but also because we are experiencing a crisis that is unprecedented in the European Union : an economic and social crisis .
We do not think that the Treaty of Lisbon is the most important thing .
The most important thing is for there to be a change of attitude in terms of steering all the European institutions towards greater political ambition .
We therefore unreservedly support the Commission led by Mr Barroso .
We also support the Commission because , whilst we are currently experiencing an economic and financial crisis , we are going to move onto another phase : the social crisis .
The differences between some countries and others are going to increase , and there is going to be increased social unrest .
The economic and social crisis is undoubtedly going to cause increased social unrest .
Another reason is that we are experiencing a crisis of values , making it essential that all of us , not just the Commission , change our personal attitudes .
We all need to change our attitude .
Our Group therefore believes that the best way to change , to transform and to improve is to support the European Commission led by Mr Barroso .
I therefore think that in the context of this task , and of the work that we have to do , the PPE Group is the group that wants us all to change the most .
The European Parliament also needs to change .
The Commission alone cannot be held responsible for the frequent lack of unity in this House , which is largely the reason why there is no European voice in the world .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , trade policy is going to be a major factor in the Union 's external policy .
Unfortunately , this trade policy is today the symbol of the disappearance of Community interest , since it is nothing other than the addition of national interests .
At a time when we want Europe to defend its values - solidarity , social justice - when we want Europe to be able to integrate into its trade agreements social rights , environmental rights , the protection of human rights and the protection of trade union rights , we realise that the Commission 's only proposal to us is to conclude agreements in which it is felt that there is no alternative to the market and trade and that they are an end in themselves .
This , as far as my political family is concerned , is unacceptable .
At a time when we want this trade policy to be able to integrate industrial policy and the effects that it may have on employment policies , we realise that the Commission has given no guarantees on these points in the comments made this morning by the President of the Commission .
Unfortunately , however , this does not surprise me .
Nothing has been said about the horizontal social clause , about the protection of public services , about the way to see Europe change policy again or have a totally different policy .
To conclude my remarks on these issues , Mr Barroso , I believe that trust is built within a two-way relationship .
With your comments this morning , you have not offered us what we need to put our trust in you .
Please note that , since you have not provided these guarantees , I cannot guarantee that we will put our trust in you .
( DE ) Mr President , I finally have the feeling that things are starting to happen .
It took more than eight and , indeed , almost nine years for us to get the new treaty and the same number of months for us to get the new Commission .
That is not a Europe that takes action , yet action is what we need .
People are looking for work , businesses are looking for markets , consumers are looking for reliability , Greece is looking for stability and Europe is looking for its role in the world .
It is therefore a good thing that the time of complicated debates that only experts could understand is over and , for that reason , it is also good that the Commission can now work in a way that will really benefit the people once again .
There are two things we want from you , Mr Barroso .
Please be courageous and make Europe strong , both inside and out .
We want you to be courageous and we also want Europe to be more involved in areas which perhaps differ from those that the Member States or people answering polls want - in the economy and financial affairs , in justice and home affairs , but also in foreign and security policy .
This comment is intended for you , in particular , Baroness Ashton .
The shortcomings are clear .
The internal market is not functioning well enough for small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is often due to national , rather than European , bureaucracy .
Greece needs help , of course .
For this , we need a strong Europe .
I am pleased that the Commission has now put forward a proposal .
Anyone who thought that we had already achieved enough in foreign policy will now surely have learnt otherwise in the light of Copenhagen .
We therefore repeat : Mr Barroso , make Europe strong , inside and out .
You have our support to do so .

Mr President , our group strongly supports Mr Barroso and his reformist agenda for a Europe that focuses on addressing the real concerns of our fellow citizens and on acting where it can add value to the efforts of our Member States .
We therefore believe that he deserved to receive a list of Commission candidates with the talent and ability to help make a reality of his ambitious plans .
But in some of these nominations he has been let down .
Nothing can disguise the fact that the experience and competence of the candidates varies greatly , and this was obvious in our hearings .
It is unacceptable that the leaders of some Member States still treat the formation of the Commission as an opportunity to reward a colleague for past support , to resolve a local political difficulty or to ease a ministerial friend into a comfortable pre-retirement .
It is clear that some Member States are taking advantage of the fact that we only have a single vote on the whole Commission in order to ease in candidates who might not succeed on their own merits .
The single vote must end .
We must vote on individual candidates , for only then will all Member States take their responsibility with regard to this process more seriously and send to the Commission the most able candidates available .

( PT ) Mr President , I would like to ask Dr Barroso about the meaning of responsibility in the light of the events which placed the euro under attack from speculators .
This afternoon , we shall discuss in more depth the reasons behind this event , but for now , I should like to focus on the statements by Joaquín Almunia because it was these that provoked the immediate increase in international credit market spreads and interest rates for Portugal and Spain , which further weakened the position of the euro itself last week .
There is no point in telling me that Joaquín Almunia did not say what he did .
Whatever it was that the journalists heard was also what the speculators heard , and they lost no time in acting .
President Barroso , the role of a commissioner is not to pour petrol onto the fire .
This House cannot give its approval to someone who , at the critical moment , was not up to the job .
That is the first problem , and the second is one of signals .
In the light of the attack on the Greek , Spanish and Portuguese public debts , what have the European institutions done through to now ?
Mr Trichet has confined himself to saying that no state should be able to rely on special treatment , when the message ought to be the exact opposite : that is , to say to speculators that we shall not be divided , because this is a Europe of solidarity .
This is the political question that has arisen and it is for this reason that we expect serious replies given what has happened with the statements by your candidate for commissioner .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to make a brief comment with regard to the interinstitutional agreement and the resolution that we have before us .
First of all , I welcome the fact that the Commission now seems to be prepared , in a more realistic way , to accept the indirect right of initiative of the European Parliament .
To put it plainly , this means that , in future , there will be specific deadlines within which the Commission will be obliged to respond to our decisions .
That is a good thing , also in view of the experiences we had during the last parliamentary term .
It is actually self-evident , but this agreement also means that we will be treated on an equal footing with the Council on all matters .
That is the logical consequence of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Furthermore , I welcome the fact that we have also succeeded in creating a closer working relationship between Parliament and the Commission in the area of legislative programming .
In future , we will have to draw up some sort of common legislative programme for the three institutions , and in this regard , it would be helpful if , as the traditional bearers of the interests of the Union , the Commission and Parliament could come to an agreement , as far as possible , in advance .
I am not completely happy with the results of the impact assessment .
In this regard , Parliament will have to consider how it can make qualitative improvements to its own area of the impact assessment in view of the fact that the European Commission does not want to carry out the truly independent impact assessment demanded by Parliament .
I welcome the fact that , in this regard , it has already been announced in the statements that there will be close cooperation in connection with the legislation relating to the External Action Service .
Here , too , the Commission and Parliament have a largely common interest , which we also ought to define before we talk to the Council .
I also think that it is good - and this is also something that is , in fact , a necessary consequence of the Treaty of Lisbon - that the position of this House in the area of international negotiations in respect of international agreements will be considerably improved and Parliament is to be granted genuine access to all information and to all of the conferences .
That has been an absolutely crucial issue , and I am pleased that we have also been able to achieve what we wanted to in this regard .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , we were very happy to have got the Treaty of Lisbon in place on 1 December and , along with that , a stronger social policy and a strengthening of the position of consumers in the area of internal policy within the European Union .
However , we now find that you - contrary to what is contained in the Treaty of Lisbon , namely a horizontal commitment to protect consumers - have done exactly the opposite with the division of the portfolios in your European Commission , because now there is not just one commissioner responsible for consumer protection , but several .
I would like to ask you how you actually intend to handle this .
How do you intend to establish coherence in this policy area , an area that is extremely important to consumers , to European citizens ?
The responsibilities have been divided up .
Which commissioner will provide this coherence ?
Please do not tell us that it is the College that will decide .
We need clear areas of responsibility .
Please do not say to us , either , that ultimately you will decide in the event of a dispute between the different commissioners .
You are not almighty and you belong to a College .
I have serious difficulties with this , Mr Barroso .
You need to explain to me how you can truly get to grips with this fragmentation of policy in the area of consumer protection , but also in other areas like foreign policy , so that we have a policy that , after five years , will allow us to say ' yes , it was worth having a Commission like this ' .
I do not yet know how I will vote later .
That will depend very much on your answers to our questions .

Mr President , I think you are more than aware that Europe is standing at a turning point , and you have the opportunity to take it one way or the other : either the gloomy way , with deeper economic crises , a bad competitiveness environment for European companies , more regulation and bureaucratic burden , or the courageous way , seizing all the opportunities laid down in the Lisbon Treaty to make Europe stronger and taking a cohesive approach to global markets and challenges .
Opportunities and solutions to the global challenges can be found in sectors such as the ICT digital agenda , research and development and energy .
A new treaty , finally ratified by all Member States , is giving you - on a silver platter - the tools to achieve these goals .
What I fear most is the widening gap between citizens ' expectations and Brussels ' little world .
The trust and confidence that we assume from our citizens is fading away .
On how many occasions have I observed the discrepancies between the European administration pursuing a blunt policy goal and peoples ' real concerns ?
What is the aim of devising a common energy policy if we cannot deliver our citizens secure , affordable and green energy ?
What is the aim of collecting data on energy infrastructures ?
I believe we cannot impose one-size-fits-all solutions .
The Commission has to take into account the differences , opportunities and means of each Member State .
You will need to be visionary and creative to take Europe out of the gloomy past .
On this , Parliament will support you .
If we miss the opportunity , Europe will not get a second chance in five years .
Mr President , Greece is on the verge of fiscal collapse .
Spain and Portugal are also struggling with increasing difficulties .
If the European Commission , the European Central Bank and the European Council do not act , then the threat is now the disintegration of the eurozone .
What we can see in this situation is the sub-optimal allocation of portfolios among Commissioners .
Joaquín Almunia , who was a safe pair of hands in managing monetary and economic affairs , is now transferred to competition , which is not his cup of tea .
Olli Rehn , who was a very distinguished Commissioner for enlargement , is now dealing with economic and monetary affairs , which is not his expertise .
Why is it in the interest of Europe to weaken the intellectual firepower of the Commission precisely in times of crisis ?
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we now have a second Barroso Commission .
The way the system has changed has already been mentioned .
It is the fourth Commission since I came here .
The first two Commissions , led by Mr Santer and Mr Prodi , were both collegial bodies .
The first Barroso Commission was notable for its individual players - I am thinking of Mr Dimas , Mrs Kroes or even Mr McGreevy , who remained inactive for years under your leadership .
If you now introduce the presidential system , Mr President , then I would recommend that you take the lead , but return to the college system .
That is better for Europe and better for cooperation with Parliament .
The citizens have expectations - you spoke of being bold - with regard to the European agenda .
Firstly , you need to stabilise the euro , extend the euro area and make the national governments honour their obligations .
Secondly , you need to create modern , technology-based jobs to a global standard , because the Lisbon Strategy from 2000 has failed , although the goals were the right ones .
Thirdly , you need to continue to develop Europe on the basis of its previous successes , not on the basis of cries of doom and renunciation scenarios , and make Europe an equal partner with the US and China , and , fourthly , you need not only to ask questions about the future , you also need to answer them together with Parliament .
Open markets and more education , growth and prosperity must not be topics that are consigned to the past ; they need to remain topics of the future , as must social security , an industrial base and no expansion of the financial markets .
We want fair cooperation with you and the Commission .
In this , the Commission must be the engine , not the master of Europe .
Two groups have decided to totally oppose you - the Greens and the Communists .
They represent barely 13 % of Members .
If the Commission President and the Commission work well with the rest of this House , then we will , together , have the success that we need .
( ES ) Mr President of the Commission , as you are aware , the Members that belong to the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament want a real change in Europe 's social agenda and a renewed social agenda .
Many of us cherish the hope that there are some small ' green shoots ' in your speech , in the promises that you made to our group , in the speech by Commissioner Andor and in the institutional agreement that we have to submit future European legislation for environmental impact assessment .
There is a hope that you have learnt the lessons from the last elections and the resounding silence from workers ' organisations regarding the new Commission .
Therefore , Mr Barroso , we are extremely keen for what is currently a somewhat vague promise to become reality , and for the Commission to bring the added value of genuine change .
We are extremely keen for Barroso II not to be the same as Barroso I.
Mr President of the Commission , we listened to Commissioner Andor and we have this dream , this hope .
We can promise you loyalty if there is a commitment that is going to be upheld regarding everything that you have announced when you have made your appearances and in the agreement that you have made with Parliament .
What we need Mr Barroso - because you are an intelligent man - is for these environmental and social impact assessments to cover the sustainability of the economic model that you advocate .
Otherwise , Europe will not have a future .
Europe must reconcile its agenda with that of its citizens and workers , otherwise it will not achieve economic integration and it will definitely not achieve political integration , which is our plan .
Our plan is to build a Europe with great political ambition that is capable of exciting its citizens once again , of being relevant in the world once again ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioners-designate are proposed by the governments of EU Member States .
After they have been approved by the European Parliament , they are free from obligations to their own country .
In principle , they are supposed to work for equal development throughout Europe .
For this , competence and trust are needed .
The first aspect was cast into doubt during the hearings .
The candidates ' answers were often agreed in advance , and were couched in indecently general terms .
Mrs Ashton did touch on some details , but her answers were disappointing .
As a whole , the team of Commissioners which showed its prowess at the hearings is weak , and the few well-qualified candidates are not capable of changing this image .
However , we are obliged to vote en bloc on the whole Commission , and it has not presented a clear strategy of action .
Can we trust the Commission ?
In the Group of European Conservatives and Reformists , we were asked this question : would we put our own family 's budget and the fate of our family in the hands of this Commission ?
Many of us answered , and still answer today , in the negative .

( IT ) Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , if we were to stick to the version of the facts proposed by Mr Cohn-Bendit , the key to whose interpretation is hypocrisy , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) would have decided to vote in favour because it has thirteen Commissioners , and the Liberals because they have nine , while the Socialists , perhaps , would have to abstain , because their pickings are more scanty .
That is not how things are , however .
The votes of so many of us are , in fact , tied to the answer to a more profound question : what role is the Barroso Commission called on to play at this historical juncture ?
It is being called upon , Mr President , to restore hope to millions of people and businesses who find themselves in difficulties , and to break their powerlessness in the face of vested interests and governments through dogged determination and with the power of ideas .
It is being called upon , Mr President , to give a European face to immigration and energy policy , and to issue Eurobonds in order to ensure the recovery .
It is being called upon , Mr President , to establish with conviction a European foreign and security policy , dear Baroness Ashton , that is worthy of the name .
According to Mr Schulz , you , ladies and gentlemen , are like Trappist monks who have taken the vow of silence .
On this , your ideal path of holiness , I suggest you take a different vow : a vow of action .
There are , in fact , many things to be done .
Mr President , let us do them quickly , let us do them well , let us do them together .
My best wishes , President Barroso !
( IT ) President of the Commission , the progressives among us are giving you a vote of confidence today so as not to leave you open to the blackmail of those who have little faith in this community of Europe and so as not to subordinate you to the governments of the Twenty-Seven .
Believing in a community of Europe means breaking your deafening silence and taking up a central role in the major international issues ; defending European interests in the industrial and economic arena ; reinforcing social policy and investing more towards conquering world poverty ; consolidating our alliance with the United States but on equal terms ; reinforcing the position of the European Union in international bodies , beginning with the UN Security Council ; relaunching multilateralism in world trade ; and setting the agenda in the fight against global pollution .
Our vote today will be a conditional vote of confidence , with no exceptions , in the Commission and in the individual Commissioners , in order fully to achieve the new Europe born in Lisbon , a political player among the major world powers , and so that it can be , above all , a community of destiny dedicated to its own economic and civil progress , and which sets itself a mission of peace , justice and freedom in the world ; one that is not solely a community of memory , living in the present off its own wealth and off a past glory that is now faded .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the success of the Treaty of Lisbon now depends on you and your team .
Surprisingly , the first permanent President of the European Council decided to disappear after his election .
He has succeeded in this .
No one outside his country knew anything about him two and a half months ago , and no one has learnt anything more about him since .
The Prime Minister of the Spanish Government had the courtesy to come and present to us here Spain 's priorities for a six-month term of the Spanish Presidency .
That is exactly the opposite of what the authors of the Treaty of Lisbon - many of whom are present in this Chamber - wanted .
No one - neither the people of Europe , nor the President of the United States - knows who is in charge of Europe any more .
In a world turned upside down by the crisis , on a continent which has lost all its bearings , which has more than 20 million unemployed , which is at risk of a long-term decline in the face of the emerging powers , Europe needs a pilot , a direction , an ambition , a major unifying project that can mobilise our 27 nations and half a billion free citizens .
So , Mr Barroso , do not be scared , be bold !
Objectives , strategy , method , financing - it all requires a totally new approach .
The prospect of a return to strong growth has never been so distant .
Solidarity among the Member States has never been so necessary .
The disparity between our competences and our financial resources has never been so great .
The citizens ' expectations have never been so high .
And , without doubt , the European Parliament has never been more willing to support an ambitious policy to make up for the 10 years lost in the interminable institutional debate .
As a friend , I say to you : Parliament 's support will be proportional not to your prudence but to your boldness .
( Applause )

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , our circumstances are different and we have a different institutional structure .
Now that the Treaty of Lisbon is in place , the three institutions - Parliament , the Council and the European Commission - will have to work together in a different way to how they have done up to now .
I believe that we all need to be interested in making this a success .
Your involvement in the first part of the interinstitutional agreement gives me the impression - and I am not always uncritical of you - that you want this , too .
The first part of this agreement that we have negotiated with you contains important elements for the role of the European Parliament in our cooperation with you , in particular , but also with the Council .
These elements are the strengthening of the dialogue between Parliament and the European Commission , the possibility of receiving more information than we have done in the past , in other words , to be able to be an equal partner in the legislative process , and a genuine question time in which commissioners , who are , ultimately , politicians , come here and answer questions and give speeches and responses , without hiding away as they have done in the past .
Previously , only you , Mr Barroso , had the courage to do that .
Now , all of them will do so .
That is a good thing .
It will benefit all of us , and it will also be beneficial for European democracy and , hopefully , also for the interest of citizens in what we do , namely our legislative work for everyone .
Finally , Mr Barroso , with regard to the question of legislative initiative , I firmly believe that , with what we were able to achieve in the negotiations with you regarding our cooperation and what we have today shaped into a resolution , we have come as close to the right of initiative for the European Parliament as we possibly can .
It furthermore rules out the sui generis construct .
You worked with us on this and you worked earnestly on it .
I respect that and very much appreciate how you have contributed to this .
The impact assessments have already been mentioned by other Members .
You have undertaken to make this transparent and to act in a cooperative manner .
You said that social impact assessments are important to you .
That is an essential point from our perspective .
I am completely happy with this .
I believe that we should begin the work today , and not before time .
Mr President , I want to refer to the Framework Agreement and a special partnership between the Commission and Parliament , which you addressed and we obviously welcome .
Parliament is fighting for its competence not for the sake of this House 's pride and glory .
We want to fill the gap of democratic legitimacy after all the pain we witnessed when the referenda were held .
We are entering a new era of Community method so please do not defend the competences of the Commission as we , Parliament , were not part of this Community method .
I am referring here to the legislative monopoly of the Commission .
This monopoly existed when the European Parliament was not what it is today , so I welcome the half-way solution which takes into account our initiatives in legislative matters , and which you have accepted .
This House will be looking very closely at the practice of this half-way solution , taking into account our request to the Commission to take legislative action .
My second point is about the common External Action Service .
It should draw its credibility from two sources - not only the Council but also the European Parliament - and so far , we are not fully satisfied .
I am looking at your Vice-President , Lady Ashton .
We deplore the fact that we are absent from the High Level Group .
We think we should be involved in the process which was always requested by this House .
We should be involved in the nominations of ambassadors and EUSRs .
Perhaps there is still some room for left for manoeuvre because it is not for our glory but to give this Service real credibility in the eyes of Europeans .
Otherwise , it will be weaker , whereas both sides want it to be stronger .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I was particularly interested in the hearings regarding the Commissioners-designate for agriculture and fisheries , areas which I follow with special attention in the European Parliament .
Their background , in both cases , seems to me to be appropriate .
However , more than personalities and competences , it is important to know the nature of the political conditions in which they will have to develop their mission .
In order for my political group and me to be able , in all good conscience , to vote in favour of the investiture of the Commission , are you , Mr Barroso , in a position to guarantee me that you will give all your support to these two commissioners to ensure that the profound reforms which they will initiate in these most common of policies , agriculture and fisheries , will preserve their Community character and reject any kind of renationalisation ?
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to use this opportunity , principally , to highlight to the Commission and to the President of the Commission the way in which they have worked with this Parliament throughout these months of investiture .
There is no other body in the world with executive and legislative initiative powers that is subject to such requirements : its President has to present a programme to Parliament ; it has to attend hearings with all parliamentary groups ; it is subject to an absolute majority vote ; and it must bring all the commissioners here to be heard one by one on their own programmes , followed by three or four hours of direct questions - questions that must be answered .
The Commission agreed to undertake to negotiate a Framework Agreement with Parliament , in which , firstly , it agreed to justify and increase the powers of the Parliament with respect to legislative initiative ; secondly , it accepted the principle of complete freedom of access to information whether with respect to legislative and political action or in relation to international negotiations ; and , finally , it agreed to take into account Parliament 's opinion regarding the commissioners and the reshuffling of the commissioners .

This is definitive proof , in my view , that the Commission has demonstrated since July that it is prepared to have close ties with Parliament and that , by doing so , it has demonstrated in a clear , apparent and unequivocal manner that the strategic alliance within the Lisbon Treaty to promote the Community method , of which Mr Saryusz-Wolski spoke , is the alliance between Parliament and the Commission .
For these reasons , both the Commission and the Framework Agreement deserve the complete support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a democracy , an approval is never a carte blanche , it is always a credit of trust that first needs to be justified .
Let us therefore open up a new chapter together , let us not merely carry on as before , as you , President of the Commission , have said .
The treaty , the crisis and globalisation make it necessary for all of us to change the way we operate .
We need greater European awareness in the Member States , more honesty towards the European Union , more EU in Europe and more EU in the world .
It requires leadership from every single commissioner and the readiness to turn European Union debates into policy .
The European Parliament and the Commission must enter into a new partnership - a partnership for a Europe of the citizens , a partnership to counter nationalism , protectionism and extremism , dishonesty , dumbing down , irresponsibility and a lack of respect .
In addition to the stability pact for currency , we need a sustainability pact for all policy areas in order to be more credible and to regain lost trust .
It will be necessary to develop the excessive deficit procedure , the exit strategy and Europe 2020 into one joint concept to bring down national debt , deal with deficits , promote innovation and growth and create long-term jobs .
Finally , Mr President , I urge you to draw up an opening balance sheet and submit proposals for coordinating economic , social , fiscal , research , innovation and education policy , because we need more Europe .
Mr President , the main challenge for this Commission will not be to fight the crisis we have seen .
We are gradually coming out of it and , although it will still be an important task to fulfil the policies that we have decided , the main challenge must be to prepare the ground for the future economy of Europe , to ensure that it will be a dynamic economy able to compete and play a leading part in the world economy .
That requires policies for new jobs , investments and dynamic economic growth .
Otherwise , we will continue to face the problems caused by the crisis - the unemployment and the deficits .
It is important that the Commission that will be approved here in Parliament today takes this challenge seriously .
European voters gave a very clear message in June .
They do not want the Socialist regulation-based model but a model based on being open , laying the ground for a level playing field and a social Europe , meaning jobs , growth , opportunities and cross-border integration .
That is the task of this new Commission - laying the ground for the economy , prosperity and social security by being open-minded and by saying ' yes ' to innovations .
Mr President , the European Community is more than 50 years old now .
Some people speak about it undergoing a mid-life crisis - feeling a bit tired , morally worn out , hesitant about further enlargement .
Against this background , Mr Barroso , you have an historic opportunity for statesmanship , real reforms and long-term vision .
Your second term coincides with the 60th anniversary of the Schuman Declaration .
The only solution for the founding fathers of Europe was not political bickering , but rising above national interests to establish supranational European policies based on an open and generous attitude , as you yourself mentioned .
First of all , we expect real implementation of common European policies , especially the completion of the common energy market .
The European Commission has been the European Parliament 's main ally and collaborator .
We wish you and the whole College of Commissioners well .
( RO ) I believe that the main task of the new Commission is to implement the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is your job to demonstrate to the citizens of Europe that the new treaty meets their expectations and to instil confidence in them about it .
In the next few years , among the many other important matters it will deal with , the Commission must put forward two vitally important policies for review : the common agricultural policy and the cohesion policy .
I think that the budget policy for the 2014-2021 period can only be devised and structured after these policies have been finalised .
This is the reason that the new Commission 's framework programme must make this an absolute priority .
I hope that the review of these two European policies will help , in the medium and long term , to balance the economic , financial and social situation in all Member States in order to prevent imbalances of the type which are being seen at the moment and are jeopardising the sustainable development of the European Union as a whole .
( HU ) The new Member States are rightly worried that national egoism and renationalisation is gaining strength within the European Union .
The European Union cannot exist without solidarity , cohesion or catching up by the less developed new Member States .
The 2020 programme will need to be shaped by the Commission led by Mr Barroso in such a way that we do not reduce , but preserve - while reforming - and strengthen the Community policies we have hitherto pursued , in particular , the cohesion and regional policy and the common agricultural policy .
We are seeing frightening intentions whereby some are trying to phase out these policies and , in particular , to reduce the common agricultural budget .
The Council should work out concrete measures in order that the world crisis may not become an employment and social crisis .
Finally , we must not allow the tragic Greek situation to lead to the conclusion that we should not continue to strengthen the euro area and should not continue expansion towards the Western Balkans .
Mr President , Albert Einstein said that life is like riding a bicycle : to keep your balance , you must keep moving .
That is exactly what we expect from the new Commission .
At the same time , there are worries .
The issue of climate change , for example , is split between a number of portfolios ; that is most worrying .
The issues of industrial policy and energy policy , meanwhile , will be dealt with by Commissioners from just one political group ; that is also most worrying .
What we need now is balance and support for sustainable economic growth , and it is important that this is reflected in the EU 2020 strategy .
The first words in a novel are always the most difficult to write .
The impression the Commission creates and the way it will operate will be reflected and written into the EU 2020 strategy , and this will be an indication of the work and quality of the new Commission .
I hope it will be sustainable .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the new College , ladies and gentlemen here in plenary and in the gallery , in these times of economic , financial and climate crisis , the citizens of Europe expect leadership from you .
They expect bold and clear projects .
Mr Barroso , you said a couple of times today that we cannot go on as if it is business as usual and we need to be bold and courageous .
This is not something that we have seen in your guidelines or in the hearings of most of the commissioners .
Take foreign policy , for example .
Baroness Ashton , you are the one who should and must be the united voice of Europe .
It is not only a matter of good coordination or consulting the Member States .
You should present bold , specific projects to the Council , for example , for European civil disaster prevention in line with the Barnier report .
You need to lead the way , including in matters relating to the financial crisis .
We need common financial market supervision and a financial transactions tax .
Present these proposals to the Council .
Please do this and do not wait for the Council to say ' yes ' or ' no ' or for individual Member States to start lobbying you .
If we get this leadership from you , then you will also receive the support of the European Parliament .
You do not have it yet .
Mr President , I must raise what I believe is a very important issue in relation to the United Kingdom .
Currently in the UK , we enjoy an opt-out from the 48-hour working week .
However , after listening to Mr Andor at the hearings - I have nothing against Mr Andor personally - I am very concerned about the direction in which I believe he will take us .
It is quite likely , in my view , that the UK will lose the opt-out .
If we do , three million people in our country are going to lose out on this .
They enjoy working extra hours .
Our retained fire service in the UK - in particular in my region , Wales , where 75 % of it is covered by retained officers - is under threat .
We have a general election coming soon , and I call upon all the British MEPs present today to vote against the new Commission on the basis that , if this 48-hour working opt-out is lost for the good people of my country , it will cause us grave consequences .
It is up to them .
The three million people will be watching how they vote , as I will .
( DE ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon is intended to strengthen the European Union and with that , naturally , primarily the European Commission and also our Parliament .
It is disgraceful , however , that , despite this , politically weak representatives are placed at the top of the EU institutions .
Political observers agree that the new Commission contains no real political heavyweights .
If the President of the Commission is already the smallest common denominator among the powers of the large EU States , this situation is clearly continuing unchecked with the individual commissioners .
The new President-in-Office of the Council and the High Representative , in particular , are also more like political lightweights .
Our important political partners like the US are already letting us know this , and we do not know what will happen with other partners like Russia , for example .
As a result , the question arises as to whether a strengthened European Parliament in cooperation with a weak Commission can actually do any positive work in terms of integration and satisfying the interests of the European peoples .
( DE ) Mr President , my request to the new Commission is that it do more for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Two thirds of our workers work for these enterprises and they generate 50 % of gross domestic product .
We must , above all , see to it that the creditworthiness of the small and medium-sized enterprises is increased , because , particularly in times of crisis , venture capital is of particular interest in order to be able to continue to pay good wages .
We need to be more competitive and for this we need to provide better support for the infrastructure .
The trans-European networks in particular ought to be improved .
We must see to it that the small and medium-sized enterprises also have research opportunities so that they are able to offer new products and services via the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
We also need to improve vocational education and training .
That is a major task for the European Commission .
I wish the new European Commission every success and good luck for the future .
( SL ) I am with those who believe that today is a great day for European democracy , not only because we will be bringing to completion new European institutions and structures , but also because we will be adopting this interinstitutional agreement which , together with the Treaty of Lisbon , actually increases the influence that European citizens can bring to bear on European politics .
To me , that seems particularly relevant right now , as we have already witnessed , or can begin to see , the signs of the first crisis of European democracy .
It is evidenced by ever-shrinking election turnouts , people 's ever-dwindling confidence in fundamental democratic institutions and the fact that , in some European capitals , demonstrators are greeted with violence and , in others , the symbols of totalitarianism and similar regimes are being commemorated .
In brief , I think it is high time that European politics also did something to develop democracy at the level of institution building , but that will not be enough .
We also need to make an effort to raise the level of democratic political culture , especially in post-communist countries .
( ES ) Mr President , the members of the Spanish delegation of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament are going to vote in favour of the mandate of the Commission that has been christened Barroso II .
We have good reasons for doing so .
One of them is that we are convinced that not even Mr Barroso could agree with the critics of Barroso I when he has a mandate for the Barroso II Commission .
Anyone can see what the reasons are .
Europe has changed , the world has changed , and it has entered a crisis .
A globalised world , facing a global crisis , which needs a globally relevant Europe .
Instead of responding to the crisis with further crises , we must take action , and we must do it now .
We need to take action to respond to climate change , new energy sources , the importance of our foreign policy on the global scale and our contribution to a safer world in the fight against crime and terrorism .
We need to take this action now .
Six months have now passed since the elections , and it is now time for us to have a Commission that is at full capacity and is fully operational .
That is what the 500 million Europeans who are watching us are expecting right now .
We are therefore convinced that as inaction is not an option , the only option is for Barroso II to surprise the critics of Barroso I with action , with firm action .
( RO ) I , too , would like to say that today is an important day as we will be voting for a Commission not only for 27 Member States , but also for a single Europe .
It has been stated in this Chamber that the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon is a matter of urgency .
It is an urgent matter overshadowed by a major difficulty because the current crisis is far from conducive to the implementation of this treaty , which must produce a single Europe for 27 countries and a Europe which , at the same time , every European finds credible .
I would like to stress that , in my view , the biggest challenge facing the European Union is actually the sense of solidarity between Europeans from the old countries and new countries , in other words , the solidarity between Europeans from East and West .
This is the only way we can make Europe credible for those aspiring , sooner or later , to join our Union , regardless of whether it is the Western Balkans , Moldova , Turkey or Iceland .
( FI ) Mr President , it has definitely taken too long to form the Commission .
Future historians will surely wonder how it was possible to spend six months putting together the Commission , while in Europe , we were going through the deepest recession in Europe 's economic history .
I believe that this process has , on the whole , empowered and strengthened the Commission and Parliament .
That is why I am surprised at the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , who have unanimously decided to vote against the new Commission , especially as they themselves have frequently stated that they gained a lot from the process and that their objectives were accepted .
Frankly , I think this is a case of extreme populism .
The viability of the internal market and a social Europe are like brother and sister : they go hand in hand .
It is very important that an assessment of the social impact is a step in the direction of a social Europe .

( DE ) Mr Barroso , Mr President , I am disappointed not only about the people in the Commission , but also about your allocation of portfolios .
You have split up some of them in such a way that it will , in future , be very difficult to conduct specific negotiations in the committees .
Moreover , you have taken away from some commissioners a portfolio with which they had actually proved their worth and you have given them one they are not so happy with .
Looking at this from more of a psychological point of view , an unhappy commissioner , Mr Barroso , can do a lot of harm , because , particularly at the start of his job , he will be faced with a lot of people putting forward suggestions that he is not able to deal with .
In my opinion , that is a wrong decision .
The second point I would like to make is about the interinstitutional agreement .
We will definitely fight for this to be implemented , as the Treaty of Lisbon is now in force .
We will have our say on international treaties and we will succeed in this , even in the face of delaying tactics by both the Council and the Commission .
The Commission should be prepared for this .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union is in a completely new situation .
The Treaty of Lisbon has introduced important changes .
What can we say after two months of its function ?
Well , in fact , if we think about it more deeply , it is only a good and important beginning .
Only now has the time come to give those provisions and resolutions real content .
We should make an appropriate division of competences between institutions or newly created important high positions , and establish political principles and rules for cooperation .
We also need to maintain the principle of real equality between Member States , but also between Member States and the Union .
It is important not to reduce the significance of the Presidency held by individual Member States .
Only a cohesive Union , one which speaks with unanimity , will have the position in the world which it deserves .
The initial experience gained over the past two months gives rise to a variety of doubts .
These problems , therefore , should be given profound thought , and measures should be taken which will enable us to achieve the expected effects and a new quality of operation of the European Union .
( HU ) The question , once asked by Kissinger , is often repeated - who will pick up the phone ?
The point being that we need strong personalities and strong faces .
No !
We need strong institutions .
We need a Council , a Parliament , a Union in which anyone can pick up the phone at the Council , because he or she is able to give a competent answer and a competent solution .
I would like now to make such a phone request : we would like a Europe in which the rights of the traditional national minorities are also respected , where there are no Slovak language laws .
With the entry into force of that language law , not only are the fundamental rights of the EU and the provisions of the European human rights conventions infringed , but one of the greatest achievements of European integration , the functioning of a unified internal market , is also in danger .
I request that the Commission take the necessary steps , in accordance with the opinion of the Legal Service , to ensure that Community law continues unfailingly to prevail .
Mr President , structural funds have been so important for regions like Wales in the past and currently .
They have helped many individuals , communities and businesses .
They have been particularly important during recent difficult economic times .
Therefore , it is vital that all these groups can benefit from structural funds in the future .
I believe a structural fund should be available to all regions across Europe if they qualify post-2013 .
I think we should rule out the renationalisation of structural funds and I particularly welcomed the comments from the Commissioner-designate for the Budget and Financial Programming , who stated his opposition to the renationalisation of cohesion policy and structural funds .
I also think it is vital that funding does not suddenly stop in 2013 for all the groups I mentioned .
Therefore , I believe that it is important that transitional status is made available for regions which fall out of convergence post-2013 .
I would hope the Commission gives cohesion policy and structural funds the priority it deserves in the coming weeks and months .
Mr President , I want to raise an issue here that I have been raising in my own country in the hope that , by raising it from the top down and the bottom up , we might somehow get some action on it .
We are constantly talking about the banking crisis and what we can do for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The problem is that there are many small and medium-sized enterprises that simply cannot get loans , even though they have viable businesses and can give employment .
The biggest reason for that , in my experience , is the absence of bank managers .
We got into this crisis because the banking system was on automatic - and , in many cases , it is still on automatic .
The European Central Bank and the European Commission have given a lot of support to the financial institutions .
It is time now that we returned , and used every influence we have to return , to the traditional bank manager , who can make calculated risk based on character , ability and track record .
I really think that would make a difference , and I say this to the 27 Commissioners here present : do not underestimate your ability to influence ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , I would like to mention two things that , for me , are absolutely crucial .
A great deal has been said today about overcoming the crisis .
In this regard , we must be aware of one thing : this crisis will not be overcome if bonuses are paid out again once the banks are stable again .
This crisis will only be overcome when those who have now become unemployed get their jobs back again , and when those who , as yet , have not had any work are able to work .
Then we will have overcome the crisis .
It is therefore vital for your Commission that you pursue the goal of creating and safeguarding jobs and ensuring that those who work hard also receive adequate pay for their work and have a greater share of the general prosperity than was previously the case .
If you succeed in doing that , Mr Barroso , then , in my opinion , the future Commission will be more successful than the previous one .
Mr President , like the election of a Pope , I hope we will be able to say this evening ' Habemus Papam ; habemus Commission ' , but one area that concerns me and a lot of people is that in the Lisbon Treaty , we were to appoint a President of the Council to give clarity .
I am not sure whether the clarity is there , and maybe President Barroso could answer that for us .
When push comes to shove , at a time of crisis , who is going to be the one voice representing Europe ?
Is it going to be Mr Van Rompuy ?
Is it going to be Baroness Ashton ?
Is it going to be one of the Commissioners ?
Is it going to be the rotating Presidency , or is it going to be President Barroso himself ?
I would like an answer to that .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I will try to start by answering some concrete questions and will then address the more general ones .
Firstly , on the euro area , some Members of this Parliament raised issues relating to the euro area and some current problems we are facing in euro area Member States .
First of all , let me recall that the euro is one of the major successes in Europe 's history .
Since its creation with 11 participants , the euro area has grown to comprise 16 Member States .
The euro area has been an area of stability and job creation .
Of course , it was affected by the crisis .
Non-euro area countries were also affected by the crisis .
I do not need to remind you that , just a few days ago , I received the Prime Minister of Iceland , a country very close to us - and a non-euro area member - which was indeed facing this crisis .
I want to repeat that this crisis was not created in the euro area ; it came from outside the euro area .
But the truth is that the euro did protect the countries which share the single currency .
I believe that the European situation would be much more difficult today if we did not have the euro .
We have yet to reap the full benefits of the euro .
To do so , we need to reinforce economic coordination in the euro area .
It is true that we do not have just a monetary union .
We should have a real economic union .
The treaty gives new opportunities , which I intend to make use of .
Olli Rehn , the new Commissioner for these matters - if we get your support - will develop this line .
Looking ahead at how to reinforce the euro area is very important , but of course , it does not prevent us from looking at the present .
The period the euro area is going through is a difficult one .
There is no point in denying it .
Other countries outside the euro area are also facing very difficult times .
Let us also recognise that .
However , I must say that the situation in the financial markets is sometimes reported in a way that amplifies the problems , and does not always give an objective assessment of the situation .
Such analyses usually come from non-euro area countries .
But the euro area has the capacity to deal with the difficulties currently affecting it .
We have our system of fiscal rules , the Stability and Growth Pact , which must be properly implemented .
In the case of Greece , we have the capacity to assess and monitor its fiscal adjustment programme .
We have the possibility of recommending bold structural reforms in Greece which will also be closely monitored by the Commission .
On 3 February , the Commission adopted a package on Greece which will go to the Council early next week .
Naturally , the solution requires , above all , action from the Greek side .
Support for the determination of the Greek authorities will increase confidence in the successful achievement of the ambitious programme they have adopted .
Member States , particularly those in the euro area , should always have in mind that the economic policies of each of them have an impact on the economies of others .
I welcome clear indications that all Member States are aware of the challenge and will act accordingly .
There was a concrete question asked about consumer policy , I think by Mrs Gebhardt .
There is a person with clear responsibility for consumer policy in the Commission , namely Commissioner Dalli .
He will be in charge of this policy , propose initiatives in this area and discuss them with you in the IMCO Committee and in plenary .
Specific civil-law dimensions will be under the responsibility of the Commissioner for Justice , Vice-President Reding .
This is normal in most executives around Europe , where those specific issues are dealt with by the Minister of Justice .
Of course , all decisions on new initiatives will have to be approved by the College .
I am extremely committed to collegiality .
In fact , many of you have urged the Commission to keep a strong accent on collegiality .
Under the treaties , the President of the Commission is the guarantor of collegiality .
In today 's policies , this is a normal tendency .
More and more issues are transversal or horizontal by nature .
They need a common purpose and they require the integration of different sectoral policies .
What happens in the Commission is more or less the same as what is happening in national governance and in global governance .
We see now that , very often , Heads of State or Government need to address , in a coordinated and coherent way , matters that were previously dealt with separately by those responsible in the different governments .
So this is exactly what we intend to do .
I want to underline this point with special pride because we are now building this new Commission on the experience of the previous one .
The previous one was the first Commission of this enlarged Europe - the first time we had a Commission with 27 members from 27 different countries .
The fact that that Commission worked in a truly collegiate spirit with a sense of purpose is indeed a demonstration that the enlarged European Union can work with 27 or more Members .
I think this is also critically important for the future .
There were some concrete questions about cohesion policy and some Community policies like fisheries and agriculture - for example , the question by Mr Capoulas Santos .
The cohesion policy has been enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon .
By its nature , it is a European policy .
We need to see how we can continue the process of reform so that we can continue to improve the policy 's value for money and ensure that cohesion policy and regional policy are translated into a real increase in the competitiveness of all the regions of Europe .
We need to be sure that the policy can achieve that so that we can have a strong case in the next financing debate .
Let me assure you of my full commitment - and , I think I can say , the full commitment of the new Commission - to the principles of social , economic and territorial cohesion that are also enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty .
Of course , we will do everything we can to promote the common policies of Europe .
There were some concrete questions about social impact assessment - Mr Cercas 's question .
I want to make clear what I have said publicly before .
We are committed to introducing this social impact assessment in our work through the Impact Assessment Board .
We believe we have made a lot of progress on impact assessment .
We are always ready to improve that work and we believe the social dimension should be properly addressed in our work .
Some Members of this Parliament put questions to me regarding energy security .
I want to underline that we are going to include energy security in our proposal for the European Union 2020 strategy .
One of the innovations of the European Union 2020 strategy is precisely to bring together some policies that were previously treated separately .
I believe that promoting energy security and energy efficiency should be an important part of our agenda for competitiveness and for greener , sustainable and resource-efficient growth in Europe .
This underlines how important we believe this agenda is .
Some of you asked me about SMEs and the value of the internal market - Mr Hökmark and others .
It is very important to relaunch the internal market now .
It is important to make clear that the internal market is not just about a market , even if markets are important .
Some people believe that we defend markets because we are market fundamentalists .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
We believe the internal market is , above all , the basis for the European project .
Without an internal market , we will not have a strong European Union .
If you allow the internal market to be fragmented , we will see the ugly face of economic nationalism again in Europe .
We have to speak courageously and say that the internal market exists to defend the weakest - the consumers , to defend small and medium-sized companies against monopolies , and , of course , to defend the European project as a whole .
That is why I asked Mr Monti to produce a report so that we can bring some new ideas and also create a larger consensus to relaunch and deepen the internal market as one of the great past and future achievements of our European project .
( FR ) I would like now to mention one or two more general issues that some of you have raised .

Mr Daul , Mr Schulz , Mr Lamassoure - who gave a speech in which he stressed the importance of boldness - Mr López Aguilar , Mr Mayor Oneja and many others have raised the issue of ambition .
This is , in my view , an extremely important point , and we must have an honest debate on it .
Some of you , and particularly Mr Schulz , have questioned me once again on the issue of the market and of social policy .
I would say to you once again : it is not the Commission that you have to convince of the need to have a social purpose .
You will have to work with us to try to convince certain capitals , because the truth is very clear : some capitals believe that Europe is solely about the market and that , under the principle of solidarity , they are responsible for social policy .
I disagree .
I believe that , in order to also have an emotional attachment to Europe , we need a social dimension .
We need a social dimension that actually combines what can be done at European level with what can be done at national level .
No one wants to create a European social security system or a centralised health system in Europe .
That is not what we are proposing .
Moreover , this should not be seen in terms of competition between the national level and the European level .
However , if , in addition to our work on the internal market , on competition , on State aid policy and on other policies , such as external trade policy , there is no social dimension in Europe , we will have difficulty in ensuring the legitimacy of the European project .
I would therefore stress this point : we are not the ones who have to be convinced of the need for a social dimension .
Work with us to strengthen Europe 's social dimension - the social market economy - which is , moreover , enshrined as an objective in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am very committed to this , and we must strive to achieve it together .
There is absolutely no doubt about that .
( Applause )
As regards the matter of governance - a favourite issue of Mr Verhofstadt 's and also of mine - once again , help us , support us .
I am in favour of enhanced governance of Europe , and Europe needs this enhanced governance .
My speech - you will call it a speech , it is a speech , but it is , all the same , a speech that I am making on behalf of the new College and which reflects a political ambition , a political stance - is clear .
We are living in unprecedented times .
As I said , both within and outside Europe , we need more determination with regard to European matters .
I am absolutely convinced , intellectually and politically , that , if Europe does not act in a concerted manner , we risk having only an insignificant role at international level in the future .
I said this in my guidelines , before the Heads of State or Government , and I am going to repeat it at the informal European Council , the day after tomorrow , because I am convinced of it .
I believe that recent developments have only served to highlight this situation more acutely .
The international financial crisis has shown just how interdependent our economies are .
The problems being experienced by the euro area right now also show how interdependent our economies are .
We must therefore step up our efforts in terms of European coordination and governance .
Brussels need not necessarily be given national competences : this is a 20th century debate and one which I believe has had its day .
It is wrong to make this an ' it is for Brussels , it is for the Commission , it is against the Member States ... ' kind of debate , because it is ridiculous .
It is clear that , while we want to have a role in the world today , our Member States alone do not have the influence required to negotiate on equal terms with the United States , Russia or China .
We therefore need this dimension , not to strengthen Brussels , but to strengthen Europe and , above all , to focus on the real interests of each of our fellow citizens .
It is here that we must work together , and here too , I say to you : support us .
We need your support , not in a course that will inevitably lead to war between the institutions - now more than ever we need the institutional partnership - but to defend Europe 's interests in the world .
Lastly , in terms of external relations , here too let us be absolutely clear .
Where in the world does Europe count ?
Europe counts in the world where it has , in fact , a coordinated position .
It is respected in trade terms , I can assure you of that .
Our competition laws are respected by all the major international conglomerates .
We have a common policy .
We have institutions .
We have the basis on which to act .
Bear in mind , though , that we are living at a time , particularly in international security terms , when Europe does not have the geopolitical and defence instruments that others have .
I can see very clearly , when I speak with some of our international partners , that they think above all in terms of security .
They think in terms of strategic balance .
And here , it must be said clearly , Europe cannot be naive .
The problem in Copenhagen was not a lack of ambition from Europe , as some are saying .
On the contrary , we were by far the most ambitious .
For me , what Copenhagen showed was that we had to express a European interest in the various areas and defend it consistently and strategically , with all our partners .
Therefore , we must not simply conduct a generous policy , important though it is ; we must also have the strength to defend our generosity and the conviction to defend our interests .
That is what I intend to do , and I also hope to have your support in this regard .


Finally , some Members - Mr Lehne and Mr Swoboda , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mrs Wallis and Mr Rangel , among others - spoke at length about the institutional question , and , in particular , about the Framework Agreement .
I wish to say to you that what I did in the negotiations with you was precisely to convey the spirit and the letter of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Some people have not yet realised that the European Parliament has powers today that it did not have prior to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I believe in the European dimension of the parliamentarian , and when I use the word ' dimension ' - my English is not as good as yours , Mrs Wallis - it is not to say something vague .
For me , ' dimension ' means depth , it means scope .
It is something very ambitious , in any case .
I wish to work with Parliament in this spirit .
Not against another institution , because I believe - and I must say it here - that we need a very strong Council and European Council .
I welcome the innovations in the Treaty of Lisbon , not least the existence of a permanent Presidency of the European Council , because this provides continuity and consistency in the long term .
I very much welcome the creation of the role of High Representative , who is , at the same time , Vice-President of the European Commission .
This is not about making things more difficult , quite the opposite !
Instead of having two centres for external relations , one on the Council side , and one on the Commission side , we now have one key figure - in this case , Baroness Ashton - who is going to defend the European interest with intergovernmental legitimacy , which remains very important in external matters , but also with European legitimacy .
Therefore , I say this with a great deal of conviction .
I believe that it would be a mistake to start a debate or an institutional conflict now .
We need the various institutions .
Some people felt compelled to ask the eternal question about Mr Kissinger and the telephone number .
I have already said it once : Mr Kissinger was the Secretary of State .
I believe that , from now on , the US Secretary of State 's opposite number will be Baroness Ashton .
She has the responsibility and the ability to play that role .
However , at Heads of State or Government level , apart from the relationships with our Member States , we have , in the Treaty of Lisbon , the President of the Council , who represents Europe in external policy and common security matters , and the Commission which , pursuant to Article 17 , represents Europe in every other aspect of external relations .
That is our system .
Some people would like a completely unified system .
As some have said , the United States , at times , does not have a completely unified system either .
At times , we negotiate with the US Administration and we subsequently discover that Congress does not follow exactly the same line as the US Administration .
It is also important to understand here that we consist of 27 Member States .
We have a system that is an improvement on the internal system .
Instead of having a Presidency that changes every six months , we have a permanent Presidency of the Council .
We now have the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission .
This is a step forward , true , but dynamism is more important than mechanism , and it is in this way that we must add a new dimension to our action .
I shall conclude by making an appeal to this House .
With power comes responsibility .
I am going to be very frank with you here , ladies and gentlemen : the European Parliament has gained a large number of powers with this revision .
I hope that these powers will be used not only for feel-good policies , but also as part of the responsibility of governing Europe with the other institutions .
This is a big test of the responsibility of all the institutions - of the European Parliament , of the Commission and of the European Council .
Some of you asked me - sincerely , I believe - to show more boldness .
I can tell you that I am ready to make efforts along those lines .
However , the Commission alone will be unable to see them through .
Let us be clear on this point .
It would be an illusion , and the Commission cannot establish its influence , its power , its direction against the will of our Member States , which are democratic States .
We must establish these things together , with a parliamentary assembly - in this case , a European Parliament - which genuinely assumes its responsibility , which is not simply , as some people want , a place in which to protest .
Moreover , I have noticed that some people speak louder because they are weaker !
What we need , therefore , is for all the European political groups that are in power to work together .
Some political groups said that they would vote against us .
When it comes to the extremes , I can tell you that I would be worried if they did vote for us .
I do not need that kind of support .
The Commission does not want their support .
However , the Commission wants and requests the support of all the European forces .
That , I do ask of you .
I ask for it modestly , but also with the firm belief that we need your support and that you can help us to fill the gap that exists today .
What is the real problem ?
Let us be clear on this subject too .
When we talk about it with our fellow citizens , there is , today , in Europe - and this will be my final point , Mr President - a fundamental gap between our stated ambitions and the results that we manage to obtain .
Some now wish to use this gap as a means of lowering our ambitions .
Others - and we are in this camp - want to improve our results so that they match our ambitions .
I am counting on this House to fulfil our ambition , an ambition for a stronger Europe , in an increasingly demanding world .
I ask you to give your support to the new Commission so that , with our ambition , we can turn the European dream into a reality .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Barroso , for giving detailed answers to the questions and remarks which were put to you from the Chamber , and also for your very comprehensive treatment of our mutual relations - the European Commission and the European Parliament .
We are aware of the responsibility which rests on the European Parliament .
Our agreement is of a new kind , and we are moving closer with our cooperation than we have done before .
Our joint responsibility , of two Community institutions - the European Parliament and the European Commission - is particularly significant .
Thank you , too , for presenting your vision of the European Commission 's work and the aims of that work .
I would like to thank once again Mr López Garrido , who is representing the Spanish Presidency , and the entire Spanish delegation , for being here in the Chamber during our proceedings and debate .
I have received five motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 106 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 9 February 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I should like to say how pleased I am , as Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , about the agreement that has been reached on the principal lines of a new Framework Agreement between the Commission and Parliament .
I must , however , make it clear that we need to think more deeply about the nature of the relationship between these two institutions .
The outlook for democratic growth in the Union continues to be one in which Parliament is seen as representing the people and the Council as a sort of second chamber , representing the States .
In such a context , the Commission should be considered as a government , and it is clear that this configuration would require rules that are considerably more detailed than the adjustments deservedly outlined today .
I should like to add a thought on the citizens ' right of initiative .
The relevant rules will have to be tailored to the effects that we consider must follow as a result .
These effects must be considered in comparison with those stemming from the existing right of every citizen to submit a petition to the European Parliament and those connected to the limited powers of Parliament .
Parliament has no power of initiative but it does have the power to request that the Commission initiate legislation .
Now that the institutional problem has been resolved , with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and the election of the new Commission , a new stage in the history of the Union is beginning .
A new era which aims to be ambitious in its capacity for initiative and in its foresight with respect to the great challenges of our time .
A new era in which the Commission will work in complete harmony with Parliament in the search for solutions to the problems which affect European citizens , as envisaged in the interinstitutional agreement .
A new era of European leadership in relation to the major issues of the contemporary world and of appropriate responses to the challenges of the future .
A new era in the integration of a fairer Europe which shows greater solidarity .
The new College of Commissioners , on the basis of the evidence given during the hearings , meets the necessary criteria to respond to present needs .
It is a Commission of balance , which combines the experience of its veterans with the freshness of the other half of its members .
And it is also balanced in terms of its representation of the genders , given that one third of its members are female , a small increase in comparison to before .
The balance of power between the three institutions does not weaken anyone but rather strengthens Europe .
In presenting the new European Commission , President Barroso has presented a programme which is the continuation of the neoliberal , federalist and militaristic policy of the old Commission .
The College of Commissioners which he has presented will continue along the same lines , as we saw confirmed during the hearings that took place in the parliamentary committees .
We are going to have a period of proposals for the deepening of the European capitalist integration that we are experiencing right now .
The previous Commission left a considerable amount of work prepared , including the general outline and what is termed the public consultation over the strategy which will give continuity to the so-called Lisbon Strategy .
For now , they are calling it the EU 2020 strategy , but they have already said that it is , in fact , about ' making it happen : harnessing existing instruments in a new approach ' .
Put another way , what we know right now is that we are going to have more of the same .
They ignore the need to weigh up how far the measures adopted in the name of the Lisbon Strategy have been implemented and to what degree the objectives proclaimed at that time have been achieved or what the consequences have been of the application of the Stability Pact .
They hide the fact that we have more than 23 million unemployed people in the EU as a whole , with younger people being particularly afflicted as their unemployment rate now exceeds 21 % , as well as over 85 million people in poverty .
We cannot but vote against this new Commission .
Mr President , the European Commission , which is headed by Mr Barroso , has , today , achieved greater support than in 2004 .
However , in the debate which preceded the vote , many reservations were expressed , concerning both the Commission 's composition and the unclear division of competences in the framework of the new College .
For example , consumer protection is part of the portfolio of as many as six different Commissioners .
At the moment , it is difficult to imagine how , in practice , those shared competences will influence the effectiveness of the work of the respective Commissioners .
The European Commission , which was elected today , 9 February 2010 , is going to have to start work quickly , because since around October last year , when the election of the new Commission was supposed to happen , the old Commission has only been holding the fort , and has not taken any new initiatives .
Keeping to the framework understanding on contacts with Parliament will be a test for the new Commission , especially the principle of equal treatment for Parliament and the Council .
I would also like to point out that during the term of office of the present Commission , the interinstitutional agreement on better law-making of 2003 will be reviewed .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs , I am currently working on this , and I hope that constructive cooperation with the new Commission will bring substantial results in this area .
The new College of Commissioners is the first complete European Union team made up of 27 Member States .
Romania and Bulgaria , which joined the European Union on 1 January 2007 , only now have the opportunity to propose a commissioner for an entire five-year term .
I congratulate Romania for choosing Mr Cioloş .
I think that his performance during the hearings which took place before the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development made a deep impression on all those who attended .
I also believe that his professionalism bodes well if we think about the major challenges which await us in the area which he is going to manage .
I am primarily referring to the forthcoming debates on the future of the common agricultural policy .
In order to find the most suitable solutions , adapted to the needs and interests of all Member States , the new commissioner will need to have a deep understanding of European agriculture , a strong work rate and plenty of diplomacy , all qualities which I know that he possesses .
I wish the entire College of Commissioners every success and I hope that the work it is going to carry out in its future mandate will succeed in bringing the European Union closer to its citizens .
I congratulate Mr Barroso and the entire College of Commissioners but , at the same time , I hope we are now going to have a more independent and dynamic Commission .
A Commission which will guard , above all , the common interest , and which will undertake bold reforms of EU policies , which we have to embark upon after the years spent reforming our institutions .
In terms of relations between the Commission and Parliament , we are witnesses of a new openness , which comes not only from Parliament 's new powers , but also , as we heard back in the autumn , from Mr Barroso 's desire to establish a special partnership with Parliament .
It is a fact that particular provisions of the preliminary Framework Agreement on cooperation between the two institutions significantly strengthen Parliament 's role in the decision-making process , making this process more democratic .
The devil , however , is in the detail , which is why we are going to watch the negotiations closely all the way , to make sure that promises , such as including Parliament in the process of building EU diplomacy , will be kept .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 and resumed at 12.05 )

1 .
Framework Agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission (
- Before the vote :
President of the Commission . - Mr President , a few months ago in my political guidelines and here in plenary , I proposed taking this special partnership between Parliament and the Commission to a new level .
I proposed further enforcing and developing our relations in a positive way to reflect the new treaty and to reflect our shared sense of purpose to shape Europe together .
In the last few weeks , I had in-depth discussions with the team of negotiators led by Mr Lehne , whom you appointed , for the revision of the Framework Agreement .
Let me take this opportunity to thank all of them for very intensive discussions , but also for their constructive approach .
I am deeply satisfied that we have now found a common understanding on the principles that will govern our relationship in the coming years .
They should reinforce our cooperation in full respect of the institutional balance set up by the treaties .
As President of the European Commission , I will subscribe to the principles laid down in the resolution you have just adopted .
They will guide me in developing the position of the new College on the revision of the full Framework Agreement .
With the adoption of this resolution by such an impressive majority of this House , I am confident that we have an excellent base for reinforcing our relationship .
For those issues that concern not only our two institutions but also the Council , I sincerely hope the Council will join us in this common effort to improve the work of all the institutions for the benefit of Europe .
If you approve the new College later today , I will ask Vice-President designate Šefčovič to lead negotiations on the Commission side to revise the Framework Agreement .
I wish to assure you that he is as committed as I am - as , I am sure , are all the new College - to effective and swift negotiations .
Thank you very much , President Barroso , for your very positive approach to our negotiations .
On behalf of us all , I would like to thank our negotiating group , chaired by Mr Lehne , and all colleagues who were so committed to the negotiations .
( Applause )
We do not as yet have a legislative initiative based on the Treaty of Lisbon , but we have been promised an answer on our expectations from the Commission .
Not only do we have Question Hour with the President of the European Commission , but also Question Time with the Commissioners , an invitation from the President of the European Commission to the President of the European Parliament and to the College of Commissioners , and our common cooperation with national parliaments , which is very important .
We are thinking about the subsidiarity rule ; we need an impact assessment to improve it as far as possible , and we hope it will be much stronger from this point of view than was originally the case in our agreement , but there is still much hope for all of us that we can do everything that is necessary for our citizens in the future .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.10 and resumed at 13.30 )

Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
1 .
Presentation of the College of Commissioners (
2 .
Appointment of the Commission (
I would like to warmly congratulate the newly elected College of Commissioners and President Barroso : congratulations to all of you .
There is a huge amount of work ahead of us , and the expectations of our citizens are high ; it is a time for action and delivery .
I will immediately inform the rotating Presidency of the Council and the President of the European Council of the result of our votes and the appointment of the European Commission until 31 October 2014 .
Thank you very much , and congratulations once again .
( Applause )

Mr President , on behalf of the Council of the European Union , I would very briefly like to congratulate Mr Barroso and the Commission as a whole on the vote of approval , the support and the trust that it has been given by this House , the European Parliament .
In the coming months and years , these two institutions , the Commission and the European Parliament , are going to play a decisive role in confronting the challenges that the European Union is facing : tackling climate change , security , economic globalisation , preventing a crisis such as the one that we are still experiencing , launching the new initiatives and institutions of the Treaty of Lisbon ( the citizens ' initiative , the solidarity clause and , of course , the European External Action Service ) .
The Commission and the European Parliament are going to play an essential role in all of these things , and we as the Council want the Commission to work hard .
It certainly has many powers , which are not unlimited , as has been said here , but it does , of course , have the power to do what it needs to do .
We want the Commission to work quickly and wisely , because this is what the European public wants .
Following the period of institutional uncertainty that Europe has experienced , they also want us all to get to work in order to make up for lost time and immediately launch this new political phase , this new situation in Europe , the definitive Europe of the 21st century .
I therefore want to say , Mr Barroso , that your speech was pro-European , and that you will have the full support of the Council , as will the European Parliament , to create more Europe and to bring Europe closer to the citizens represented in Parliament , because the citizens are , ultimately , at the heart of Europe .
Thank you , Mr López Garrido , Secretary of State for European Affairs in the Spanish Government .
Thank you . Now Mr Barroso has the floor .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , very briefly I wish to express on my own behalf , and on behalf of all the members of the Commission , my sincerest gratitude for the confidence that has just been placed in us .
We are proud and humbled by the vote .
We see there is strong support across the political spectrum ; this is an important moment for Europe , a real mandate for boldness .
I also want to thank the President of the Council for his warm words .
I believe we now have the conditions to go to work .
But let me just make a comment .
During this vote , I have heard here some remarks and I want to state very clearly that those who compare totalitarian Soviet Union with the European Union do not know what it was to live under dictatorship and they do not know what democracy is .
( Applause )
In the European Union , we have a democratic European Parliament , and this is democracy .
In the European Union , we have a European Commission elected by you as the elected representatives of the citizens of Europe , and this is democracy .
We believe that , now , with the democratic legitimacy which was given to us by you , by the designation of the democratic governments of all of our 27 Member States , we are proud and confident in working with full determination for the good of democracy in Europe , a Europe which is , in fact , a beacon of freedom in the world .
Voting time is closed , and it is a time for congratulations .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will now proceed to the explanations of vote .
There are 16 Members who wish to give an explanation of vote .
I would like to remind you all that the procedure allows them to submit the text in writing , which means that they do not need to hurry their speeches as their points are set out more precisely in the verbatim report of proceedings .
Firstly , we have three explanations of vote regarding the Framework Agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission .
Each of the speakers will have one minute .
Voting time ( continued )
Before the vote , we will hear speeches from the chairs of the political groups on the election of the new Commission .

Mr President , Mr López Garrido , President of the Commission , thank you for giving me the opportunity to say why I firmly believe , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , that Mr Barroso and his College of Commissioners , assisted by members of staff from the Commission , will be equal to the challenges that they face .
Europe was born of an international crisis and , for the first time in 60 years , it is facing a new international crisis that is of a different type but that is undoubtedly serious and dangerous .
It is overcoming it , although we are not yet out of the woods .
The euro has done its job as a monetary shield ; there will never be enough words to say how much we owe it : the automatic stabilisers , those famous solidarity mechanisms , which are too ...
You have benefited a great deal from them , my friends !
( Applause )
Where would you be now without the solidarity stabilisers ?
Too often they have been regarded as a burden weighing down our economies , but they have done a great deal to keep the European model afloat .
An attractive , much-copied model to which our fellow citizens are rightly attached , but which is being called into question by new challenges .
The world has become multipolar , but not in the way we dreamed ; we dreamed that it would be idealistic , peaceful and multilateral .
No , the world has become one of competition , of a struggle - a peaceful one , certainly , but a fierce one - to impose one 's model on the others .
In the face of this challenge , the Union , which has so many tools at its disposal , must not waste them .
It must remain true to itself , by embracing ideas and people , and by pioneering the fight against global warming , but it must also arm itself with the resources to compete .
That is , I know , what the new Commission is going to strive to achieve with us .
We all know about Europe 's weaknesses : demographics , lack of future expenditure , industrial challenges , government deficit , weak economic governance .
That is one more reason why we should make the most of our tools : the euro and monetary policy , technological achievements , industrial flagships , agricultural potential to guarantee the food security of our 500 million fellow citizens .
To this end , I expect the Commission to show imagination and leadership in the European legislation that we will be called on to adopt .
I expect it to defend European interests , to demand reciprocity from our partners and to have no hesitation in resorting to the legal means at its disposal in the event of violations .
Commissioners , it is your responsibility , with us , with the Council , to complete the internal market .
To do so , we must break taboos such as those of taxation and of the social dimension .
The Member States can no longer act as though these two areas are restricted and untouchable competences , beyond the scope of common action .
At the same time , however , we must be much more forceful with regard to the external challenges : security and defence , but also trade , technological and industrial standards , and environmental standards .
Europe must defend its values , peace and the prosperity of its citizens .
Europe must be an international player and not merely an area of prosperity and of law .
It must not deprive itself of the tools that come with its power .
The PPE Group expects the Commission to work effectively on all these fronts , at the same time .
If it does so - and I have no reason to doubt it - it will always have the support of the PPE Group .
Mr Barroso , the PPE Group has faith in you ; it asks you to be bold , to reform .
It asks you to be far-sighted , for the benefit of the cause that brings us together : the creation of political Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has not made its decision lightly .
We voted on the President of the Commission five months ago in this House and although we did not give him our support then , he received the majority vote .
On the basis of this majority , which regrettably rested on people who are actually not in favour of the Treaty of Lisbon , he has presented a College to us and today we are to assess this College .
It is also necessary for us to assess this College .
There are two options open to us : we can go and divide this House into those on the Right and those on the Left .
These two groups have conflicting ideologies and must vote accordingly .
That is one option .
However , this is not the way that Europe works .
We do not have a majority in this Parliament .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) does not have a majority in this Parliament either , nor has the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Europe is not an entity in which any political force whatsoever can alone cobble together a majority and say that Europe will now be governed in a particular way .
Europe is a permanent compromise .
That is what sometimes makes it so cumbersome and also so difficult to understand .
However , better a permanent compromise , which leads to successes and more social justice , than an ideological battle that ultimately fizzles out without any tangible results .
( Applause )
It is therefore very difficult for us to weigh up the benefits .
Of course , we all enjoy a tussle .
I , too , enjoy arguing principles with fellow Members from other groups , but Europe also needs tangible results .
We therefore asked ourselves what we , as Social Democrats - as Socialists and Democrats - can call for and get accepted .
We then defined criteria .
One criterion was that we wanted the political force that is the second-strongest force in Europe to be represented on a higher level in this Commission .
We therefore wanted the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and we succeeded in getting this post in place .
I would like to say something with regard to the person holding this post .
Baroness Ashton must not allow herself to be called a communist in this Parliament by a man who , in France , has been convicted of denying the Holocaust .
Baroness Ashton has our full support .
( Sustained applause )
We asked whether we could introduce a social impact assessment into European Union legislation as a regulatory mechanism .
For us , the question was whether measures - such as the Services Directive in the past - could still be set in motion at all .
No , we wanted a mechanism for examining any measures that this Commission is to take in terms of their impact on the social security systems of the Member States before they are taken .
This was incorporated .
We wanted - and , for me , this is a quantum leap in European policy - the legislative resolutions of this Parliament to be turned into the Commission 's own legislative initiatives within a year .
That is a huge step forward , because it means that the right of initiative of this Parliament , which unfortunately does not exist , will be secured by indirect means .
We see this as significant progress .
Ultimately , as the second-strongest force in this Parliament and also as a group without which no qualified majority would be possible in this House , we wanted to be represented in the Commission .
Three of the seven vice-presidents are Social Democrats .
In this respect , you have largely accommodated us .
In recent weeks and months , we have voiced many concerns , including in our debate this morning .
In weighing up these concerns against the progress made , we decided to offer you our support for the next five years .
When I say ' you ' , I mean the College of Commissioners .
You can count on our support if you take seriously what I say to you : Europe will either be a social Europe or it will fail .
It is our joint responsibility to ensure that it becomes a more social Europe .
The S & D Group will support this Commission .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , my group will offer its support to the European Commission .
The Alliance of Liberals and Democrats is a responsible group and we firmly believe that the next five years will be so critical for the European Union and European citizens that we will need a Commission that will have broad pro-European support in this Parliament .
But let me also be very clear . Our support is conditional , more so than during the last five years .
We expect the new European Commission to be the engine of the European Union .
We want a Commission with a bolder , more ambitious and more integrated economic and social approach , a Commission that is at the forefront of such a strategy - a strategy that can force Member States to do what they have to do .
I think that , certainly in the eurozone , we have to recognise that there is a great need for a true economic and social pillar next to the existing monetary pillar .
The problems in the eurozone today are clear proof of the failure of the weak approach that we have followed over the last 10 years with the so-called open coordination method .
The same is true in other areas - on climate change , on foreign policy and on defence policy .
The basic assumption behind this new bold approach is the recognition that in fact , in the multipolar world of tomorrow , Europe cannot play a significant role without being more effective and without further deepening its own integration in the near future .
We expect you to embrace this assumption and to come forward with clear , firm and ambitious proposals and reforms in all these fields .
We expect that , to achieve this , the Commission will use the right of initiative to its full potential .
I am clearly talking about the Commission as a whole , working as a college , as a cohesive political body pushing European integration forward .
A strong Commission may be helpful , but a strong Commission in that respect is indispensable .
The Lisbon Treaty offers new tools and has enhanced our capacity for action .
High Representative Ashton , we ask you to use these new tools .
We expect more from a High Representative than we have seen until now .
Your role demands it and the European Union requires it .
Take the opportunities .
The lesson we learned from Haiti is an example .
Put the report to establish a European civil protection force on the Council table immediately .
Having said that , my group will support this Commission , with its strong liberal presence , and we are prepared to offer our commitment to advance the European cause with her .
( Applause )
Mr President , you know very well that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will not vote for this Commission , and , at the same time , we are offering you our ideas , our imagination and our European determination .
Mr Barroso , do not play the game of saying that those who fail to vote for the Commission are against Europe .
Not with us , the European Greens .
You can play that game with others , but not with us .
We propose to cooperate unconditionally with you if you wish to make progress on a European tax system .
If you wish Europe to have its own resources , we will support you against the Member States ' defence of their economic sovereignty .
I will name them : whether it be Germany , or France , we will support you .
If you wish to be the guardians of the treaties - there are , for example , negotiations taking place today within the Council aimed at returning the refugees to Libya , and we ask the Council to tell us what the legal basis of those negotiations is .
Will Parliament be part of the ordinary legislative procedure ?
The Council tells us : ' you will be told that at the end of the negotiations ' .
That is impossible ; it is the Commission 's responsibility to intervene to ensure that the European institutions are informed of the legal basis of those negotiations .
I can give you a whole host of examples .
If you want to make progress on climate change , if you want Europe to go further than the three times twenty , if you want to get closer to 30 % , you will have the support of the entire Verts / ALE Group .
If you want to go further in the field of financial regulation after the financial crisis , you will have our full support .
If you and your Commission want to go further with regard to the protection of Europe , you will have our support .
If you want to solve the Cyprus problem , you will have our support .
If you want to see an end , finally , to this crazy situation in which a country such as Greece - as I said earlier - spends 4.3 % of its GDP on defence , you will have our support .
You will have it unconditionally !
For this reason , Mr Barroso , I am saying that we will vote ' No ' now , but that we may be making a mistake .
We know that we made a mistake last time where Mr Dimas was concerned .
We made a mistake , and we admit it .
Therefore , if you can live up to our dreams , and not live up to the expectations that we have of you following today , we will say frankly that we made a mistake , and we will support you .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , some Member States believe the nomination of a Commissioner is a useful opportunity to sort out a domestic problem or settle a political debt .
The European Commission should bring together the most talented and effective political leaders from across Europe , people with experience and competence to help it address the enormous challenges we face .
After years of institutional wrangling , Europe needs to refocus its efforts on delivering results in areas where it can add value to the work of the Member States , and where our fellow citizens expect the nations of Europe to cooperate .
It must support efforts to nurture fragile economic recovery and to generate growth and jobs , and has to play a leading role in tackling energy security and climate change .
It must propose central reforms to the European budget and many of the key expenditure programmes .
In Mr Barroso , we have the right leader to take the Commission forward .
In his political guidelines , he outlines an ambitious agenda to focus on the issues that matter , an agenda which , in general , we support .
Every single Member State should have backed his efforts by sending the strongest possible nominee as Commissioner , and in some cases , he has been badly let down .
Of course he must back every member of his team - we would expect nothing less from a leader in his position - and , in organising his team , although we question some portfolios , he has probably done his best with what he has got .
But whilst some nominees are excellent and performed well in the hearings , others are mediocre and made a poor impression .
Some distanced themselves from his own political guidelines .
Mr President , if the vote is favourable , we will , of course , engage constructively with every Commissioner and we still hope to be positively surprised , but please let us at least have an annual assessment by this Parliament of the Commission .
This is still a fundamentally flawed process and one we cannot endorse fully .
For these reasons , the European Conservatives and Reformists will today abstain on this vote .
Some groups are disunited ; we are united in that position .
Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , my group also participated actively in the hearings of the candidates .
Some of them made a thoroughly positive impression on us .
We are less enthusiastic about the new arrangement of many of the portfolios .
That also includes the rather mysterious - although perhaps soon to be less mysterious - area of responsibility of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , who is also Vice-President of the Commission .
However , we found many of the candidates disappointing in terms of their specialist knowledge .
In this regard , all of our questions related primarily to political projects .
In what direction should the European integration process go ?
Which measures are most important to the Commission candidate ?
There were far too many vague answers to these questions and answers that , politically speaking , we do not support .
Despite claims of a more social Europe , they persisted in advocating a route towards deregulation , privatisation or the flexicurity concept .
The flexibility of workers was the top priority and social security was right at the bottom .
Climate protection is on the agenda , but we are not seeing a move away from coal-powered generation of electricity or from nuclear power .
I do not see the EU taking a leading role in climate protection and in development aid .
Nothing has been said about consistent disarmament , especially with regard to nuclear weapons within Europe .
Mr Barroso , Mr President , as much as I appreciate the candidates coming forward for the hearing , my group is unable to give your College a positive vote .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , in generations to come , children will be told a story .
They will be told that once upon a time , Europe was divided ; there was a big wall down the middle of it and the people in the East were very poor and they had no democracy , and they lived under an evil system called Communism that killed millions of its own people .
But , joy of joys , the wall came down and we finished up with 27 nations , and those people lived in democracy and 500 million people lived in peace ...
( Applause )
There is more .
I promise you , there is more .
( Applause )
Well , I must say that is the first time I have ever received such applause and I am tempted , Mr Verhofstadt , to sit down but , if I may , sadly , the story continues .
The politicians in charge became very greedy ; they wanted money for themselves and they wanted power .
So they resorted to lies and deceit , they staged the most spectacular bureaucratic coup d 'état that the world had ever seen .
But they did not need to use any bullets to do it .
They were much cleverer , much more scheming than that .
What they did is they put in place a new treaty - it was called the Lisbon Treaty .
Then they gave 27 people total unlimited power .
These would have been the people who made all the laws .
Of course , they already had a flag , and they already had an anthem , but they went about building a new state .
But they ignored the people .
What they did , whether they knew it or not , was to recreate the very evil system that the people in Eastern Europe had lived under before .
But the incredible thing was that many of the new bosses had also worked for that same evil system before .
Well , of course , the plan was flawed and their fanciful monetary scheme collapsed .
But , still , the new bosses would not listen to the people .
No , they made life tougher and tougher : they put tens of millions into poverty ; they denied people a say and , in the end , those people had to resort to violence to get back their nation states and their democracies .
The moral of the story is that they had learnt nothing from history .
Members of the European Parliament , before you give this Commission power , remember that 60 years ago , an Iron Curtain came down on Europe but now , with this Commission , there is an economic iron fist and it is being felt in Greece today .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , after the fairytale that you have just heard , I would like to return to reality .
My son is seventeen years old and is studying English very intensively , because he knows that English is the working language , and he hopes that it will help him to get an appropriate job .
He is an enthusiastic European , but is dissatisfied with European politics - and rightly so .
In Germany , the magazine Der Spiegel is already writing about widespread political contempt - and rightly so .
Nevertheless , millions of young Europeans want a functional , competent and bold democracy in the 21st century .
Yet , what are we being offered here today by the Commission ?
Are these the competent people - and the best people - that we need ?
Those of us up here in the back row represent an independent group of citizens who have played a key role in ensuring that the right-wing radicals in this House do not set up a group once again .
We are passionate pro-Europeans , but this is precisely why we are extremely disappointed by the people that you have presented us with and by the quality of these people .
Would we employ an assistant here who becomes a laughing stock like Günther Oettinger has done on YouTube in ' Oettinger talking English ' ?
Presumably not .
From the point of view of competence , would we want to deal with an Austrian Commissioner who has not proven himself at all in his area .
Mr Barroso , there are very many experienced parliamentarians here in Parliament that you could adorn yourself with .
You have one of them , for example , in the shape of the Swede , that is true .
Yet , why do you not want Mr Karas ?
Why have you not taken a German from here , instead of the ones you have ?
Because you are not allowed to .
Because , despite the Treaty of Lisbon , we are still restrained , because we are still not so independent that we can make sovereign decisions - you cannot and neither can we as Parliament .
Unfortunately , we are also still not allowed to elect individual commissioners .
That is a type of democracy that we had in Austria in the 19th century .
It is not appropriate for the Europe that we need , of which we dream .
Please take heed : if you continue in this way , you will be playing into the hands of the nationalists and , indeed , the opponents of the EU .
Instead , we need more democracy .
( FR ) Mr President , my sentiments exactly .
I shall be very brief .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schulz has referred to me - not by name but precisely enough - as having been found guilty of revisionism by the French courts .

I would like to tell Mr Schulz that he is mistaken , and I have at his disposal , and at the disposal of the entire European Parliament Committee on immunities , the momentous decision of the French supreme court , the Court of Cassation , which overturned all the sentences handed down to me and which , in its exceptional judgment , declared that I had been prosecuted on the basis of parts of sentences artificially put together to form a statement and that , furthermore , though cobbled together in this way by my political opponents , this statement did not come within the provisions of the law .
This is an exceptionally rare decision , since the Court overturned a lower court ruling and decided the case itself , which happens very rarely with the French Court of Cassation .
This overturning of a ruling and judgment of a case by the Court of Cassation became part of our legal history for the first time during the Dreyfus affair .
Therefore , Mr Gollnisch is as innocent as Mr Dreyfus .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
I should like to add something .
I did not say that Baroness Ashton was a communist .
I said that she was one of those pacifists who Lenin might have called a fellow traveller .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you .
It was only supposed to be a personal statement .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Framework Agreement that we have just adopted considerably improves the role of the European Parliament - a role that has grown thanks to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
President Barroso , we have given you our confidence , and we expect you for your part to have respect for our greater prerogatives .
In particular , we consider it fundamental to collaborate more closely , with the aim of establishing a regular dialogue between the two institutions .
We take as a cue the undertakings that you have given in this Chamber , your willingness to institutionalise a regular dialogue on key fundamental questions and on important legislative proposals , and the undertaking you have made to report on the practical follow-up to each legislative initiative request within three months of its adoption .
Mr President , our institutions will be called upon to implement the so-called ' democratic method ' by establishing a special partnership with a view to defining , implementing and , above all , safeguarding the true interest of Europe .
This is a greater responsibility for the Commission , but also for us , the direct representatives of the citizens of this Europe of ours .
Mr President , all these goals require a greater commitment by all : by the Commission , by Parliament , by national parliaments and by governments .
This is the Europe that citizens demand of us and this is the Europe that we must be able to guarantee them over the next five years .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the Commission and I am also in favour of the Framework Agreement , which represents an historic step forward .
Despite this , I have voted against the resolution , because we received it yesterday as a finished text and were not able to debate it seriously and because the devil is in the detail .
For that reason , I would like to make it clear that I have concerns about the wording in many places , for example , with regard to the rights of individual MEPs to ask questions or the risk of collusion between the Commission and Parliament in respect of the agenda if the Commission attends the Conference of Presidents .
I therefore ask that further corrections be made in the final negotiation of the text .
It has rightly been said that Parliament has more power .
We need a close partnership with the Commission , but we do not need collusion .
We need more democracy , not less , because with this additional power comes the need for more democracy within Parliament .
( FR ) Mr President , no one in this Chamber can really believe that , of the 500 million Europeans , these 27 candidates are the best qualified to become European commissioners .
The Commission exercises exorbitant powers .
As well as being the European executive , it initiates legislation .
Who , though , are we going to appoint to exercise these powers ?
A series of compromise candidates nominated by the national governments as thanks for services rendered or , quite simply , to keep rivals at bay .
Let us take , for example , my own country 's candidate , Baroness Ashton .
We are told that the French Government opposes her because she does not speak French .
Yet , Mr President , that is the least of her failings !
Baroness Ashton has never put herself in a position where she has to face universal suffrage .
How can the European Union teach Iran or Cuba about democracy when that woman , who manages its external service , is herself a non-elected official ?
Baroness Ashton and her federalist friends treat us as anti-Europeans .
If , however , she and her friends from the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament had won the fight , our continent would have remained divided and hundreds of millions of Europeans would still be subjected to Marxist tyranny .
No true European ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( LT ) Certainly , I , too , would like to welcome and congratulate the new Commission , the new Members , but I would like to draw attention to some facts that were not debated in either the political groups or the parliamentary sessions , the plenary sessions ; the appointment of the Members themselves .
In my political group , I said that at least those candidates who enjoy the support of two thirds of their national parliament should be appointed to the European Commission .
That is one point .
The other thing which was not debated and which I believe is very important is that the new Commission should pay particular attention to protecting the European Union 's business people from imports from those countries that do not share the values we promote .
Values such as the environment , social guarantees and , at the end of the day , democratic institutions .
This is precisely where more money needs to be spent , because such imports increase the prices of our services and goods and make it difficult for our business people to compete ...
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton and her federalist friends treat us as anti-Europeans .
If , however , she and her friends from the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament had won the fight , our continent would have remained divided and hundreds of millions of Europeans would still be subjected to Marxist tyranny .
No true European and no true democrat can , in all conscience , support these candidates .
By voting for them , solely on account of their support for European integration , this House is judging itself .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to have cast my vote in favour of this new College of Commissioners .
I am pleased because I have seen men and women who are highly expert , and have clear and defined programmes .
With your permission , I should first of all like to wish success in his job to Mr Tajani , because he is a man of great worth who will be able to make a great contribution to European industry .
Finally , as Vice-Chair of the Committee on Development , I must emphasise the excellent impression made by Commissioner-designate Georgieva .
She is truly a determined and capable woman who will be an excellent point of reference for the Committee on Development .
I wish them all success in their jobs .
( DE ) Mr President , in view of the enormous challenges facing Europe , it is important and a very welcome fact that we have an effective Commission .
In addition , cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , on an equal footing and based on trust , is vital if we want to succeed .
The agreement adopted today will form an important basis for this .
Parliament now has full powers of codecision and therefore has equal standing with the Commission and the Council in all areas .
In light of this , we will cooperate intensively with the Commission - on the basis of trust , but not without discernment .
The SWIFT agreement in particular demonstrates that no more issues may be decided without Parliament .
I very much expect us in this House to be able to debate the SWIFT agreement once more .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the Barroso Commission because I am sure that it will be able to meet the challenges that the economic and financial crisis compels us to face with courage and determination .
I hope , moreover , that some of the topics that are particularly close to my heart will be tackled with the necessary attention .
I refer particularly to regional policy , which acquires a fundamental importance when we talk of the growth and development of our territories and which must absolutely not suffer cuts following the reform of the European Union budget .
I also hope that support will be provided to tackle the housing crisis faced by our fellow citizens , which often reaches alarming levels , particularly in the great conurbations .
I therefore hope that specific financial instruments for social housing and other housing policies will again be among the priorities of the new Commission , to which I offer my sincerest wishes for its work .
( PL ) Mr President , several months ago , it was with complete conviction that I voted for Mr Barroso to be head of the European Commission .
Quite honestly , there was no alternative .
Mr Verhofstadt , the liberal alternative , and Mr Juncker , the federalist alternative , were not acceptable .
Today , as someone who endorsed Mr Barroso , I must say , with sadness , that the Commission he has presented has very many shortcomings in its personnel .
I cannot support , and neither can my colleagues support , a Commission which includes a Commissioner who , quite frankly , is still learning her profession .
If she were a student of international relations , and expressed herself at an oral examination as she did at the hearings , she would probably be thrown out of the room .
She would not pass any examination at all in Poland .
I cannot endorse a Commission in which the Danish Commissioner wants to close coal mines , including mines in my country .
This is another reason why I abstained from voting .
It is my conviction that this Commission has very many question marks over it , and we are going to be watching the Commission carefully .
Mr President , I voted against the appointment of the new EU Commission because it will simply continue with the same right-wing , neoliberal economic policy that has already resulted in disastrous crisis in the capitalist economies of many EU States .
This - allegedly new - EU Commission will turn out to be the same stale old wine with the same old neoliberal Barroso label .
These policies of liberalisation , deregulation and privatisation - implemented , let us be clear , at the behest of European big business - are having disastrous consequences for the lives of working-class people , with mass unemployment and savage attacks on living standards .
In its attitude to the crisis in Greece and in Ireland , the leadership of the EU Commission is agreed that it is the working class who will pay the price , while the bankers and speculators are baled out .
European workers and the poor in Europe must mobilise their power against these disastrous policies and for a genuinely democratic and socialist Europe , and that means opposing the policies of this new EU Commission .
( NL ) Due to the very limited time allotted I can , of course , only pick a few of the very many reasons why we did not throw our support behind this European Commission .
One of these reasons , for example , is the fact that the present European Commission is continuing as normal on the path towards the accession of non-European , Islamist Turkey to the European Union , even though this is categorically opposed by a large majority of Europeans , who themselves have never had the opportunity to express their opinion on the matter .
Another reason is the fact that this European Commission continues to argue in favour of the renewed immigration of millions and , in the long term , even tens of millions of new non-European immigrants to a continent which , in any case , already has tens of millions of unemployed people .
A further reason is the fact that it has already been revealed in the hearings that not a single one of the new European commissioners is prepared to do anything about the democratic deficit .
These are reasons enough not to vote for this new European Commission .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have not received definite or satisfactory answers from the new Commission concerning the fight against illegal immigration within the European Union .
That alone would be sufficient to withhold approval from its work and from its programme .
There is also another fact .
The Commission and , above all , its President , has shown itself to be very reluctant to accept Parliament 's legislative initiatives .
This is somewhat of a breach of democracy , at least that is how it comes across .
We Members of Parliament are the only directly elected representatives of the people , and failure to comply with our right of initiative , or at least attempts to flout it - even if , under the new Treaty of Lisbon , this is now sanctioned by Article 255 of the treaties - does not allow for a vote of confidence in Mr Barroso or in his Commissioners .
Mr President , when you look at the gallery of candidates that were there before us today , I think most people across the House , regardless of their politics , would have said that some were good , some might have been very , very good , some were bad and some were just pretty poor .
Unfortunately , some of them have also not answered all the questions about their past .
But , as Members of the European Parliament , we are unable to vote on the individual Commissioners , so we had a choice whether to vote for all of them en bloc or to reject them .
That is very sad and to be regretted and , for that reason , I abstained .
We heard Mr Barroso talk about a Europe that responds to a crisis .
If we really want to respond to a crisis , let us make sure we are not piling on more and more inappropriate regulation .
Let us make sure that we have proper impact assessments on any directive or regulations .
Take as a case in point the Directive on Alternative Investment Fund Managers , which will reduce the amount of money available to entrepreneurs in Europe , which will drive creators of wealth out of the European Union , and which will reduce investment in developing countries .
If only we were able to reduce the amount of regulation going through this place !
Mr President , I was elected by the people of the south-east of England to reform the EU .
Block voting for all the 27 commissioners with one vote is business as usual : not reform , not transparency , not accountability , not responsible confirmation .
Mr Barroso has my personal confidence ; so do some of the other commissioners with whom I have had dealings in the past .
But that does not mean a vote of confidence in the whole College of Commissioners .
Each commissioner is unique in political history .
No other person in a so-called democracy has the power to initiate , legislate and execute the same legislation and not be elected individually by anybody .
This is wholly unacceptable , Mr President , and therefore I regretfully had to abstain .
( NL ) I voted against the new Commission because there is not a single indication that the new Commission will start to work on reducing the gap between the average European and the European institutions , in particular , the European Commission .
I listened to the then Commissioner-designate for Enlargement during his hearing in the Foreign Affairs Committee , in which he appeared to demonstrate , for example , a very high degree of readiness to sweep all complaints against the accession of non-European Turkey under the carpet , as has happened for five years now .
The new Commission also wants more economic immigration , even more patronising behaviour and even more meddling , all of which is certainly a particularly disgraceful state of affairs under the Treaty of Lisbon , which offers a far from reassuring perspective .
Mr President , I voted against the Commission because I do not want to be governed by a European Commission of any composition , but there are particular reasons for voting against this one .
A number of its Members were members of the Communist Party , or were associated with it .
For example , they include Mr Barroso , Mr Šefčovič , Mr Füle , Mr Piebalgs and Mr Potočnik , to name just a few .


Baroness Ashton was treasurer of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament , which was little better than a Communist-front organisation , and a proportion of its funding came from the Soviet bloc .
She is not fit to be responsible for foreign security and defence policy .
The noble Baroness worked to undermine the defence policy of her own country when we faced the gravest threat - a nuclear threat - from our enemies .
The Commission is the new de facto government of the European Union .
Europe is sleep-walking towards disaster .
We are now governed by communists , collaborators and quislings .
Mr President , I was pleased to vote in favour of the Commission today because I think , in the circumstances and under the rules of the House , it was the right thing to do .
We need a Commission , and we have one now .
However , the point has been made - and well made - by a number of colleagues that it would be a better system if each of the Commissioners were elected on their own merits rather than en bloc .
After all , if you were putting out a football team to represent you , you would not select them en bloc .
You would select each player on his merits so that you get the best possible result .
I think we should work towards that situation and to reform the rules to ensure that the next time we are electing a Commission , each of them would be elected on merit .
That would force the countries to put forward the best possible candidates and ensure that candidates would perform to the maximum .
I think we would have a better team by doing that .
But , in the meantime , I look forward to working as closely as possible with the Commission over the next five years .
( DE ) Mr President , I am pleased that there has been a high level of consensus in Parliament today .
Many have called for a strong Europe .
Consensus makes us strong , and I am therefore pleased to see such a positive outcome of the vote on the new Commission .
At the end of the day , only an effective Europe can also be a social Europe .
The Commission has made a clear commitment in this regard , because ultimately we can only distribute what has already been produced .
It is therefore important for us to concern ourselves with training and education and to focus on infrastructure and research in Europe .
It is relatively simple to make the rich poor , but it is a rather more intelligent , challenging and far-reaching task to make the poor rich .
That should remain the goal of Europe .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - Interinstitutional relations between the Parliament and the Commission are moving in a different direction with the Lisbon Treaty .
We parliamentarians are sending a clear message to the Commission that the European Parliament never again will be a mere observer but an equal player in the shaping of European policy .
Policy actions at the Community level lack coherence and leave Europe totally disabled when unexpected situations come up .
And when they do come up , we are unable to respond to them in an effective and coordinated manner .
The President of the Commission has committed himself to engage in an open , transparent and constructive relationship with the European Parliament in order to set clear and feasible policy aims together and to ensure high quality legislation .
It is now time for Mr Barroso to remember his promises and to ensure that the requests of the European Parliament are clearly reflected in the Framework Agreement .
I support this Framework Agreement , since cooperation between the European Parliament and the European Commission is particularly important in strengthening the stability of the European Union and the effectiveness of its work .
According to this agreement , once a legislative initiative request has been submitted to the European Parliament , the European Commission must answer within a month , and prepare a suitable piece of European Union legislation within a year .
If the European Union refuses to prepare the act requested , it will have to justify its decision in detail .
Until now , only the European Commission was able to initiate European Union legislation , but in the Treaty of Lisbon , it is stipulated that a majority of the European Parliament has the right to create European Union legislation .
Parliament and the Commission will cooperate closely at an early stage on any legislative initiative requests emanating from citizens ' initiatives .
When signing international treaties , European Parliament experts will also be included in the discussions .
In the agreement , Parliament will be granted the right to participate as an observer in certain European Union international talks , as well as the right to obtain more information about international treaties .
in writing . - Whilst we agree with those parts of the proposal that provide for the equal treatment of Parliament with the Council with regard to access to meetings and to information ; for regular dialogue between the President of the Commission and the President of the Parliament ; cooperation on citizens ' initiatives ; impact assessments on legislation ; and the use of ' soft law ' ( rather than punitive law ? ) ; we disagree with : a reaffirmation and strengthening of compulsory time limits for the implementation of directives ; and the use of congratulatory language about the European Union and its officers .
I welcome the motion for a resolution , which was approved today , on a new political Framework Agreement which will govern the institutional relations between the European Commission and the European Parliament and which will strengthen the powers of Parliament conferred by the Lisbon Treaty .
The guarantee that the Commission will apply the basic principle of equal treatment for Parliament and the Council is one of the aspects relevant to a new institutional balance that are addressed in this agreement .
I also emphasise the importance of regular dialogue between the Commission and Parliament , through access to meetings of the Conference of Presidents and the Conference of Committee Chairs , and meetings of the College of Commissioners , respectively .
Furthermore , the introduction of a new ' Question Hour ' with the members of the Commission in plenary sessions will contribute towards better accountability of the executive .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on a revised Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission for the next parliamentary term as it is an important agreement , not only for its symbolic value - given that it gives a clear signal of the commitment of both European institutions , Parliament and the Commission , to work together in pursuit of the European project - but also because of its content , since it identifies the obligations of the parties so that they can better confront the challenges of the future and resolve the problems of the citizenry .
The European Parliament has often been confronted with faits accomplis by the Commission or the Council , having been relegated to the role of merely ratifying a decision already taken .
This situation , about which this Chamber has complained , has created an imbalance in the relations between the three principal European institutions .
It is essential that Parliament , which is more and more by rights a partner of the Council in the decision-making process , should today merit the same attention from the Commission as it affords to the Council .
Rather than merely smoothing out rough edges , I sincerely hope that the revised Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission will accelerate procedures , lead to closer cooperation and promote the exchange of information in a swift and efficient manner , allowing the voice of the elected representatives of the Member States to be heard and taken into account in good time .
In view of the way in which it was prepared , I believe that this will be possible .
For these reasons , the initiative of the President of the European Commission in seeking to establish a special partnership between Parliament and the institution over which he presides is fully justified .
I hope it will not only flourish but also bear fruit .
In view of the implications of the Lisbon Treaty regarding the operation of the European Union institutions and the reinforcement of shared responsibility in the decision-making process , it has become absolutely necessary to establish a set of procedures which ensure and guarantee the healthy and efficient exchange of information and points of view regarding the strategies for consolidating and developing European integration .
The possibility of systematically having working meetings before each of the institutions produces legislative and regulatory material will surely promote joint working , the reconciliation of ideas , projects and perspectives and the improvement of draft decisions .
In this way , we shall avoid administrative and bureaucratic procedures , particularly in respect of the return and correction of resolutions , thereby avoiding the risk of the multiplication of proposals and counterproposals .
This is an agreement which reinforces cooperation between the European institutions and which guarantees that the Commission will apply the basic principle of equality of treatment for Parliament and the Council .
For these reasons , it is vital that there should be swift implementation of this Framework Agreement , and it is important to recognise the need for constant evaluation in order to improve the efficiency and efficacy of this institutional relationship .
I abstained on the Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission .
Parliament , as colegislator , should refrain from trying to acquire ever greater powers at the Commission 's expense .
The whole treaty , and nothing but the treaty : that is how Parliament curtails the Commission 's right of initiative .
As President Buzek said : ' We have just taken one step further towards the right of Members to initiate legislation ' .
When the day comes for Members to make legislative proposals , each lobby will find a Member to serve its own interests .
I want to keep the tried and tested Community method - with the Commission as guardian and judge of common European interests - from which the exclusive right of legislative initiative stems .
Increasing the number of meetings between the Commission and Parliament 's bodies is not the way to arrive at more effective European policy .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the new Framework Agreement between the Parliament and Commission .
With the Lisbon Treaty now in force , this House has acquired increased powers and our working relationship with the Commission must adapt accordingly .
I particularly welcome the section in the new Agreement requiring the Commission President to fully respond to the Parliament in the event of this House withdrawing its confidence in a Commissioner .
Whilst I voted today in favour of the new Commission , I object to the all-or-nothing system whereby Parliament must approve or reject the Commission as a whole .
Any procedure which enhances our capability to hold individual Commissioners to account is to be welcomed .
The approval of the European Parliament for the new Commission does not constitute a carte blanche , but a vote of confidence .
However , now we can finally begin our work together with a fully competent Commission .
The role of the European Parliament was consolidated and strengthened with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and , with the Framework Agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission that was adopted today , the establishment of the European Parliament as an equal partner with the Commission has been duly confirmed , and this is something that I expressly welcome .
With this , we have created a good foundation for future cooperation and we will also insist emphatically on this dialogue as an equal partner .
It will probably also be very much in the interests of the Commission to involve the European Parliament in legislative initiatives at an early stage in order to ensure an efficient process that is in the interests and for the benefit of the people in Europe and of an active democracy .
The Members of the European Parliament are elected by universal suffrage and , as such , represent the European public .
It is therefore incredible that the Conference of Presidents should be content to beg for access to the same information as the Commission and the Council receive , or to attend some of their meetings , when they are actually invited to Parliament 's meetings !
How can it be that Parliament is not asserting its representative role so as to demand that its initiatives be endorsed as a matter of course by the Commission ?
Why is Parliament accepting the fact that the Commission can refuse it permission to withdraw its vote of confidence in a commissioner if it so requests ?
How is it acceptable that Parliament cannot give a binding opinion when the Commission changes its way of working ?
How is it possible that Parliament is not making stronger demands for the chairs of delegations only to be granted observer status when they represent it in international conferences ?
For the Treaty of Lisbon to give the European Parliament the role of a rump Parliament is one thing , but for its Members to state their agreement with this nonsense is something entirely different .
I shall vote against this decision out of respect for the dignity of the mandate that I received from the people of France .
With the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , it has become necessary to negotiate a new Framework Agreement to govern the relations between the European Parliament and the Commission .
The motion for a resolution , approved today by an overwhelming majority , reflects the new and extremely important role which the European Parliament is to assume .
The spirit of the Lisbon Treaty is clearly present within this document , with the expansion of Parliament 's responsibilities , the equal treatment for Parliament and the Council and Parliament 's new prerogatives with respect to various matters .
From this point of view , the approved motion expresses a deepening , in the right direction , of the constitutional process of the EU .
The motion for a resolution on a revised Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission for the next parliamentary term contains some reasonable starting points .
This includes the call for a guarantee by the Commission that it will , in future , apply the principle of equal treatment for Parliament and the Council , and also the setting of specific deadlines that the Commission must meet in connection with the submission of legislative initiatives .
However , the call for the President of the Commission to ask individual Members of the Commission to resign at the request of Parliament is unacceptable and senseless .
This would only make sense if , in the election of the Commission , it was possible to vote for the individual candidates , which it currently is not .
For this reason , I have voted against the motion for a resolution .
I find the lack of a reference in the Framework Agreement to the European Parliament 's control mechanisms and the lack of clarity in respect of the principles of power separation in parts of the agreement regrettable .
I have therefore decided to abstain from the vote .
The Lisbon Treaty embodies a new institutional balance , which attributes to the European Parliament a significantly improved status with respect to the other institutions .
The Framework Agreement aims to govern the daily relations between Parliament and the Commission in a partnership which is now reinforced and adapted to the new aspects of the Lisbon Treaty , taking as its point of departure the promises made by the recently elected President of the Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , as well as his proposal for a ' Special Partnership between the European Parliament and the Commission ' .
The request for an undertaking by the Commission to respond in a short time period to all requests for legislative initiatives is to be welcomed as it reflects the increasing importance of the European Parliament as a colegislator , most specifically in areas such as Regional Policy .
I also consider it to be extremely positive that the agreement includes a guarantee that the Commission will apply the basic principle of equality of treatment for Parliament and the Council , as well as a greater degree of interinstitutional cooperation in the preparation and execution of the Legislative Programme and Annual Work Programme .
For these reasons , and above all because it reinforces the role of the European Parliament and reinvigorates the European Union , I voted in favour of the motion .
The new Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission contains several important elements .
Firstly , the principle of equal treatment for Parliament and the Council , which strengthens the democratic warrant of the European Union .
Secondly , it gives Parliament additional powers to monitor legislative initiatives from the Commission , thanks to which Parliament will have a greater influence on laws which are made .
A clause has been included in the agreement about the compulsory publication of correlation tables , which I called for in my report on internal market scoreboards , and binding time limits for implementation of directives , which should not exceed two years .
Thanks to this , there is a chance that the plan to establish a common market will be completed faster .
The agreement also strengthens the Community approach and improves the working of both institutions .
It also obliges them to function in a way which will ensure that the European Union will be a true community .
I voted for the European Parliament resolution on a revised Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission for the next parliamentary term as I consider that this agreement is essential to cooperation between the European Parliament and the future European Commission .
European institutions must ensure that the ' Community method ' is used efficiently , for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
In accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , which establishes a new institutional balance , the European Parliament can ask the Commission to submit legislative proposals , and the latter must submit the relevant legislative proposal within one year of the request being made by Parliament .
The extension of Parliament 's powers , interinstitutional cooperation and the promotion of simpler EU legislation ensure that the EU legislative process operates better and that citizens are involved more actively and directly in drafting European legislation .
The Commission must regulate the procedures and conditions stipulated in the Treaty of Lisbon whereby EU citizens can invite the Commission to present a legislative proposal on issues which they regard as necessary .
The February 2010 plenary session is today witnessing the very start of the institutional cooperation that will continue for the next five years .
Although Parliament began its internal work after the European elections and quickly decided on the distribution of the positions of responsibility and on its internal rules , it has taken us time to implement the arrangements for interinstitutional cooperation between the Council and the Commission in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The parallel process of appointing the future commissioners has certainly facilitated the introduction of a right of legislative initiative , which the European Parliament will enjoy from now on .
Henceforth , the Commission has to report on the practical follow-up to any legislative initiative requests following the adoption of a legislative initiative report pursuant to Article 225 of the TFEU .
If the European Parliament requests it by a simple majority , the Commission must present a legislative proposal within one year or include that proposal in the following year 's work programme .
I call on every person of goodwill to observe closely the work done by Parliament , because it is clear that the MEPs will use this provision in particular in the field of universal social ethics .
in writing . - Some might be surprised that we should support a motion by the GUE / NGL Group .
Whilst we find ourselves agreeing with some of the group 's criticism of the European Union , our view of what should replace the EU would be quite different .
Furthermore , our ideologies are completely different .
We are Nationalists , valuing the sovereignty of the nation state .
They are internationalists .
We believe in a system that is based on private enterprise , with some regulation , and with some ownership of public utilities , whilst they would , presumably , believe in much more state ownership .
We agree with : the rejection of neoliberal economic policies ; the need for greater social justice ( though we might differ on definitions ) ; and criticism of the evasion , incoherence and inadequate answers of some Commissioners .
However , we are pleased to vote with anybody , if we agree with what they propose .
With my emphatic vote in favour , I want to add greater force to the words spoken by President Barroso ; words that gave notice of the construction over the next five years of a more united and stronger Europe .
He began his speech by recalling the fundamental values of European unity , the most important of which is human dignity .
I agree wholeheartedly , but the problem is that the word ' dignity ' has become ambiguous , because it is used not only to guarantee life and human equality , but also to discriminate against and do harm to the most vulnerable members of society and even to justify death .
I hope , therefore , that in the next five years , the Commission will work in such a way that the word ' dignity ' will be restored to its unambiguous and true meaning .
It is of symbolic importance that on 15 December last year , during the height of efforts to form the new Commission , 500 000 European citizens from 17 countries requested , in a collective petition , that our institutions interpret and implement the Charter of Fundamental Rights in every decision , on the basis of the equal dignity of every human being .
I voted in favour of the Commission-designate as I am conscious of the pivotal role that it plays in the structure of Europe as a whole and of the increasing importance that it has acquired as a producer of legislative initiatives .
As a Portuguese , I cannot fail to express my delight at the fact that the demanding post of President of the Commission has once more been entrusted to my countryman , José Manuel Durão Barroso , a man who previously performed that role with undeniable distinction .
Conscious of the difficulties which recent times have brought , but inspired by the hope for better days for the European Union and the European project , I wish him , and his team , all possible success .
In view of the principles of subsidiarity , representation and equal rights of the different Member States , I emphasise the importance of sharing responsibilities and competences among the members of the European Commission .
In the context of the progressive deepening of cooperation between Member States and the increased importance of the European Union 's capacity for global intervention , it would be incomprehensible to split up the various strategic and political decisions and choices within the European institutions .
All the new Commissioners were questioned and given an audience in the European Parliament , where they could express their expectations and projects in their respective areas of competency , always stressing the importance of sharing responsibilities by means of interaction between the different portfolios and competences which make up the European Commission .
Rather than demonstrating any incapacity or hinting at presidentialism , this approach reinforces the spirit of codecision , promoted by a cooperative leadership which itself promotes an effective and useful dialogue for the consolidation of the European Union .
Given the above , I voted against the motion .
The resolution tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left concerns important aspects of our appraisal of the College of Commissioners presented to this Parliament , and also summarises some of the fundamental reasons for our vote against this Commission : the presentation of a programme by the President of the Commission - to which the Commissioners will naturally feel linked and which they defended without any reservations in the hearings which took place in Parliament - which represents the continuation of the failed neoliberal policy of the previous Commission ; and the fact that this team has been chosen to carry out this programme , following a strategy which will not result in the necessary changes in political orientation , in the sense of providing greater social justice , job creation and eradication of poverty , but instead contains dangerous elements that will exacerbate these serious problems .
In sum , the Europe for which we fight - one of justice and social progress , economic and social cohesion , cooperation between sovereign states with equal rights , and one that promotes peace - stands little chance of being reached with the guidelines that this Commission proposes to follow .
After several weeks of hearings with the new Commissioners , this would not be an appropriate time to call into question the quality of a College of Commissioners which has , over many hours in various committees , already provided very useful clarifications about the policies to be adopted .
Therefore , now is the time to provide the EU with a legitimate Commission which is capable of responding to the difficult events of recent times .
Parliament and the Commission will confront key issues for the European Union , namely the reversal of the crisis by means of the recovery of the economy and employment , the balancing of the public finances of the Member States and the negotiation of the financial framework for the post-2013 period , regarding which I would emphasise the importance of the cohesion policy .
I had the opportunity to question the Commissioner-designate for Regional Policy , Johannes Hahn , with regard to his interest in the creation of a specific programme of permanent financial support for the outermost regions .
I also presented him with a proposal for a more flexible system of eligibility for receipt of structural funds for ' transition ' regions , i.e. those which find themselves caught between the objectives of ' convergence ' and of ' competitiveness and employment ' .
As well as displaying competence and rigour , the Commissioner-designate showed he was prepared to examine these possibilities , which gives me confidence in his future willingness and sensitivity towards outermost regions such as Madeira .
I gave my vote of confidence to this team of Commissioners , which will be led by José Manuel Barroso , as in general , they have shown good technical preparation , seriousness and ambition to be able to respond to the challenges of the EU without forgetting the values which underpin its creation , namely solidarity and territorial cohesion .
Today , we approved the composition of the new European Commission , although we must recognise that doubts over candidate Commissioners were not dispelled entirely .
Both the framework of the Commission 's activities and the programmes of the individual Commissioners above all lack the social aspect .
The impression is given that the main criteria the formulation of objectives and tasks is based on is the strengthening of Europe 's role in the world , while our citizens ' rights and hopes and social protection have been pushed into the background .
The S & D Group has decided to support the Commission , because at a time when Europe is plagued by an endless economic and financial crisis and ever increasing unemployment and its citizens are disillusioned with Europe , the European Parliament and Europe in general must not become the place where there is division into camps of position and opposition .
Now , the most important thing is to concentrate on these most important matters on the political agenda , to end the state of uncertainty and instability in Europe as soon as possible and to solve the most acute problems , like the financial crisis and unemployment , more quickly and effectively .
The Barroso II Commission is a mixed bunch .
In recent weeks , we have come across some strong , but also some very weak , candidates .
That does not make it any easier to assess this Commission as a whole .
This double-edged feeling is reinforced by the fact that many Commissioners-designate blatantly played up to the European Parliament during the hearings .
Yet what they really stand for is even now still unclear sometimes .
The Dutch Reformed Political Party in the European Parliament has decided to refrain from voting .
This is to give voice to the double-edged feeling that we have been left with by this Commission .
However , there are other things going on .
One Commissioner , who is also the first Vice-President , gives us fundamental concerns .
Baroness Ashton has the dubious honour of being the first EU official to combine a career in the Commission with a position in the Council of Ministers .
We cannot support this unjustified institutionally risky venture .
What 's more , Baroness Ashton has not , at any time , given us the impression of being able to cope with the pressures of this post .
She is one of the weakest links in this Commission and has never given the impression of being truly at home with foreign affairs .
We thus look ahead to the period 2010-2014 with some trepidation .
We have a new Commission which has assumed its mandate at a difficult time , but which is made up of a group of professionals on whose shoulders lie the responsibilities of all 27 Member States .
We have the Treaty of Lisbon which changes the configuration of power and requires adaptability from the Commission .
Consequently , we have a European Union in a new , delicate situation , but which requires performance , stability and drive when it comes to proposing and implementing coherent policies .
We are facing a new financial outlook , which means a sensible response is required from the Commission through reform and new adjustments in every sector , starting with the economy .
All Member States are feeling the full magnitude of the financial crisis .
The alarm bell sounded by Greece provides strong resonance , from states with well-tuned economies to those which are struggling at every stage to cut their budget deficit .
A stable , well-coordinated economic policy across all 27 countries offers the chance of avoiding a major imbalance at EU level and of having a beneficial effect in the second stage .
The EU 's actions are intended to provide solutions to the crisis-related problems and be creative in order to restore stability in Member States .
In other words , they are meant to eliminate the deficit , prevent disparities , while also consolidating the economy .
Like my fellow Members from the three main political groups in the European Parliament , I have just approved the appointment of the College of European Commissioners presented by Mr Barroso .
It is , in fact , a fine team bringing together individuals with varied and complementary backgrounds .
Until 2014 , Christian-Democrats , liberals and socialists will leave their political and geographical differences aside and work together within a College to serve the European general interest .
For three weeks , the MEPs did a remarkable job of monitoring the quality of the candidates through the parliamentary hearing procedure .
At the end of this period , it was our duty to give our full support to this new team .
We now expect this ' Barroso II ' Commission to surprise us with its unfailing determination to advance the European Union .
Its main task will be to demonstrate each day the added value of the European project to all our fellow European citizens .
In the critical period through which Europe is passing , in financial , economic and social terms , it is crucial to have a strong Commission with an ambitious , bold programme in key areas such as energy security and climate change , scientific research and innovation .
The new structure of the Commission , with one portfolio exclusively for Climate Change and another that combines Innovation and Research , gives clear evidence of an ambitious project and a credible strategy for Europe through to 2020 .
This new Commission , under the leadership of President Barroso and with a new structure for those areas , meets the necessary criteria to be the engine of economic recovery , based on efficient use of resources and on innovation , having greater social justice as its objective .
I welcome the new College of Commissioners and President Barroso and congratulate them on the result of this election .
It represents broader parliamentary support compared to the preceding Commission , and gives a clear signal of encouragement for the new institutional cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , so that they can speak more and more with a single voice in an EU which is a leader at world level .
I voted against this Commission , as did all the French Members of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
The majority of the commissioners represent the liberal stance of the European Union that we reject .
There are others , nominated by their Member State , who do not have any ambitions for Europe , or any personal vision .
One thing is for sure : the future commissioners did not commit themselves on any one of the points that we consider essential .
What strategy will get us out of the crisis ?
How should we respond to the social and climate emergency ?
How should we revive the European project ?
Having failed to receive sufficient answers to these questions , we have voted against , because we cannot give a blank cheque to the European Commission .
I do not believe that , if it fails to meet these objectives , this Commission can offer a new future to European citizens or secure a place for Europe in the world .
On that basis , it cannot have our support .
Of course , I am now going to have to work for five years on the proposals of this Commission .
My vote today is an expression of my mistrust and of the political vigilance that I will demonstrate throughout this term of office .
in writing . - Along with my political group , the Socialists and Democrats , I was very pleased with the final make-up of the incoming Commission .
In particular , the Environment and Energy Commissioners will be pivotal to the development of Europe in the coming years , and I am satisfied that President Barroso has chosen the correct representatives .
I voted against the proposed Commissioners ( College ) , because they will apply the same , neoliberal policies which drove the European Union into this multi-faceted crisis and huge inequalities .
They will promote the Treaty of Lisbon and the EU 2020 strategy , which will strengthen the sovereignty of the markets , increase unemployment and insecure jobs , unravel the social security system and restrict democratic and social rights .
Obscure procedures and the democratic deficit in the European Union are causing mistrust among the citizens and exacerbating the crisis of confidence in the European institutions , as recently expressed in the extremely poor turnout at the European elections .
Continuing with this policy will scupper the expectations of European citizens .
The European Left will oppose this policy through the European Parliament and by fighting side by side with the workers and social movements to realise the hopes of the young generation for a democratic , social , feminist , ecological and peace-loving Europe .
I compliment Dr Barroso not only on the excellent work that he did during his first period of office , but also on his deserved re-appointment for a new term at the head of the European Commission .
I hope that Parliament and the Commission will be able to work in close cooperation and with full respect for the competences and prerogatives which each possesses , with the aim of establishing a Special Partnership between both institutions , such as that proposed by President Barroso in his political guidelines .
I am confident that the President-elect of the Commission will honour the promises he has made to this Parliament , which should result in a revised Framework Agreement .
Only in this way shall we be able to complete the integration of a Europe which has as its primary objective the defence of our citizens ' rights .
The hearings of the Commissioners-designate are always important moments which reveal the depth of European democracy .
Parliament exercised its competences and the process had dignity , incisiveness and transparency .
I believe that the second Barroso Commission will be even stronger and better prepared in policy terms than the previous one .
I hope that it will be cohesive and that all its members will be equal to their great responsibilities , at a time when everyone is longing for economic recovery and job creation .
The new Barroso Commission has been approved by the European Parliament by a large majority .
Of course , I also voted in favour of it .
And I did so not only in a conscious manner , but also in a committed and confident one .
I did so because the new College of Commissioners , on the basis of their experience , has a much greater political capacity and offers guarantees that it will firmly and with determination confront the great challenges facing the European Union : the serious financial crisis which we are experiencing and its terrible social and economic effects , particularly unemployment ; security and the fight against terrorism ; the strengthening of Europe 's role in the world , which means a Europe with an active common foreign and security policy ; the fight against climate change ; and the competitiveness of our economies in defence of our social model .
The realistic and ambitious programme which José Manuel Barroso has presented and which our Parliament has endorsed can now , finally , be implemented , to the benefit of 500 million European citizens .
I wish the very best of luck to the President of the European Commission and his team .
In September , the Members from the MoDem party did not vote in favour of Mr Barroso 's appointment as President of the Commission , his track record not being such as to recommend his re-election .
Nor did they vote today for the College of Commissioners , as the lack of ambition shown by a number of its members during their hearings offered little hope of the strong Commission that the EU needs .
Moreover , recent developments have sadly highlighted the inability of that team to get to grips with events .
Doubts were first instilled in December , during the Copenhagen Summit , where Europe proved itself incapable of speaking with one voice .
They were confirmed in January , when Baroness Ashton failed to visit Haiti to show European solidarity or to attend the Montreal donor conference , where her presence was required in order to coordinate EU aid and the aid of the Member States .
Finally , there can be no more doubts now , in February , when Greece is being attacked by speculators without the Commission being able to present a credible rescue plan .
For these reasons , the elected representatives of the MoDem party have not put their trust in the Barroso II Commission .
As a committed pro-European , I cannot give my approval to the new European Commission .
It is based on non-transparent decisions in the national parties and government offices .
The proposed EU commissioners are not independent political heavyweights , as rightly desired by younger citizens in particular .
No criteria relating to specialised knowledge were applied in the selection process .
The fact that there were four weeks between the nomination of the Austrian Commissioner , Johannes Hahn , and the allocation of his portfolio is in itself evidence of this .
Despite the EU 's reform treaty , the Treaty of Lisbon , which is now in force , the European Parliament still cannot elect individual commissioners or express a lack of confidence in them .
Political personalities like the French and Spanish European Commissioners will founder here .
This European Commission does not stand for more democracy and an awakening ; it is a continuation along the path that led us into the current crisis .
Last autumn , we voted against Mr Barroso , since he does not share our view of the importance of good working conditions , equality and the transition to a sustainable society .
The vote today concerns the College of 26 Commissioners .
Before Mr Barroso was re-elected as President of the Commission , we made clear demands for a revision of the Posting of Workers Directive .
Mr Barroso was forced to concede and acknowledged for the first time that there were problems with the rulings by the European Court of Justice in the Laval case , among others .
He also promised to come back with a regulation for resolving the problems as soon as possible .
This was a very significant change of position by the President of the Commission , but it was not sufficient for us to support his candidature .
Today , we will take a position on the overall group of commissioners and we hope that certain commissioners - who have been given key positions in order to deal with the jobs crisis , the regulation of the financial markets and the defence of fundamental trade union rights - will be able to make a difference .
It is particularly positive that Mr Barnier and Mr Andor have clearly stated that there are problems with the European Court of Justice 's interpretation of the Posting of Workers Directive .
They were also clear that they are willing to start work on implementing the necessary changes to European legislation .
I welcome the fact that the Lisbon Treaty retains the possibility of each state keeping its own commissioner , an approach which is relevant if we want all shades of opinion in Europe to identify with the processes and projects which are produced by the Commission .
I regret some of the difficulties that occurred during the parliamentary hearings , which led to the withdrawal of one of the candidates , and I sincerely hope that such events become rarer .
In my judgment , the adopted method of subjecting the candidates for commissioner to parliamentary scrutiny is beneficial for the integration of Europe , as it allows for greater transparency in the debate and in the evaluation of the individuals ' suitability for their intended posts , and I appeal for the hearings to take place in a demanding but cordial atmosphere , as the European Parliament and its Members should refrain from trying to turn the hearings into a spectacle of gratuitous insults and confrontation .
I hope the Commission will choose better legislation , will always bear in mind the need to properly respect the principle of subsidiarity and will , as a matter of priority , adopt a central policy role in tackling the economic crisis .
In a crucial phase for the recovery of the economy , the experience and versatility of this Commission led by José Manuel Durão Barroso , as well as the manifest commitment , competence and recognition of the great European causes by the Commissioners who were heard in this Parliament , will be decisive in sustaining a united and socially equitable Europe , capable of assuming a leading role in the fight against climate change and reinforcing the competitiveness of our firms by backing scientific research and innovation .
I stress the renewed expectations of a team that accepts the great diversity of cultures and identities in Europe as enhancing the best values of each Member State .
Regarding the new institutional relations created by the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon and in view of the challenges placed in the path of the development of contemporary societies , I believe that , with this Commission , the European Union has strengthened its capacity for intervention in the current economic , social and political framework , not only internally. but also at a global level .
Our vote against the European Commission is a natural result of our disagreement with respect to its programme , the majority of the positions upheld in the hearings that have taken place , and the objectives and content of the Treaty of Lisbon itself which the Commission promises to defend , but with which we disagree .
Whilst it is true that the European Commission is one of the most important institutional organs of the European Union , it is also true that the College of Commissioners is composed of commissioners nominated by the Member States of the European Union .
Since the majority of their governments are right-wing conservative or social-democrat with similar policies , it is not surprising that the European Commission is leaning in the same direction to deepen neoliberal , militaristic and federalist policies .
In practical terms , therefore , we did not hear any responses to the serious economic and social problems which workers and citizens are facing .
We fight for another Europe , of justice and social progress , where economic and social cohesion are a reality and cooperation among states which are sovereign and have equal rights , as well as peace , are central objectives .
I voted in favour of the new ' Barroso II ' Commission .
Since the European elections of June 2009 , the European Union has been in a political vacuum , a vacuum made worse by the delayed entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
There is therefore an urgent need for the new Commission , as the only European institution with the power to initiate legislation , to become active .
With the exception of Mrs Jeleva , who had to withdraw her candidature , the 26 commissioners who have been appointed have all individually received the support of the MEPs .
It would have made no sense to reject the College .
Consequently , the vote to appoint the Commission was a mere formality , an ' administrative yes ' .
By voting in favour of the Barroso II Commission , I do not intend to give it my unconditional political support .
I shall judge the Commission on its political initiatives .
In spite of the presence , within the College , of several high-calibre individuals , I voted against the appointment of the Commission for two reasons .
When it comes to economic and monetary issues ( the Lisbon Strategy , supervision of the euro area ) , the failings of the previous Commission are well known .
As regards the external representation of the EU , Baroness Ashton does not have the required skills and has not seemed intent on committing herself , as we have seen with the Haiti tragedy .
She was part of the Blair government which invaded Iraq in violation of international law and which negotiated an opt-out on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I have voted in favour of this Commission , because overall it has shown - particularly with the ( new ) appointments - that it can carry out the work successfully .
The outcome of the negotiations between the Commission and Parliament is also satisfactory .
I think it is particularly important that the Commission does not receive a carte blanche for the next five years , but is to be subject to a form of ongoing assessment .
There remains a particular challenge to bring coherence to the policies in the different areas , for example , the environment and social and economic affairs , and to formulate our communication with the outside world in such a way as to make European policy more transparent and comprehensible for all citizens .
I voted against Mr Barroso 's Commission because it fails to meet my requirements in terms of promoting the social reforms that we must have if we are to emerge from the crisis in which we find ourselves .
It is clear that this Commission will by no means represent a proactive force for a strong political Europe and that it is poles apart from the Europe that I am so anxious to see .
With ill-defined portfolios and weakened powers , this Commission will lack the means to act and will certainly be more inclined to preserve national interests than the European interest .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the new College of Commissioners .
From the viewpoint of Scotland , the nation which I represent , there are significant issues and challenges for the new Commissioners to address .
With reform of the CFP and the CAP on the horizon , Scotland 's key interests in these policies must be recognised and I call upon the Commissioners concerned to ensure that Scotland 's coastal and rural communities are allowed to flourish socially and economically .
Scotland being a major potential source of energy production , especially in renewable sources , the Commission should prioritise projects and initiatives which will assist in developing Scotland 's massive potential as a supplier of clean green energy .
As a member of a pro-EU Party , I hope that this Commission can recover some of the faith in the EU which has been lost by many Scots , for example , as a direct result of Scotland 's experiences of the failed Common Fisheries Policy .
The Barroso Commission Mark II will be the first to operate under the Treaty of Lisbon , with the European Parliament enjoying extended powers , making it a more visible and active partner than ever .
Based on the outcome of the vote , we have appointed a College of Commissioners whose overall performance did not really go without a hitch , as in the case of the commissioner nominated by Bulgaria and her subsequent replacement , which highlight this point .
The fact that we have successfully achieved this task of changing the College 's composition is actually a success for the European Parliament in general and for our political group in particular .
However , I believe that a vote for this College is the most appropriate option at a time when any delay in making this decision could have put the EU in an uncomfortable situation where accusations of inefficiency would have been justified .
What is important is for the new Commission to get down to work as quickly as possible and catch the European Parliament up , which has already been elected for seven months , at least in terms of the work which has been done .
We can only hope for good cooperation where the objectives and action plans take on a more concrete form than that presented during the hearings .
( PL ) I abstained from voting on the composition of the European Commission , because alongside the good candidates , there were many weak and very weak ones .
It is unacceptable to me to consent to people being put forward for the positions of head of European diplomacy , Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs and Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs who are not qualified to hold these positions .
We should remember that we are still in a crisis , and we are still looking for a way out of the crisis .
Europe cannot , therefore , afford to have Commissioners who are only now going to learn their portfolios .
I am astonished by the attitude of the President of the European Commission , who , after serving a five-year term of office and having such large experience in leading the Commission , has proposed such weak candidates .
Quite honestly , I should have voted against the proposed make-up of the Commission , but alongside the weak candidates there were also several very good ones - including the Polish candidate , Janusz Lewandowski .
In spite of my abstention , I wish the entire Commission nothing but success , because this is so important for all Europeans .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the College of Commissioners , expressing my trust in the President of the Commission most of all .
I do not consider the composition of the Commission to be ideal .
The High Representative for Foreign Affairs continuously poses a problem for me , as she does not have the necessary experience in foreign affairs and she lacks a clear vision on how to lead the EU 's foreign and security policy .
Nevertheless , I find it crucial that the Commission start working in its full mandate and I consider the wide support of the European Parliament in this very important as , in my opinion , the Commission and the European Parliament are the closest allies in shaping the EU 's common policies .
in writing . - We all wish this new Commission well .
Their priorities are many but there is no doubt of the one area that we all agree on is for the need to create jobs .
This should be the major pillar on which this new Commission is judged .
Let 's be frank about it ; many of the Member States have or are facing economic collapse .
Reversing this situation and developing a smart , social market economy where the EU is a global leader across all fields of economic life will be the measure of this Commission .
It is my hope particularly that the Irish Commissioner , Ms Geogheghan Quinn , takes a leading role in the new commission with her innovation and research portfolio .
She will play a critical role in Europe 's recovery and I wish her well with this .

Mr President , many fine words have been spoken regarding Mr Barroso 's new team of commissioners - and rightly so .
I speak now because it is necessary to draw attention to a major mistake that has been made in connection with the new Commission : one may look in vain for the position of Commissioner for Communication .
It has quite simply been DISCONTINUED - and that at a time when - more than ever - we need a proper , coordinated , well thought-out communication policy within the EU .
A couple of weeks ago , I sent Mr Barroso a letter on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe expressing our concern and asking WHY we no longer have a Commissioner for Communication .
No reply has ever been received - which is perhaps a kind of answer in itself , if not a satisfactory one .
It thus seems that no one is sure why the EU does not have a commissioner for what is an incredibly important - in fact , quite crucial - area if the many great speeches about getting closer to the EU 's citizens and creating a common European public space are to be anything more than just fine words .
I am still waiting for an answer from Mr Barroso - preferably an answer with a proper plan for communication in the forthcoming five years .
in writing . - I share the critics on the procedure of the nomination of the Commission , as explained in the resolution of the Green Group , particularly the lack of transparency , Member States choosing their candidates rather according to domestic political considerations than for their suitability , and the lack of possibility to disapprove to a separate candidate .
However , I could not vote against the whole Commission since the Commissioners-designate for absolutely crucial and key issues such as climate , environment , development , humanitarian aid , agriculture and fisheries were all regarded as very competent and committed .
Therefore , I abstained on the vote on the new Commission .
I have just approved the election of the European Commission , although this was not an easy decision .
The reason for this is that , during the hearing , it emerged that some of the candidates proposed by the Member States did not have adequate specialised knowledge , nor were they in a position to develop concrete ideas about their portfolios or , indeed , any vision for the future at all .
The Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on their future cooperation also leaves many questions unanswered .
It is currently merely a European Parliament wish list , with no obligation .
In specific negotiations , it will now need to be specified in detail the extent to which our rights as representatives of the people were able to be significantly strengthened through the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , the interinstitutional agreement does contain some important steps in the right direction .
The impact of all measures taken by the Commission is to be assessed regularly by an independent party .
Parliament will be informed at an early stage of staffing changes in the Commission .
The Chair of Parliament 's delegation will be granted observer status at international conferences .
The European Parliament will be entitled to be involved in preparing and implementing the Annual Work Programme of the EU .
Finally , the European Commission will undertake to submit a report on its legislative initiatives within three months .
I have therefore voted ' yes ' today to the new Barroso Commission .
A vote in favour of the European Commission is , on my part , an expression of the credit of trust and hope that I place in Mr Barroso 's newly-elected cabinet .
I think that , despite much controversy and the probability that some of the Commissioners lack experience , we should enable the European Commission to get to grips with issues which arise .
It is only by active involvement and getting down to some real work that the Commissioners will be able to demonstrate their real value .
I hope the new cabinet , with the close cooperation of the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament , and with effective control , will show that my vote was right .
in writing . - I welcome the appointment of the new Commission , and look forward to seeing the Commission delivering on the promises made .
I am particularly pleased at the confirmation of Cathy Ashton as High Representative , and am sure that her quiet diplomacy will be of benefit to Europe as a whole .
The Barroso II Commission , as the election of its President showed , is a continuation of the previous Commissions , the neoliberal policies of which led the EU into a situation of long-term economic , social and environmental crisis that is henceforth its own .
Neither the programme presented by Mr Barroso nor the nominations of the commissioners point to any change in the Commission 's policy objectives .
Lying somewhere between the continuation of the worst possible situation and its decline , the Barroso II Commission embodies a Europe that has been reduced to social destruction and to the Atlanticism beloved of the neoliberal elites , a Europe that refuses to break with the neoliberal dogma of focusing exclusively on profits , which is destroying the people and the planet .
My job as an MEP is to build the Europe of equal wealth distribution and of environmental planning that the peoples need .
I shall therefore vote against a Commission that is the antithesis of this .
After several weeks of hearings with the new Commissioners , this would not be an appropriate time to call into question the quality of a College of Commissioners which has , over many hours in various committees , already provided very useful clarifications about the policies to be adopted .
Therefore , now is the time to provide the EU with a legitimate Commission which is capable of responding to the difficult events of recent times .
This replicates here the tenor of the explanation of vote submitted with respect to the motions for resolutions , and .
The undersigned particularly welcomes the fact that the European Union is now better equipped to confront the problems of the present and challenges of the future .
As a staunch European , and following the adoption of the Framework Agreement between the European Commission and the European Parliament for the next five years , I gave my support to the appointment of the new European Commission , as did the majority of my colleagues from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
The outcome of the vote is clear : 488 of my fellow Members joined me in endorsing the appointment of the College of the European Commission .
I would point out that this is the first time in European history that we have appointed the European Commission in our capacity as a true colegislator .
In a Europe shaken by the crisis , and with the new institutional set-up , we need ambition and a major unifying project in order to establish a stronger Europe for European citizens .
Therefore , I call strongly for the European Commission to begin taking action without delay .
I voted in favour of the Barroso Commission Mark II for two reasons .
The first reason is that it has put forward a credible and realistic programme which I regard as being appropriate for the current needs .
I hope that the new College will proceed with implementing this programme as soon as possible .
The second reason is that Mr Barroso 's team is made up of many reliable professionals who , I firmly believe , will make a significant contribution to the success of the reforms which we need in the coming years .
The Polish delegation of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament voted in favour of extending a vote of confidence to the new European Commission .
We are , however , conscious of the weak sides of the newly-appointed Commission and of the reservations expressed over the competence of some Commissioners .
We have had to wait a long time for the new European Commission .
It should , however , be admitted that the new Commission did receive the overwhelming majority of the votes .
This is a strong mandate for the future .
However , on the other hand , hardly anyone voted for the new Commission without some reservations .
One problem certainly is the fact that , with 27 Commissioners , their portfolios often overlap , which is not a very clear situation .
Many fellow Members point , too , to the problem of the excessive control of particular Commissioners by Mr Barroso .
We welcome the fact that the new Commission will carry out an assessment of the social and economic effects of the financial crisis .
I note with great disappointment , however , the fact that in Mr Barroso 's speech , there was no specific information about reform of the common agricultural policy or cohesion policy .
These areas will certainly be among the most important areas of work in the coming term of the European Commission .
The citizens and institutions of all EU Member States should be keen for the best and the strongest candidates to become Commissioners .
The responsibility is great , both for those countries putting candidates forward and for Members of the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , some states are not guided by this attitude .
The impression is given that sometimes , the governments of EU Member States send weak or ' undesirable ' politicians to Brussels to free up a position in their capitals .
This is a dangerous tendency .
However , the European Parliament is attempting to show a ' red card ' to weak candidates , who have received both a posting from their governments , and the approval of Commission President Barroso , or those whose financial interests lack transparency .
Five years ago , two candidates failed , this year one .
However , as yet , MEPs do not have the right to vote for individual Commissioners , we vote for the College of Commissioners .
As the majority of Commissioner candidates made a good impression , I voted in favour of the new European Commission .
Europe has urgent need of an authoritative leader , which this Commission embodies completely .
The new Commission will have the difficult task of encouraging sustainable growth through the full implementation of the European economic model ; that is , the model of the social market economy .
The strengthening of the internal market must provide the key to maintaining healthy competition , with the aim of encouraging job creation and growth .
I am particularly proud of the fact that in the new European executive , Italy is providing , in the person of Mr Tajani , continuity of merit and competence by being awarded one of the key portfolios , namely that of industry , which is of strategic importance in managing the crisis and in the reorganisation of European production .
During the course of this next mandate , the Commission must set itself precise priorities , and be capable of giving a European face to immigration policy and energy policy , thus providing the Union with a consistent approach that is currently proving difficult to attain .
It will also have to be able to provide the European Union with a foreign and defence policy worthy of that name .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is responsible for research , energy and developing the information society .
These are three priorities in terms of emerging from the crisis and regenerating our production system , which my Group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , wants to be more competitive and innovative , but also more socially and environmentally sustainable .
Research and innovation are major driving forces for change .
Mr Barroso committed to 3 % investment in research and development .
However , we were concerned to see how this area gradually became less of a priority in terms of political timetables and budgets .
The Commission has made a clearer commitment in this regard .
Economic recovery will largely come as a result of changing our energy model .
The future of the economy is the future of the green economy .
The Commission has also reaffirmed this goal .
With regard to the information society , we agree on the many challenges that we face in order to guarantee access to information and communication technologies for everyone everywhere .
The Commissioners that attended our Committee made significant , specific commitments , and we have given them a vote of confidence , but we guarantee that we will ensure that those commitments are fulfilled .
I voted ' no ' to the question of whether we consider Barroso II suitable as a motor , initiator and inspirer of the European project .
Barroso is not the powerful leader we need .
He allowed five extremely crucial years to pass by .
Years in which the EU could have pursued a less neoliberal and a more social policy .
Years in which Europe could have promoted SMEs .
Years in which he could have helped support the quality of European , independent media and could have helped democratise European decision making in order to give millions of citizens more confidence again in the European cooperation project .
None of this happened .
By blindly focusing on liberalisation , high stock market prices and macro-economic growth , the social and sustainable face of the EU became foggy .
The world is being ravaged by three crises : a financial-economic one , a social one and an environmental one .
A lack of a collective response is feeding public cynicism and political nihilism .
Barroso 's weak and vague policy plan gives little hope for change .
He accepted that Member States sometimes push entirely incapable candidates to the fore and he split the portfolios of some commissioners up , resulting in uncertainty about who is now actually responsible for crucial policy areas .
Barroso lacks vision and political boldness , and this does Europe no favours .
That explains my ' No ' vote .
Parliament and the Commission will confront key issues for the European Union , namely the reversal of the crisis by means of the recovery of the economy and employment , the balancing of the public finances of the Member States and the negotiation of the financial framework for the post-2013 period , regarding which I would emphasise the importance of the cohesion policy .
I had the opportunity to question the Commissioner-designate for Regional Policy , Johannes Hahn , with regard to his interest in the creation of a specific programme of permanent financial support for the outermost regions .
I also presented him with a proposal for a more flexible system of eligibility for receipt of structural funds for ' transition ' regions , i.e. those which find themselves caught between the objectives of ' convergence ' and ' competitiveness and employment ' . As well as displaying competence and rigour , the Commissioner-designate showed he was prepared to examine these possibilities , which gives me confidence in his future willingness and sensitivity towards outermost regions such as Madeira .
I gave my vote of confidence to this team of Commissioners , which will be led by José Manuel Barroso , as in general , they have shown good technical preparation , seriousness and ambition to be able to respond to the challenges of the EU without forgetting the values which underpin its creation , namely solidarity and territorial cohesion .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of appointment of the Commission , although in the case of several commissioners I would gladly have expressed a separate opinion .
As we all know , the European Parliament votes only on the composition of the entire Commission .
Despite the fact that I cannot say I am delighted with the choice of Baroness Ashton , the College of Commissioners is dominated by extremely competent and experienced people .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to which I belong , decided to endorse the Commission , to enable the European Union to work efficiently .
If I had voted against appointment of the Commission it would have been a demonstration and could have been seen as a lack of loyalty towards my group , but it would not have affected Parliament 's decision .
Mr Barroso 's new Commission includes experienced and wise politicians such as Mr Barnier and Mrs Reding , with whom I am going to work closely .
Mr Lewandowski , who is responsible for the budget , will certainly be an excellent commissioner , too .
We can be truly proud .
The European Parliament was also able to influence Bulgaria , which replaced Mrs Jeleva , who was not very well qualified in the field of humanitarian aid and development , with Mrs Georgieva .
I consider this to be a great success and a constructive contribution of the European Parliament to the creation of the new Commission .
Making sound suggestions and having an indirect influence on Mr Barroso and Member States is , I think , the most effective way we can work , today .
Voting against the Commission would have prolonged the expensive negotiations , and the final effect would not necessarily have been better than the one which we have achieved .
The members of the European Commission have the vote of confidence of the political representatives of capital , but not of the workers .
The members of the European Commission were appointed by the neoliberal and social-democrat governments of the Member States of the EU and the vote of the European Parliament , the sole political criterion for their election being their ability to serve the interests of capital without hindrance .
The members of the European Commission took pains to confirm this during the hearings in the European Parliament 's committees by unhesitatingly supporting : the imperialist nature of the EU , the strength of its anti-grassroots policy and its military interventions at international level , in order to promote the profitability of capital ; their dedication to the completion of the single market and the four Maastricht freedoms , competitiveness and capitalist restructurings , in order to put suitable conditions in place for the concentration of capital ; the stepping-up of anti-grassroots measures in an all-out attack on the workers ' labour , wage , social and insurance rights , in order to increase the profits of the monopolies ; an increase in and the strengthening of reactionary prosecuting tools , in order to repress workers ' and grassroots demonstrations .
The MEPs of the Greek Communist Party voted against the European Commission , which will maintain and intensify the policy of exploitation of the workers , poor farmers and the self-employed .
in writing . - We want a pragmatic European Commission that will push through reform , including deregulation and reductions in EU expenditure , focusing on managerial issues rather than political integration .
While some of the nominated Commissioners are competent , others are not .
The post of High Representative is a product of the Lisbon Treaty .
I do not approve of that treaty or its creations .
It has no democratic legitimacy .
Baroness Ashton was chosen through a back-room deal among Europe 's socialist parties , an afterthought by the British Prime Minister .
Besides having no experience of the required tasks , she has a highly dubious past as National Treasurer of CND .
This subversive organisation sought to disarm Britain unilaterally at the height of the Cold War , and spread alarm and despondency .
There are many nominees with Communist backgrounds .
Some nominees , such as László Andor , demonstrated little understanding of their portfolios and seemed inclined to impose more and more unhelpful regulation .
It is quite wrong that Parliament cannot vote on individual Commissioners but must vote on the College as a whole .
While I could approve some individuals , others I would vote against .
In the interests of the solidarity of our group , I abstained .
Mr Barroso , the pragmatic reason for voting ' yes ' to the Commission-designate is simply that the work that needs to be done can now finally be started .
This will save valuable taxpayers ' money .
Mr Barroso , you have shown skill in electing the Commission .
Some of the Commissioners-designate are excellent .
There are also some who definitely have the potential to develop .
They should be given the opportunity , as they wish , to familiarise themselves with Europe 's challenges .
However , there are some Commissioners-designate who leave something to be desired , do not seem to possess the specialised knowledge and seem to lack the necessary ambition to occupy the top positions in Europe .
For these reasons , I have rejected the proposal for the Commission-designate made up in this way .
I would like to see commissioners appointed in a much more transparent way - and I would like better qualified female commissioners to be found .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution and , hence , of the new European Commission .
The European Parliament is not giving a blank cheque to Mr Barroso and the College of Commissioners .
However , I met with President Barroso on a very regular basis throughout his first term of office when I oversaw , during the same period , the work of Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I was therefore able to observe his sensitive approach to managing the work of the European Commission and the respect he shows for his fellow human beings and for the common good .
I am also very pleased for the Slovak candidate , who was exposed to unfair attacks born of ignorance and carried out for nothing other than petty political reasons .
When slander and minorities are used , by means of a smear campaign , to question the integrity of a political figure for petty political reasons , it marks the beginning of the end of the institutional political culture .
I genuinely wish all the members of the European Commission well in their efforts to do an excellent job .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Difficult monetary , economic and social situation of Eurozone countries ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the difficult monetary , economic and social situation of eurozone countries .
Madam President , we are in an unprecedented situation in the euro area , because this is the first global financial crisis since the euro has been in existence .
What is happening in the euro area and in the whole of the European Union is that although it did not cause the crisis and it is not where the crisis began - we know that it began in the United States - we have suffered its effects just as much as the country where it began .
Obviously , the situation of public deficits has arisen as a result of the crisis and of positive action by governments to prevent , among other things , the collapse of the financial system .
These deficits inevitably mean that governments have less room for manoeuvre in terms of their budgetary policies .
The debate concerns the economic situation , the monetary situation and the social situation .
Regarding the economic situation , it must be said that the euro area as a whole has now come out of the recession and it has also avoided the risk of deflation , although there are obvious disparities in the rates of growth and growth is still not entirely sustained .
We need to ensure that growth is sustained and consolidated , which is a fundamental objective of economic policy throughout the euro area , but we are no longer in a recession .
The euro area as a whole is no longer in recession .
It is , however , true that job creation is falling behind .
This year , there will still be severe unemployment throughout the euro area , but we are on the right path towards growth .
In fact , this is one of the matters that is going to be dealt with in the informal meeting of the European Council on Thursday : the importance of growth in order to return to sustained growth , maintain the European social model and begin to create jobs once again , good-quality jobs .
Regarding the monetary system , despite the fact that there is tension in the securities markets , the European Union and its institutions have acted correctly .
The European Central Bank has done its job well and is continuing to do so by gauging the strategies for bringing us out of the crisis .
It is therefore reasonable for the stimuli not to be abandoned during 2010 .
In fact , the European Central Bank is gradually phasing out those stimuli , and is already removing some of the measures that it adopted .
An example of this is removing the cash advantages granted to banks , which has been possible because the credit markets have gradually returned to normal .
It should also be pointed out that the Eurogroup and Ecofin have managed the crisis well , and have also created a supervision structure for the financial system that is going to be debated in this House .
We hope that this will be one of the central elements of the political debate during the term of the Spanish Presidency .
Regarding the social situation , we are obviously suffering the consequences of high unemployment throughout the euro area .
Although there are also disparities in unemployment levels across the euro area , it is undoubtedly the main issue for Europeans at the moment .
They want employment , they want a return to growth , which will create employment .
Not the volatile , precarious employment that may have existed in some countries of the euro area , but good-quality employment .
Among other things , it should also be pointed out that it was obviously high unemployment that triggered the ' automatic stabilisers ' , which resulted in unemployment aid and subsidies .
In turn , these influenced the deficits that the Member States have as a result of our political and social system , which protects those in the most vulnerable situations , such as those who lose their jobs .
In the future - and this is another subject that will be dealt with on Thursday at the informal European Council meeting - there will have to be a policy of employability , which we call ' Europe 2020 ' , as a model of growth and creating quality jobs .
To conclude , Madam President , I believe that in this case , it has been demonstrated that it has been absolutely vital to coordinate and strengthen the euro area and that it continues to be a place where there is significant monetary and economic protection .
It has been demonstrated that the euro area needs to be strengthened and that it will be possible to expand it when there are countries that can meet the requirements , but that expansion is also a positive thing .
Also - and I will now conclude - it is essential that we move towards integration and economic convergence in the European Union .
There are still disparities between the economic positions in the Union .
We need to move from monetary union towards true economic union , as stated in the treaties .
The treaties talked about economic and monetary union , and it was described as such , but monetary union was implemented before economic union .
The coordination of economic , employment and social policies is laid down in the treaties .
It is an obligation and it is one of the principles , one of the lines or ideas raised by the Spanish Presidency .
Coordinated public policies have been effective when they have truly been coordinated .
This was the case when the European Economic Recovery Plan was made , when fiscal policies were implemented around maintaining the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact , which was vital .
It was also the case when coordinated financial policies were undertaken , for example , bank guarantees and increasing deposit guarantee funds .
In short , it is about what economists call ' economies of scale ' also being done at a political level , because at a political level , significant coordination produces good results .
This is the Council 's vision of this difficult situation , but we are coming out of it and we need to emerge from it much more strongly and solidly .
This will undoubtedly be one of the central objectives of the informal meeting of the European Council on Thursday :
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is concerned about the substantial economic and fiscal challenges that Greece faces .
The difficult situation in Greece is a matter of common concern for the euro area and for the EU as a whole , as large and persistent domestic external imbalances threaten the macro-financial stability of the country with a serious risk of spillovers into other parts of the euro area .
The Greek authorities and the Greek people are aware of the challenge in front of them .
On 15 January , the government presented an ambitious stability programme intended to tackle these issues .
The programme envisages a deficit reduction from an estimated 12.7 % in 2009 to below 3 % in 2012 , starting with an adjustment of four points of GDP this year .
This programme displays an appropriate degree of ambition given the sheer size of the consolidation needed and is a front-loaded programme .
In more detail , the Greek authorities have announced a package of concrete measures for 2010 .
Some of these measures have already been submitted to the Greek Parliament and are to be implemented shortly .
Plans for the later years of the programme are less detailed at this stage .
Last week , on 3 February , the Commission adopted an integrated approach and surveillance mechanism which combines our assessment of the stability programme , a recommendation on the excessive deficit procedure to bring the budget deficit below 3 % in 2012 , as the government established in the programme , and another recommendation using Article 121 ( 4 ) of the EU Treaty for the first time to ensure that Greece 's economic policies are consistent with our broad economic policy guidelines and with the proper functioning of our Economic and Monetary Union .
We have also started an infringement procedure to ensure that Greece addresses the problems that have prevented the reporting of reliable budgetary statistics until now and the Commission announced its immediate initiative on audit powers for Eurostat .
As regards the stability programme , the Commission fully supports Greece in its efforts to redress a difficult economic and fiscal situation .
The measures and policy intentions outlined in this programme are an important step in the right direction .
The successful large government bond issue on 25 January seems to indicate that market participants share this view , albeit at a high interest premium , and increases in the spreads thereafter also show that they remain cautious .
However , there are risks to the programme targets and the medium-term fiscal adjustment .
The macro-economic scenario outlined in the programme is rather optimistic and there is some uncertainty about the underlying revenue projections , especially the estimated impact of efforts to tackle tax evasion during an economic downturn .
Given recent market developments , interest and expenditure projections also seem to be on the low side .
As far as the recommendation on the excessive deficit procedure is concerned , our recommendations as regard measures to be taken this year rely fully on the measures announced by the Greek authorities in their stability programme .
They include measures to be implemented in the first quarter of this year , such as wage bill cuts , reduction in public employment , progress with health care and pension reforms , tax and excise duties increases and tax administration reform .
Some of the fiscal consolidation measures have already been submitted to the Greek Parliament and should be implemented shortly .
The Greek authorities are invited by the Commission in our proposal to the Council to present by mid-March a detailed implementation report announcing adopted measures and the calendar of the announced measures .
An evaluation of the risks should also be carried out so that , in case risks materialise , compensatory measures should be put in place as necessary .
In this context , the Commission welcomes the announcement on 2 February of further measures , notably a nominal public sector wage freeze and an increase in excise duties on fuels to safeguard the budgetary target for this year , as well as the Greek authorities ' readiness to adopt and swiftly implement additional measures if needed .
As regards the later years of the programme , we call for further adjustments of a permanent nature , continued tax administration reforms and an improvement in the budgetary framework .
Obviously , Greece is also requested to further pursue efforts to improve the collection and processing of general government aid .
Given that plans are less detailed , we propose setting up a tight reporting system in which the Greek authorities will report on a quarterly basis on measures implemented , results achieved and measures to be implemented .
This tight reporting system will ensure that the plans will materialise as planned .
We also adopted the recommendation to put an end to the inconsistency with the broad guidelines of the economic policies and the risks of jeopardising the proper functioning of economic and monetary union , given the continuous loss of competitiveness of the Greek economy , and the widening of external imbalances as well as by the large spread in financial markets vis-à-vis benchmark bonds .
Moreover , co-movements in spreads in other countries are also evidence of clear risks of spillovers to other Member States .
In this context , Greece is expected to adopt a comprehensive structural reform programme aimed at increasing the effectiveness of the public administration , stepping up pension and health care reform , improving labour-market functioning and the effectiveness of the wage bargaining system , enhancing product market functioning and the business environment and maintaining banking and financial sector stability .
What are the next steps in this very detailed process of surveillance ?
Our recommendations will be discussed by the Eurogroup and Ecofin next week , and then a first report should come in mid-March elaborating on the calendar for implementation to safeguard the 2010 targets .
Then , on a quarterly basis , starting in May , Greece should report on the way in which they are responding to the Council decision and recommendation .
Each report will be subject to a Commission assessment .
It is clear that , if there are signs that risks are materialising , additional measures would need to be implemented .
Therefore , it is crucial that the Greek Government stands ready to adopt additional measures if necessary , as they have already indicated .
In conclusion , we are living in an unprecedented situation but we are facing it .
Greece has adopted an ambitious programme to correct its deficit and to reform its public administration and its economy .
It deserves support in this difficult task , and the Commission supports Greece .
The integrated surveillance mechanism , together with the willingness of the authorities to tackle the problems , is the guardian of a successful implementation of fiscal consolidation measures and structural reforms that will put Greece back on a sustainable path .
Timely and rigorous implementation of the budgetary measures and of structural reforms - and both fiscal measures and structural reforms are contained in the programme adopted in Greece by the Greek authorities - together with the tight monitoring of the situation , is the key to finding an adequate solution to the present tensions in our markets .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has taken the initiative for this debate because the problems in the euro area countries make a strong European approach very urgent .
That is what we are concerned about .
In recent years , Member States have too often distanced themselves from the Stability and Growth Pact .
That is why I call on the Council today , and not only where Greece is concerned , to commit itself more widely and fully to much stronger coordination of monetary policy at the informal summit meeting this coming Thursday and at the Ecofin meeting next week .
The Spanish Presidency can also set a good example in its own country , because the situation there is also urgent .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would like to offer my heartfelt support to the way in which the European Commission is dealing with Greece .
Admittedly it is months too late , but it is absolutely necessary .
The same must also apply to other countries in the danger zone .
The solution lies not in providing more money from the European budget , but in actually implementing the reform plans .
I hope that you are also working on an emergency scenario , should one be necessary , and are therefore investigating all options , including cooperating with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
At the same time , we must keep a cool head because , given the extent of the budget problem , the reactions on the financial markets are seriously exaggerated .
This underscores the urgent need to quickly strengthen European regulation of the financial markets .

Madam President , Mr Almunia , during this transition period in particular , I thank you for your commitment to your previous mandate and I wish you luck in your new role .
I would also like to extend this wish to your successor , Mr Rehn .
I wish him courage and luck for the important tasks he is taking on .
There are three things we can learn from the present situation .
The first is that what Mr Barroso has presented to us as Europe 2020 is lacking in substance .
It is a long way from being sufficient to create the coherence in the European Union that we urgently need in order to prevent the situation that we are currently facing from occurring again in the future .
This strategy needs substance , and I hope that the scheduled milestones in the next few weeks will provide the opportunity to improve on it .
We urgently need better coordination of economic policy .
The Spanish Presidency is right to emphasise this .
The Presidency should not allow itself to be intimidated in this regard .
The second thing we can learn from the current situation is that some Member States are , of course , in need of modernisation and the figures are surely correct in this regard .
However , there is a need for modernisation in more than one country .
There are also countries that have to do more , because they are able to do more .
I have no doubt that the new Greek Finance Minister , Mr Papakonstantinou , will do an excellent job and I do not know any sincere politicians who would dispute that .
He deserves our trust and we should give him our support .
The third thing we can learn is that the European Union must be armed .
If the markets put the euro area to the test , then Europe must be a position to respond to this and it must be possible for the response to be unconventional .
If there is further speculation against individual countries , we must be in a position to make credit available under average European rating terms .
That will need to be organised .
We can find support for this kind of action in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would say to the Council and the Commission : be prepared for the need to negotiate .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I would like to tell the Spanish Presidency that we fully support its analysis of the political will to progress towards new tools of governance and towards an economic union , and not just a monetary union , as Mr Bullmann also pointed out .
You will have our political group 's full support in this undertaking .
In actual fact , leaving aside the Greek case , which is at stake , I believe that we need to review all the tools of economic governance of the euro area and , in particular , the Stability and Growth Pact .
More than half of the Member States in the euro area no longer adhere to the Stability and Growth Pact .
Moreover , let us not forget that , until fairly recently - until the crisis - Spain was fully compliant with the Stability and Growth Pact criteria , but that did not stop it , two years later , from finding itself in a radically different situation , with a 20 % unemployment rate , or from completely disregarding those criteria .
What does this mean ?
It means that , with a Stability and Growth Pact that is narrowly focused on public finance criteria , which are absolutely necessary but insufficient , until recently , Spain controlled its public debt and its public deficit but , at the same time , allowed its private debt to soar .
There has been an explosion in private debt , a speculative bubble on the property market , and a recession on a much greater scale than elsewhere , with the result that a massive injection of public money is required .
This is indeed proof that , by having a blinkered view of the Stability and Growth Pact and a view of euro area governance that is focused solely on public debt , one fails to see the bigger picture , which would make it possible to anticipate the next crisis and to prevent it .
I should therefore like to know what proposals both the Spanish Presidency and the Commission have put on the table in order , of course , to reaffirm the Stability and Growth Pact and , above all , to integrate it into a more comprehensive system .
Secondly , you say - and you are right - that public finances need to be controlled better , that a return to more stable debt levels is necessary .
In your view , does that depend solely on a decrease in public spending , or does it also depend on the ability to increase certain taxes ?
If so , which ones ?
Also , what role can fiscal cooperation between ourselves play in enabling the Member States to regain some room for manoeuvre that will allow them to make up their deficits , not only by reducing expenditure , but also by regaining some room for manoeuvre so as to increase their revenues ?
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , sovereign debt spreads have widened dramatically over recent months for certain euro Member States , leading to much speculation in the markets about defaults , bail-outs and even the viability of certain Member States within the euro framework .
The EU , through the ECB , cannot impose fiscal criteria on these Member States .
Nevertheless , the effects of this crisis have repercussions for the EU and the ECB in terms of having to orchestrate a solution , international confidence in the euro model and the future smooth operation of the euro sovereign debt markets .
We have spent a lot of time and energy in the last year investigating procedures , oversight , transparency and effective risk management of international capital market participants .
These measures affect the secondary market in securities , but I believe there is a strong case to apply the same principles to the primary market , particularly in the unique situation of the eurozone debt-issuing members .
Specifically in the UK , Northern Rock became insolvent as it raised money in the short-term markets to fund long-term liabilities .
When the market questioned the business model and refused to lend , the business model de facto collapsed .
Certain euro Member States are facing the same issues right now .
I propose that the ECB , whilst not having any power over budgets or capital-raising , can have an input over the debt maturity profile if it felt that a Member State is over exposed through short-term market movements .
Greece has to raise EUR 31 billion over the next few weeks .
Portugal has to roll over existing debt equivalent to 17 % of its GDP at a time when France also has to roll over existing debt equivalent to 20 % of its GDP .
The maturity profile of debt is left to Member States , but the cumulative effect of tapping the market simultaneously leaves the EU exposed in times of crisis , leading to difficulties in raising capital in the markets .
In the eurozone , perhaps the ECB should have an oversight of accumulative debt issuance and advise Member States on responsible management .
In conclusion , a simple first step would be for the EU , and specifically eurozone Member States , to have a sustainable debt maturity strategy as the absolute debt level at this time is less important than the amount of debt which is up for renewal .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the new Commission is starting its job with a huge lie : not only are the Treaty of Lisbon and the Lisbon Strategy not helping to protect us from the crisis ; they are one of the causes which drove us into it .
They have failed resoundingly .
The global crisis highlighted the boundaries , the strengths and the structural problems of the European global development model .
The Stability Pact no longer exists ; the crisis abolished it , as proven by the deficits and rate at which public debt is increasing in Germany , Spain , Italy , Portugal , Great Britain and Greece .
The crisis does not only concern Greece .
It concerns the European Union and , because of the decisions taken , it concerns the euro area .
The Left warned against and opposed these policies .
Unfortunately , the Right and the social democrats are insisting on using the same tools to deal with the crisis .
With the Lisbon Strategy , we have dismantled the social state .
We talk about a Europe of cooperation , while the European Central Bank is lending to merchant banks at a rate of interest of 1 % , but allowing the Member States to borrow from the money markets at a rate of 6 % .
The European Union is following the United States in terms of its model and its military services .
How is it that we accept the US credit-rating firms , such as Moody and others , as the official judges of the economic policy of the Member States and let them dictate economic policy ?
We therefore need to change the Stability Pact and replace it with a Development and Employment Pact .
The European Union cannot and must not compete at global level on the basis of wage costs .
Finally , we must discourage the promotion of competitiveness on the basis of a deterioration in labour relations and rights .

Madam President , earlier we heard the programming statement by Mr Barroso and his new team of Commissioners .
I personally was left with the impression that all of us who are members here are in the same boat , not the same armada .
There is a huge difference .
Based , therefore , on Mr Barroso 's programming statements , I look forward to the future of the Union being designed on the basis of stronger ties between the Member States , especially at economic , social and development level .
However , I fear that there will be a huge increase in ' stray ' capital , in ' nomadic capital ' which moves and is moved on the markets .
By promoting and then abandoning local markets , like a passing tornado , it is destroying the real economies and reaping profits with no real investment .
The euro , of course , limited the potential for ' stray ' capital to speculate on exchange rates .
That , therefore , is the reason for the attack suffered today by Greece , which needs special support .
Bearing in mind , therefore , that the European Union , according to the 2008 statistics , produces approximately 38 % of global wealth , I think that , in the present monetary crisis , the European Union failed or did not wish to exert its powers of economic intervention on the global financial markets .
I wish to send a message both to this Parliament and to all my fellow members ; a message from Schumpeter .
There is a creative destruction which will leave Europe , the European currency and Greece unscathed , but which is absolutely necessary in order to demonstrate , both to Greece and the other Member States , the solidarity of the Member States .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what is happening in Greece and Portugal today , and in Spain and Ireland tomorrow , is scandalous .
These same Anglo-Saxon agencies , which sat back obligingly while the rogues issued and traded in toxic assets and which did not see anything coming , are now the strictest of all towards those Member States that rushed to the aid of a financial sector that was undeserving of it .
The crisis caused by the irresponsibility of the markets and the banks , and this huge amount of aid , are directly responsible for the increase in the public deficits and the public debt that these same markets are today trying to penalise .
So much for the ethical capitalism announced by Mr Sarkozy , the European Union and the G20 .
The only lesson the banksters have learnt from the crisis is that the taxpayer is an endless source of resources , profits and guarantees , for rumour has it that the scale of this panic is down to a US bank , which received US Government aid , and to two hedge funds , also from the United States , which want to profit both from the exorbitant interest rates imposed on Greece and from the credit default swap market , those insurance policies on government borrowing , which themselves are the subject of independent speculation .
It will not be enough to regulate hedge funds - which you are scared to do - or the derivatives markets , as Mr Barnier is proposing .
There is no point in creating a European economic government .
The Twenty-Seven are in the same mess anyway , and solidarity is not an option .
It is the free international movement of capital that must be called into question , otherwise there will not be a recovery , but a repeat of the crisis .
( FR ) Madam President , President , Commissioner , like Mrs Wortmann-Kool before me , I am , of course , going to tell you that we approve of the positions adopted by the Commission to deal with the current situation in Greece .
As regards the Spanish Presidency , we are pleased to note the objective that you are setting yourself to improve the coordination of economic policies .
This strong political will must also be applied in order to see through two current and important projects : the structuring of a genuine form of financial supervision and the regulation of hedge funds .
True , Europe must not be a fortress , but nor must it be a sieve .
In both these areas , the Presidency really must have room to manoeuvre so that it can negotiate productively with Parliament .
We expect the Council , at its next meeting , to send out a strong signal to the public and to the market : to the public to restore confidence in the euro , and to the market to show its solidarity with Greece .
The Council must give a strong indication that it will not let itself be overawed by the attempts to destabilise the euro made by certain speculators who have no hesitation in speculating against those Member States that are currently facing economic and social difficulties .


( FR ) Madam President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioners , this debate is important , not only because the euro is under attack , but also because on Thursday , we will have the first summit under the leadership of President Van Rompuy .
I note that , today , Europeans are standing firm and are convinced that we cannot allow the IMF to intervene in Greece .
I welcome this , because it would mean closing the door on everything that we have been requesting for so many years , namely economic governance of the euro area .
When we call for economic governance of the euro area , it means that , faced with the volatility of the markets , we need to equip ourselves with the means to react and to keep pace with the markets .
Clearly , today , we are failing on that score .
What I also see is that the situation within our European apparatus today is such that if you are outside the euro area , you can be ' helped ' , whereas if you are inside it , things are much more complicated .
I never imagined the euro area becoming a zone in which there is no solidarity .
The very operation of the euro area is based on the concept of solidarity .
None of the member countries of the zone , no matter what its export strategy , no matter what its deficit level , no matter what its public debt level , has a chance of emerging from the crisis if one of the links is attacked .
Yet what are we seeing today ?
A mechanism that works in such a way that the financial markets pit the different parties against one another , test our capacity for solidarity and test our ability to keep the very concept of the euro area alive .
For the euro area concept is the idea that , if we want to give ourselves room for manoeuvre , to look beyond speculation as the only mechanism available , then we have to develop our own strategy .
However , this ability to basically become somewhat immune to the way in which the foreign exchange markets were operating prior to the adoption of the euro , with the sovereign debt rating mechanisms , has been reintroduced within the euro area itself .
This is what we must focus our attention on .
This goes far beyond the proposals that are today on the table , and it is incumbent on President Van Rompuy to embark , next Thursday , on those projects , which are very important .
( NL ) Greece only recently gave an insight into the actual extent of its debts .
They are much bigger than had been thought .
The budget deficit is approaching 13 % .
Unfortunately , Spain , Portugal and Italy also have high budget deficits .
Europe must not bring in a Trojan Horse .
That would indeed be the case if support were granted to these countries , as some people wish .
That must not happen , because we would then be rewarding bad policy with a bonus .
The Stability and Growth Pact clearly indicates how countries must act in the event of a crisis and the pact primarily indicates what must be done before a crisis occurs , namely by putting a strict budget and spending policy in place in good time .
The Netherlands made a start on this as much as a year ago .
The Southern European Member States have left it too late .
Fortunately , they have now made a start - better late than never - on putting their affairs in order .
I am watching for the effects of the measures they are taking with great interest .
If stock markets and the euro fall a little in the meantime , then that will not be a disaster for either investors or export companies , far from it , in fact .
( EL ) Madam President , the talk about speculative pressures on the euro area and on the euro and the talk of the risk of economies collapsing in Greece and other countries in southern Europe as a result of public finance problems , excessive debt and deficit is being used to the full by the European Union , the bourgeois governments and other imperialist associations , as an excuse for speeding up and stepping up capitalist restructurings and increasing the degree of exploitation of the working and grassroots classes .
The European Union and the governments are blackmailing and terrorising the workers in order to get them to consent to the rules of the market economy and the European construct of big business , in order to impose wage and pension cuts , flexible forms of employment , drastic cutbacks in social benefits and a barrage of harsh tax measures , and to uproot poor and middling farmers from their land .
It is a lie to say that the capitalist crisis is due solely to maladministration and corruption .
Debt and deficits are the creations of the capitalist system , of the Treaty of Maastricht and , of course , of the Lisbon Strategy .
That is why the bourgeois governments and the European Union , which bear full responsibility for the situation that has arisen , are calling on the working classes , the grassroots classes to submit and join national campaigns .
However , the workers should turn their back , because the interests of the plutocracy are not the same as the interests of the workers , given that we live in a capitalist society .
The workers are demonstrating en masse in response to the war that has been declared and we welcome that and support them .
( NL ) Greece may even threaten to declare itself bankrupt along with other countries , thanks to years of weak left-wing policy by left-wing politicians who have held office in Europe : Gordon Brown , Barroso , Schulz , Cohn-Bendit , Guy Verhofstadt .
Mr Verhofstadt , could you please also listen to me ?
Billions have flowed to weak Member States and , even at the time of its accession , Greece appeared to be manipulating the figures , but no , you were blind to that .
Europe had to and would expand .
Thanks to failing politicians such as you , these economies have been artificially inflated , and now they are deflating .
What is happening now ?
You are continuing as normal with your disastrous policy .
Who is knocking on the door of the European Union ?
Even more poor countries : Albania , Iceland , Macedonia , Croatia , Serbia , Kosovo and even Turkey .
Poor countries that are also suffering under enormous corruption .
Then there is Spain , which , despite high unemployment , has legalised some 700 000 illegal immigrants , who have also brought their families here - and there is presently 20 % unemployment in Spain !
Mr President , this policy of immigration must stop .
( EL ) Madam President , there can be no doubt that Greece , like other countries in the euro area , faces a huge public deficit and debt and , as you know and as the Commissioner mentioned , the Greek Government has already tabled a fully substantiated and ambitious but realistic programme to deal with them .
There can equally be no doubt that Greece , like other countries in the euro area , has been , and is , at the epicentre of coordinated speculative pressure , the basic aim of which is to undermine the euro and economic cohesion in the euro area .
This is not a Greek , a Portuguese or a Spanish problem ; it is a European problem and we have an obligation to demonstrate the real causes of this situation .
As we did a year ago , we are stressing that the global credit crisis is linked to the uncontrolled operation of the financial markets and we must be equally direct in stating today that the uncontrolled operation of speculative capital is a basic parameter of the current situation in the euro area and is to the detriment of European taxpayers ' money .
So our first obligation today must be to defend the euro and the euro area against speculative pressures and , secondly , we must realise that we can no longer remain fixed on close monetary unification and that , until real economic convergence is achieved between the euro area states , both the so-called slow-lane economies and the overall credibility of the euro area and the stability of the euro will be affected .
( DE ) Madam President , it has been rare for me to be overlooked .
Nevertheless , I will gladly begin my speech now .
We all know that not all Member States in the euro area have been equally hard hit by the financial and economic crisis .
In my opinion , however , countries that have been particularly hard hit need to take more extensive measures than those that have not been affected as badly .
The stability of the euro must , of course , remain the crucial and overarching goal .
That also applies to the measures for consolidating the budgets of the individual Member States of the euro area .
These measures are not only in the interests of the countries themselves , but also of the countries that are not as badly affected .
However , we must also consider carefully what measures are necessary and what measures might perhaps be less effective in helping the countries out of this crisis .
Although we could help the countries with the greatest economic problems in the monetary union to obtain money on favourable terms , for example , by means of a Union loan to several euro area states , this favourable external credit would hardly be able to alleviate the acute problems they are facing and would also do nothing about the causes of the problems .
In my view , these countries have , in the past , failed to make important reforms , for which they are now paying the price .
The problems are therefore largely of their own making and therefore need to be solved in future by the relevant countries themselves .
For that reason , we need to implement strict austerity and reform programmes , as announced by the Commission .
In my opinion , it would be disastrous if the taxpayer always ends up footing the bill .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , many interesting things are being said here , but I believe that we must have the courage to call into question the very criteria on which the European Union is today based .
There is even an article in the Treaty of Lisbon and the Treaty of Maastricht that prohibits the European Union from assisting Greece .
The fact of having given speculators a free rein as one has done by allowing the completely free movement of capital , and the fact of advocating tax competition , which results in zero taxation on capital and companies , means that , little by little , the national budgets are drying up , and now , under proposals such as the one made earlier by Mr Almunia , the peoples are being asked to carry the can by having their salaries squeezed , their retirement age pushed back and their social security systems destroyed .
Therefore , every single one of these criteria must be changed , the Growth and Stability Pact must be replaced with a human development pact for work , employment and training , and the decision must be taken to change the role and the tasks of the European Central Bank so that the euro becomes a unifying common currency and not a currency to be speculated on , as it is today .
The decision must be taken to introduce new initiatives against tax evasion and capital flight , and to do away with tax havens , as had been promised .
Lastly , courage must be shown in order to tax speculative capital movements .
Madam President , there is a natural relationship between the current health of a state 's economy and the value of its currency .
As the economy grows , so should the value of its currency so that it can enjoy the cheapness of goods and services that it chooses to import .
Equally , as an economy stagnates or even declines , so will the value of its currency , leading to an export boom and recovery of the economy , assuming , of course , its manufacturing and service industries have not been destroyed by globalisation .
However , the currency of a nation trapped in the euro straitjacket cannot adjust to the needs of its economy and people .
This crippled Britain between 1990 and 1992 when we were in the Exchange Rate Mechanism .
Now it is strangling Greece and other client states of the euro .
This should be a warning for any country outside the eurozone .
Join us at your peril .
In the short term , you will see the needs of your economy unattended .
When you do decide to withdraw , you will be faced with a debt to the eurozone that has been inflated by your own devalued currency .
( ES ) Madam President , we are here for the first time in the history of the euro to talk about the financial situation of a handful of countries .
I am emphasising the word ' countries ' , because the Spanish Presidency sounded like it was talking about outer space , and Commissioner Almunia only mentioned Greece .
I would like to know whether the Commissioner continues to maintain in his closing speech that the problems of Spain and Portugal are similar to those of Greece and if so , what he would do about it .
However , we are here to talk about these financial situations because the finances of a few could ruin the credibility of the currency of all and open the door to a two-speed Europe .
The gap could increase when the exit strategy referred to by the Spanish Presidency is implemented , because we could find that the less developed countries have to deal with monetary difficulties and harsher monetary policies and , more importantly , have to use much more money to pay off debts and much less money to create employment .
Believe me , ladies and gentlemen , without a sustainable economy , it will be impossible to balance finances .
Without employment , tax revenue will continue to fall and unemployment benefit payouts will continue to rise .
We are facing a crisis of confidence , and when there is a crisis of confidence , the first thing we have to do is tell the truth .
We have to say how we have ended up here .
What are the affected countries doing to get themselves out of debt ?
Are the stability pacts credible or not ?
Above all , we need to know what they are doing to straighten out their economies , because as I said before , without sustained growth , there will not be a sustainable economy or sustainable finances .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , in a monetary union , there can be no attacks on Greece , Spain , Ireland or Portugal , but rather attacks on the Union and attacks on the euro , which make the most of any signs of fragility or any breaches which open up within the solidity of the bloc as a whole .
In this context , I must inform you , Commissioner , that your statements were inappropriate and dangerous but , coming from someone with your experience and background , I can only assume that they reflect an outpouring against the stubbornness and inaction by the Commission of which you are part because monetary union is much more , as you well know , than a single currency , a Stability Pact or a single Central Bank .
For monetary union to be sustainable over the long term , it cannot limit itself to looking at short-term , nominal indicators , it cannot leave out the real economy , economic growth or employment and it cannot ignore the substantial internal divergences of a regional and social character which occur alongside it and which the Commission detected very well in the work which it did on the ' EMU @ 10 ' .
For these reasons , each member country has its obligations .
Whoever believes , however , that monetary union is a project which is now complete is making an unpardonable mistake .
We need to stop talking and start acting .
The Lisbon Strategy did not work because it had neither means nor instruments .
Today , if we want monetary union to persist and remain firm , it is necessary to replace terms such as ' solidarity ' and ' economic policy coordination ' with concrete means and instruments which , up to now , have not been there .
The Commission has just been put in office not to continue doing what it has done before but to learn lessons and initiate a new phase .
That is what I expect and I trust them to do it .
( PT ) Madam President , in this debate , it was fundamental to ensure that the European Union would make a break with its monetarist policies and the blind criteria of the Stability Pact .
It was fundamental to back social progress in order to give priority to the resolution of the problems of unemployment and poverty , in order to support production and the creation of jobs with rights , in order to guarantee economic and social cohesion , in order to implement budgetary support measures for those countries in the most serious situations , particularly by advancing funds without the need for the national governments to match them .
Unfortunately , however , nothing of that was heard here .
Commissioner Almunia insisted on the same policies and the same neoliberal recipes , attempting to make the same people as always bear the consequences of the bad policies of the European Union , including , Commissioner , your own responsibility for the sad and lamentable statements which you made regarding Greece , Spain and Portugal , which , in the case of my own country , Portugal , for example , resulted in the unleashing of a speculative attack .
The speculators did indeed profit from your statements .
My own country and others , however , lost as a result of those statements and the policies which are currently in place .
For these reasons , we tell you that it is the time to change policy .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , the euro is our shield and it has proven to be a stabilising force .
That also demonstrates that the Maastricht criteria and the Stability and Growth Pact need to form the essential basis for the deficit strategy and the exit strategy .
However , they should not form this basis alone .
Both strategies need to be supported by sustainable growth and employment policy .
We need to combine the Europe 2020 strategy with the other strategies .
We need an innovation agreement , an investment agreement and a coordination agreement in the European Union , encompassing all Member States .
I am therefore in favour of the finance ministers implementing the three-point plan proposed by Mr Almunia on 22 December 2004 for strengthening Eurostat as quickly as possible .
These sensible , necessary measures have been obstructed for five years .
We need to raise the status of Eurostat and we need to review the statistics of the Member States and to coordinate the statistics of the ECB and the European Union .
We need an opening balance sheet for the European Commission , we need to review the finances of the Member States on the basis of common criteria set by the Commission and we need a steering committee between the Commission , Eurostat , the ECB , the EIB and the Member States for national action plans .
Responsibility , honesty and transparency are required - and no games of hide and seek or cat and mouse by the Member States and the finance ministers .
( ES ) Mr President , the economic crisis has enabled us to appreciate the value of the euro and of economic coordination .
It is now indisputable that the role played by the euro area and the European Central Bank in providing stability and a response to the credit crunch , along with the concerted action at European and international level , in which you played an important leading role , Mr Almunia , have made an essential contribution to preventing the most serious and even disastrous effects of the crisis .
The crisis has caused a major decline in economic activity , huge job losses and a considerable deterioration in public finances .
Although it appears that there are indications of a burgeoning recovery , the forecasts for this year show a drop in employment and an increase in public debt in the European Union .
The crisis has also brought to light the diversity of situations and the differences that exist between the different Member States .
Tensions have emerged , tensions which - let us not be naïve - are not always associated with economic principles or potential .
We need to ensure that they do not cause us to forget our serious economic interdependency and our major commitments .
The European Union is facing its greatest challenges since its formation .
Someone described international recovery using the letters LUV : L for Europe , U for the United States and V for the emerging countries .
Europe cannot be left behind .
It is time for reforms , imagination and integration .
The fundamental priority should be to increase the potential for growth of our economy .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the weakness and the recent crisis in certain euro area countries are not just the result of the difficulties of Greece , Portugal and Spain , but also those of the Union itself .
This is not a problem only in terms of economic resources , but it is also a political problem .
Before attending to sick countries , Europe must attend to itself , because the real problem behind this crisis is also the Union 's weakness .
Common and effective rules and instruments are required .
Firstly , we need to expedite supervision reform and to create a system that actually works and does not merely replicate the existing authorities , which have proven to be ineffective in predicting and managing the recent crises , and to move beyond the bureaucratic logic , which , up to now , has been adopted to deal with systemic crises .
Secondly , it is therefore necessary to coordinate and harmonise fiscal policies , even at the cost of leaving behind the more reluctant countries .
Some maintain that intervention is required on the part of the International Monetary Fund , ignoring the catastrophic signal that this would send out to financial markets in terms of the direction in which the euro area would be heading .
In the case of the current crisis situation in several euro area countries , the European Union has a political , social and moral duty to take action .
( RO ) Certain countries in the euro area are currently facing severe financial problems , illustrated by the size of public debts and budget deficits , which are much higher than the threshold permitted by the Stability and Growth Pact .
The main logic behind the Stability and Growth Pact was to avoid incidences of ' stowaway ' actions by imposing limits on public debt .
However , this failed to take into account the need to increase public debt when the financial situation is worsening at macro-economic level , and it is further affected by the exponential rise in private debt .
The rapid decline in the state of finances in certain Member States poses a threat to both the stability of the euro and cohesion at European Union level .
To avoid such consequences , solidarity must be demonstrated between Member States by adopting joint measures offering mutual support to countries experiencing difficulties .
There is also a need to relax the Stability and Growth Pact 's criteria , which is an option provided for in a declaration annexed to the Final Act of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Therefore , it is still our responsibility to show a united political will and implement the reform of the Pact , which has now become a necessity .
( EL ) Madam President , numerous members have spoken about the help needed by Greece .
This is the wrong message .
Fruitless debate about aid is of no help .
Greece obviously has huge financial problems , but it can deal with them .
There is now broad consensus on that , both among political forces and , more importantly , among the Greek people .
I also heard that the main problem for the euro is the speculators .
When the euro was strengthened , what were the speculators then ?
Euro-philanthropists ?
We need to look at what we are doing wrong .
Greek statistics are also being discussed .
Let us not forget , however , that the statistics were also European .
Did Eurostat , the European Commission and ECOFIN not know that the Greek debt could not get any bigger without a corresponding deficit ?
Did the debt , not just the Greek debt , ever drop consistently to 60 % ?
In my opinion , the basic problem in the euro area is that its rules were applied mainly on the basis of political criteria and that those in control and those being controlled are one and the same .
A second problem about which there is too little talk is the overall loss of competitiveness and the ever-widening competition divide between the North and the South .
There is no euro area , there is no monetary zone with a widening competition divide between its members .
It is a fatal long-term risk to the cohesion of the euro area and is a question which should certainly preoccupy us .
( FR ) Madam President , with this all-out attack by a few international banks against the euro , the world is once more confronted with the stupidity and greed of the markets .
It is true that the English-speaking countries have never been in favour of the euro .
Nevertheless , the euro has become the most stable currency in the world .
In fact , the dollar and the euro form a duopoly .
A duopoly will always be unstable .
There will always be movements between the two currencies .
However , if the markets have any sense , they should see that the deficits of the euro area as a whole are well below those of the United States or Japan .
While it is true that the new Greek Government has inherited an unenviable budgetary situation , it is clear that , even if Greece were to go bankrupt , which is totally impossible , it would not cause the euro area to break up .
The United States Government had just presented a budget showing a USD 1 600 billion deficit .
To make up this deficit , Washington has to borrow each day more than USD 5 billion .
Greece 's additional annual debt equates to less than one week of the United States ' additional debt .
Which country is putting the world 's financial stability in danger ?
Greece or the United States ?
Confronted as it is with the stupidity of the speculators , Europe must impose more transparency and more practical regulation on the markets , which really are too greedy , Madam President .

( PT ) Madam President , in a debate regarding the economic situation of certain member countries of the euro area , the remedy is clear : we need more economic and monetary union , we need better competitiveness , and we need better solidarity .
I am speaking to you , Commissioner , as someone who , being Portuguese , knows very well the difficulties involved in seeing the public debt grow , the deficit becoming difficult to control or public spending being excessively high .
What these countries need is solidarity and the right signals .
Unfortunately , the signals sent out by the statements which Commissioner Almunia recently made were not good , when he compared the Portuguese and Spanish situation to the Greek one .
They were unfortunate and imprudent statements which had immediate effects on the market .
The stock markets in Lisbon and Madrid plummeted ; things should not be made more difficult than they already are .
Political management is extremely important .
What I know is that this lesson must be learned for the future , because in this way , we can have better economic union , backing Europe to a greater extent in order to create solidarity and understand that the situations in the various Member States are completely different and are not comparable .
If we can take away this lesson , it is certain that the future of the euro area will be a better one .
( FR ) Madam President , the following observation must be made : the Economic and Monetary Union is indeed monetary , but hardly economic .
Europe 's monetary concerns are in conflict with the economic and budgetary sovereignty of the Member States .
At this moment in time , speculative attacks on the euro could have disastrous consequences .
Greece , Portugal , Ireland and Spain are the most affected .
Behind them , however , the entire euro area is at risk .
To avoid the worst , Europe must urgently introduce a form of common governance of its economic and budgetary policies .
After all , that is what economic union is all about .
Only in this way will we , together , have a realistic chance of consolidating public finances in the euro area and beyond .
With the current instruments , and by persisting with the budgetary sovereignty of the Member States , I fear that this consolidation is a pipe dream , with all the consequences that that entails .
Madam President , we must identify any weaknesses in the eurozone and address them with vigour , because the alternatives are too bleak to contemplate .
A glaring weakness is the lack of a strong centralised monitoring function of the whole eurozone economy .
Special attention needs to be given , firstly , to the discontinuation of cash-flow accounting by any EU Member State , and their finances .
Secondly , the public finances and the reporting need to be audited according to EU-approved standards .
Thirdly , oversight should be provided for economic forecasts which have been a cause of unnecessary and misleading public financial projections .
Fourthly , the results of stress tests by the EU need to be published regularly .
Finally , I think we should discourage eurozone members from the easy way out of financial engineering and fiscal one-offs , delaying real adjustments which we all know must come from credible and sustainable spending programmes .
( SV ) Madam President , what is happening in Greece is not just a concern of those who are part of the euro area , but concerns the whole EU .
It is therefore important that this difficult situation is dealt with in a responsible manner by the EU .
Greece must do its part , live up to its promises and reform its policy .
For me - someone who is keen to see Sweden join the euro area as quickly as possible - it is of the utmost importance that we in the EU resolve this difficult situation .
It should , after all , be said that the euro has been incredibly successful in weathering the most severe financial crisis .
Who would claim that 16 currencies would have been better than one strong currency ?
No one !
Greece sneaked into the euro area by the back door , which is now showing us how important it is that the rules of admission are tough but fair .
A well ordered economy is a prerequisite for growth and wealth , even for those outside the euro , and naturally , that applies just as much to those countries that are part of the euro area .
Those talking about speculation should bear in mind that a well ordered economy and public finances form the basis for this .
( EL ) Madam President , for Greece , about which there is a great deal of talk , the problem is not just a problem of public finances .
It is about the complete collapse of the model which has been applied over the last fifteen years and which wanted the Greek economy to be based on a constant increase and expansion in private consumption .
Moreover , for years , some people have maintained that spending on arms is spending on development .
As a percentage of GDP , SIPRI reports that Greece wastes 3.3 % .
This is the second highest percentage in NATO after the United States of America .
It is the fifth biggest importer of arms in the world in absolute terms , with 4 % of global trade .
Of course , reductions in defence spending have been planned in the budget for 2010 .
The Ministry of National Defence has a budget of EUR 6 billion , down 6.63 % .
I wish we would see a change in the arms diplomacy that has brought us to this impasse .
Greece has no colonies to exploit , but it does have staying power .
We also need to activate European solidarity and to promote international initiatives on a global green new deal .
Madam President , what is the future of the euro in the light of the problems in Greece and , for that matter , Spain , Italy , Portugal and Ireland ?
It must be of some reassurance to the UK that we never joined the euro .
It seems promises of strength through solidarity could not be further from the truth .
The problem for the 16 nations in the eurozone is who pulls the purse strings .
With little fiscal coordination and no treasury , membership of the euro is by no means an elixir for good economic health .
It turns out that , when all turns sour , no one will bail you out .
Instead , they take the opportunity to seize greater control while you are on your knees .
We must wait to see how Greece will react to becoming an economic protectorate of the European Union and whether it will bring civil unrest .
Is this really the European dream ?
Who is next , Spain , Portugal , Italy or Ireland ?
Perhaps Member States , and especially the eurozone states , should think long and hard about the here and now before turning attention to talks on economic policy post-2020 , when there might not even be a euro to protect .
Mr Barroso this morning talked about the European dream : for the good people of Greece , it has become the European nightmare .
( DE ) Madam President , as we know , the European Commission has placed Greece under supervision on account of its soaring budgetary deficit .
This massive intrusion on national sovereignty can really only be justified by the fact that we also need to rescue the single currency and avoid the risk of damage to other participant countries .
However , the foundation stone that is the essential prerequisite for the introduction of the euro , namely the Stability Pact , clearly only exists on paper .
Many Member States and the Council have expended less energy in recent years on budgetary discipline than on watering down this important agreement .
The Commission has sat back and watched this development of half-hearted procedures against deficit offenders .
We therefore need to press for the increasing net indebtedness of the Member States to be drastically reduced if we do not want to put our currency and our economic area at serious risk .
For this , absolutely crucial and forceful measures are needed .
( RO ) I believe that every Member State must be prepared to join the euro area in order to avoid extremely severe potential adverse effects on the national economy .
The economic instability experienced by some countries in the euro area must be kept in check to prevent the consequences being felt across the whole European Union .
The economies of Greece , Spain and Portugal recorded large budget deficits in 2009 due not only to the global economic crisis , but also to the inadequate measures implemented by their own national governments .
Romania will present the euro area convergence plan by the end of February , in accordance with the negotiations with the IMF and the European Commission .
My country has suggested entering the exchange rate mechanism in 2012 , which is actually the phase prior to entering the euro area .
This means that our budget deficit must drop below 3 % .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for your kind words about the measures being taken by the Greek Government .
The government has indeed introduced harsh measures , and the European Commission has indeed ratified the government 's programme and a very harsh programme has indeed been ratified in order to monitor the application of the measures , which the government instigated and which it wants .
And yet the spreads increased .
The problem is not that the markets were reserved , as you said .
The problem is that the markets speculated and speculated wantonly .
The very people who caused the crisis are now making money from the ruins they caused .
And what about the European Commission ?
I ask you the following : firstly , will you take action now , not only for strict monitoring of the states , but also for strict monitoring of the markets and , if so , what ?
Secondly : it is unacceptable that talk about the International Monetary Fund in the euro area has dragged on for so many months .
However , the International Monetary Fund does one thing : it imposes harsh measures and then lends cheaply , which leaves no room for speculators .
Do you intend to take steps to give financial support to the countries which apply such harsh public finance programmes ?
( PL ) The situation which has arisen in some countries in the euro area requires serious consideration .
Seeking its causes in the economic crisis is only partially justified .
Many of the causes lie elsewhere .
Firstly , the great differences in the level of economic development in different euro area countries was ignored .
Secondly , the discipline of the Stability and Growth Pact was not maintained .
Budgetary discipline was not kept in a responsible way , which led to a large growth in the public finance deficit .
Thirdly , banks and other financial institutions were not suitably monitored - this does not apply only to these countries .
How can we fight this ?
In accordance with the solidarity principle , the repair programme prepared by individual countries must receive support from the European Union , which entitles the European Commission and the European Central Bank to monitor realisation of the programme .
For it is also unacceptable that the costs of the crisis should be borne primarily by the poorest , an example of which was the protests by Greek farmers .
( EL ) Madam President , about ten years after the creation of the euro area , it is clear that the European Union exists but , unfortunately , we are still a very long way from economic union .
We see that the attack on the euro via the weakest national economies is taking on epidemic proportions and Europe is , ultimately , a spectator , not so much because it was surprised , but rather because it does not have the financial tools to react .
There is no institution , with the exception of the Committee on Competition , which can coordinate the interventions and actions of the national economies in times of recession .
Unfortunately , there is no unanimity and common determination between the Member States , even though we have a common currency .
I think that today 's test does not have any one country 's name on it .
It is a test for the euro itself .
I would like to believe that , when we decided to have a single currency , we had already decided that we would now have a single voice and a united front .
Madam President , thank you for indulging so many one-minute speeches on this issue .
The new Commission , I presume , is pleased to be in place , but it is going to have to hit the ground running because of the problems we are discussing here .
There are those who are revelling in the problems of the eurozone , but I think the bulk of us want to see a resolution .
Ten years on , I do not think we should throw the baby out with the bathwater .
Having said that , it is very clear from listening to this debate that there are serious problems in some Member States , and the severity varies among those with problems - and Ireland is one of those .
However , the rules in my view have not been effective .
We need to pre-empt rather than react : when a crisis is with us , it is too late .
We need to be ahead of the markets ; you cannot buck the markets as others have tried to suggest we can , so we need to have strict and timely supervision and scrutiny and then immediate action .
I wish you well .
( DE ) Madam President , despite all the criticism that people like me have expressed about particular deplorable states of affairs in the European Union , we were always very much in favour of the introduction of the euro .
Back when I was a correspondent for der Spiegel magazine , I saw speculation against particular currencies and the euro has protected us against that .
However , what we are seeing now is a massive loss of confidence by savers and , in particular , by citizens in countries in which the budgetary criteria have , to a certain extent , been met .
My question to you , Commissioner , is this : has it not become abundantly clear to you over the last few years that Greece is deceiving us ?
There have been abundant rumours in this regard .
However , we knew that Greece did not actually fully meet the criteria at the start .
Why has this not been monitored more intensively ?
How do you intend to deal with such a difficult issue in future ?
I ask this with my own country , Austria , entirely in mind , where similar rumours are currently circulating in the same way they did about Greece a few years ago .
( LV ) Madam President , the attacks by speculators on Greece , Spain or Portugal are not the cause of the problem , but its consequence .
We know too well that no family can long afford to spend more money than it earns .
The result is bankruptcy .
The same applies to governments .
No government can long afford to spend more money than it collects in tax revenues .
The result is either bankruptcy for the government , or , as we are currently experiencing , attacks on the currency by speculators .
What these countries have to do is what Latvia , which was affected by the crisis as long as a year ago , nearly a year and a half in fact , has done .
That is , to reduce their government spending drastically by so-called internal devaluation .
I would suggest that the Greek Government take advice from the Latvian Government on how such decisions may be made .
They must be made , and they already have been made in Europe in the past .
Thank you .
Madam President , I think that we have had a very broad debate , with great awareness of and concern for the economic situation .
It has also been a very constructive debate , with a series of points on which we can agree in terms of assessing the situation .
Firstly , I think that there has been a general confidence in the euro area during the debate .
The euro area will undoubtedly emerge strengthened by these sudden movements in the markets , which cannot be explained by the situation of the real economy .

As pointed out by Mr Karas , Mr Sánchez Presedo and Mr Goebbels , who talked about what is meant by what someone described as the protective shield in the euro area , we are convinced that if the euro area had not existed , the crisis would have affected European countries much more .
Furthermore , we do not believe that the Stability and Growth Pact is in crisis .
The proof of this is the detailed procedure referred to by Commissioner Almunia for supervising the programme implemented by the Greek Government .
The problems in the euro area will be resolved within the euro area , whose mechanisms are equipped to do so , in a situation in which , as I said in my previous speech , Europe is clearly coming out of the recession and is emerging from the most serious crisis that we have seen for nearly a century .
It is doing so in a relatively short period of time , which demonstrates the economic strength of the European Union , and also that the governments acted immediately when something happened that had the potential to cause the international financial system to collapse .
Naturally , this immediate intervention had to result in deficits .
There are currently 21 European Union countries that have been in this situation , which is the logical consequence of the essential intervention because , amongst other things , as I said before , in Europe there are social protection systems that mean that the most vulnerable people have to receive help from the public coffers .
Mr Canfin asked me what proposals the Spanish Presidency has in this respect .
There have been short-term interventions by the governments , which I have mentioned .
A strategy is emerging for bringing us out of this situation , but obviously , in order to bring us out of the crisis in the medium term , the Spanish Presidency of the Council is clearly proposing economic union .
It is proposing that there should not only be monetary union , but that economic union should also have an important place in the European Union , which is , furthermore , what the Treaty of Lisbon states .
Article 5 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states this very clearly : ' The Member States shall coordinate their economic policies . '
' The Union shall take measures to ensure coordination of the employment policies . '
' The Union may take initiatives to ensure coordination of [ ... ] social policies . '
This is stated in the Treaty of Lisbon , and I am therefore very much in agreement with moving towards harmonisation .
For example , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , Mr Feio and Mr Papanikolaou referred to this in their speeches .
Mr Bullmann mentioned the need for socio-political coordination , as did Mrs Podimata .
Likewise , there was the position of Mr Canfin of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and of Mr Pallone and Mr Gauzès , who talked about the need for regulation of the financial markets .
Mr Verhofstadt talked about the need for internal cohesion in the Union .
All this is what we could call economic union , internal economic cohesion in the Union .
This is what we need to aim for , with clear political leadership of the Union , which is already taking place .
We need to think about the fact that the day after tomorrow - just as the Spanish Presidency of the Union has begun , incidentally - the informal European Council is going to meet to take the reins of the situation politically speaking .
I am sure that it will also send a strong European message to the public and to economic and social players , a pro-European message , a message of European unity , of confidence in the European governments , including the Greek Government , and of confidence in our opportunities .
This is an important European Council meeting , which is being held now in order to focus our efforts on a strategy for growth and job creation , which we call Europe 2020 .
I am convinced that the initial foundations for this strategy are going to be laid at this immediate , very early Council meeting , which means that we want to act immediately and with political leadership in the European Union in this time of need .
Madam President , thank you very much to all the Members of this House who have spoken during the debate for the references that they have made to the policies , attitudes and proposals of the European Commission , of which both I and my colleague , Olli Rehn , have taken note .
Allow me to say a few things , which I will say in four points .
There have been many speeches and I cannot answer each and every one of them , but I believe that I can essentially respond to all of them using four points .
Firstly , as I have said many times in Parliament over a period of nearly six years as Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , I fully agree with the need to increase coordination within the Economic and Monetary Union and within the European Union .
All of the Member States of the Union that are not yet members of the euro area , in other words , of the final phase of the Economic and Monetary Union , are going to be , apart from two Member States that have an opt-out .
I do think , however , that in the next few years , we will see them abandoning their opt-outs and wanting to join the Economic and Monetary Union too .
In order to have coordination , we need to deepen and broaden supervision , and the activities of analysis , debate and recommendation based on that analysis and debate , with regard to fiscal policy and other macro-economic and structural policies .
If you recall , this was one of the first conclusions of the report that I presented here on behalf of the Commission in the first half of 2008 , before Lehman Brothers , on the first 10 years of the Economic and Monetary Union .
Since then , we have debated in the Commission , in the Eurogroup and in the Council , and also here in Parliament , how to improve that supervision , how to extend it , through what is now the heart of supervision and the framework for budgetary discipline , the Stability and Growth Pact , while also broadening it .
I agree with those of you who have said that it is not only about implementing a fiscal and budgetary policy that is in line with our rules , but that there is a need to go further , because there are other imbalances that put growth , employment and the situation of public finances at risk .
I agree with all of you who said that we do not need to call on the International Monetary Fund for all of this .
It is true that all of our countries are members of the International Monetary Fund , but we can and must do it ourselves .
If we are coordinated enough , if we have political will , if we use the tools provided by the treaty , if we carry through our declarations of intent and major objectives to their ultimate conclusion , we have more than sufficient capacity and tools to do what we need to do in order to tackle difficult situations such as the one that we are currently facing .
In the case of Greece , I will mention two issues that have been the subject of debate , which I have already discussed in detail .
Firstly , Mr Verhofstadt , who is unfortunately no longer here , said that the Commission intervened too late .
I do not know how quickly Mr Verhofstadt 's country asked the Commission to take action on budgetary matters , but I would like to remind him that there were elections in Greece in early October .
Two weeks after coming to power , the new Greek Government corrected the notification that we had received a few days before the elections , changing the deficit from 6 % to 12.7 % in three weeks !
This was not just a statistical correction .
In this massive increase in the deficit in Greece , to a large extent there has been an absolute lack of control of budgetary policy .
This is not a statistical matter .
They are not asking Eurostat to resolve it .
This is an issue of management , due to a government that allowed revenue to drop or did nothing when revenue was dropping and allowed expenditure to increase or pushed expenditure up because the elections were approaching .
Plainly speaking , that is what happened .

Moreover , in relation to the statistical problems , and in response to Mr Martin - as I think Mr Karas said - at the end of 2004 , I proposed to the Council on behalf of the Commission that we strengthen Eurostat 's ability to conduct audits when there were statistical problems that could not be resolved through standard notifications .
Eurostat does not compile the data .
Eurostat receives notifications from the Member States .
In order to see beyond the authority giving the notification , Eurostat needs powers that it does not have .
The Commission asked for those powers and the Council did not grant them .
I have told the Council that we are going to ask it for those powers again .
My colleague Olli Rehn , who from tomorrow will be responsible , with no more transitions to be made , for economic and monetary affairs , has a proposal prepared for adoption by the new Commission at its first formal meeting , once you have kindly given us your approval today .
Following this notification , the Greek Government put forward a budget for 2010 , which had not been put forward before the elections , and not only the Commission but also the Eurogroup and Ecofin approved the excessive deficit in the light of the new situation .
We did so with recommendations that could not be prepared until we had a programme in front of us , which the Greek Government drew up and sent to us on 15 January .
Based on that programme , as I said before , we made the recommendations on 3 February .
It is true that if we had a magic wand we could have acted on the very night of the elections .
I can tell you , however , that I believe that the Greek Government , the Commission , the Eurogroup and Ecofin acted swiftly .
The latter two began debating the situation even before we made the recommendations to them .
There is no way that we could act more quickly if our aim is actually to resolve the problems .
If all we want to do is make statements , of course we could act .
Thirdly , I fully agree with the need to increase confidence in the euro and in the Economic and Monetary Union .
This is everyone 's responsibility : it is the responsibility of the Member States , the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
Incidentally , as an aside , as some of you have referred to statements that I made when presenting the recommendations for the Greek Programme , I ask you , in the interests of confidence , to refer to what I actually said , rather than referring to what others say that I supposedly said .
That is all I ask .
Finally , the Council meeting on 11 February , the day after tomorrow , which was mentioned by Mr López Garrido , among others , is a very important meeting .
It is a special Council meeting because there are not many matters on the table .
It is a meeting at which there will be two contributions , from the President of the Commission and the President of the European Council , with an open political debate , which , at the present time , is extremely important , with tension in the financial markets that we have not experienced in the euro area since the single currency was created and a crisis worse than we have experienced for 80 years .
We need to respond to this situation , not only with an exit strategy , but with a medium-term strategy so that this decade is one of growth and employment .
If you will allow me a minute to say my last words as Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , I will tell you what I would like to hear at the end of this European Council meeting .
I would like to hear a clear demand to each and every one of the Member States , in this case starting with Greece , to meet their obligations , and to implement the measures that they have committed to as members of economic and monetary union and the recommendations given to them by the economic and monetary union authorities .
We need to demand that all Member States fulfil and apply the rules that we have all made .
Secondly , I would like a political commitment to be made at the highest level for more coordination , better coordination and the strengthening of the Economic and Monetary Union as an economic zone , not only as a central bank for the economic and monetary zone , not only as a body that issues recommendations .
Both within and outside our borders , economic and monetary union , the euro area , needs to speak clearly , firmly and credibly , because this increases the confidence of our citizens and of the other citizens of the European Union and of the world in our currency and in our project , which is not only an economic project , but goes much further .
Finally , I would like the leaders of Europe to say to the Greek authorities , ' In exchange for your efforts , you have our support . '
The support cannot be free of charge .
That would create a climate for future imbalances and future crises .
The support needs to be clear , and we have the tools to do this , in exchange for a clear commitment that everyone is assuming their rightful responsibilities .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I hope that the European Commissioners will be a factor that promotes stability and that they will produce rigorous and well-grounded statements , in contrast to what occurred with the recent statements by Commissioner Joaquín Almunia , who demonstrated a lack of prudence and contributed to stock market losses and a lack of confidence among international investors in relation to Portugal and Spain .
In order to face up to the crisis , the Member States of the EU launched recovery plans and gave stimuli and incentives to the economy , and as a result , increased their deficits .
However , we also know of Member States which , either owing to incompetence or intentionally , were wrong about their deficits .
Recent events have obliged the European Union to give new impetus to proposals for supervision and to implement a strengthened strategy of economic coordination .
It is also proposed that a system to monitor the value of each Member State 's deficit should be formally implemented , with the aim of quickly defining corrective measures , so as to avoid any irreversible situations .
This system should function almost in real time .
It is also important to clarify the calculation formula for deficits so as to avoid any massaging of public accounts and to avoid the recurrent use of debudgetisation techniques to camouflage the value of the deficit .
The campaign unleashed as a result of the situation in Greece , which some people are now trying to extend to other countries , is despicable and reveals the true objectives of its principal protagonists , amongst which should be included the European Commission itself and some of the principal economic powers of the EU .
The pressure being exerted on countries such as Greece , Portugal and Spain to fight their deficits cannot be disentangled from the interests of speculative financial capital and its aim of engaging in a turf war for the euro against the dollar .
It is these interests that are being defended , even at the cost of the interests of the people in those countries .
Several questions arise :
What objective reasons exist for us to have to reach 2013 with deficits of less than 3 % ( regardless of what may happen in terms of economic growth ) ?
What is the point of an economic and monetary union which does not implement any policy of solidarity and cohesion ?
If the ECB can regularly lend money to national banks at rates much lower than those which exist in international markets , why can it not do so to governments ?
Why has there been no creation of instruments which might allow those countries in greater difficulty to obtain financing at rates which are lower and closer to those obtained by other countries ?
The financial situation in some countries in the euro area , which has been under consideration today , clearly shows the risks that are caused by moving away from the agreements in the Stability and Growth Pact .
In light of the problem as a whole , we can see how important it is to have reliable statistics .
We must certainly draw serious conclusions from this whole problem , and in every country , both within the euro area and outside it , the way out entails recognising our problems honestly and providing our own measures for getting out of the difficulties , and additionally , solidarity from the European Union .
At the same time , the problems described cannot be solved by delaying the expansion of the euro area .
It is clear that , if there are countries which have fulfilled the necessary criteria , then those countries must be admitted to the euro area .
Time has shown that a single currency has been an additional guarantee of reliability in complex times .
Mr Almunia , Poland is preparing for entry to the euro area , and so we are looking carefully at the problems of euro area Member States .
Unfortunately , more countries are experiencing problems , and the European currency now faces its greatest challenge since it was created .
Ladies and gentlemen , Greece will not manage on its own .
I agree with those who have spoken before me that what is needed is stronger coordination of Member States ' economic policies .
The global economic crisis has led to the destabilisation of many economies and world markets , in the face of a recovery , albeit a fragile one , are afraid that incompetent action might be taken by Member State governments to prevent the collapse of euro currency markets .
Therefore , the only realistic way out of this situation , the only way to prevent the collapse of the currency market is stop-gap help for Greece as well as long-term , planned action to stabilise the position of the euro .
( The sitting was suspended for a few minutes )
Progress made on resettling Guantánamo detainees and on closing Guantánamo ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on progress made on resettling Guantánamo detainees and on closing Guantánamo .
Madam President , as you know , the European Union welcomed the promise made by President Obama to close the Guantánamo detention centre .
He made the promise in his inauguration speech , and this was later endorsed by a joint declaration of the European Union and its Member States with the United States on 15 June last year .
We are in favour of the law being applied and human rights being respected at all times , and in this declaration , the United States of course agreed .
This therefore seemed to be incompatible with maintaining the Guantánamo detention centre , which had also become one of the pretexts for propaganda most frequently used by al-Qaeda .
It is true that the timescale that was planned for closing it - one year - has now passed .
It is true , however , that there are difficulties , and we can give some examples , such as former prisoners in Yemen not being able to return there immediately .
We are also finding that this issue is very controversial in the United States , although we welcome the fact that President Obama is persevering with his intention to close Guantánamo despite the strong opposition that he is facing in Congress , not only among the Republicans but also among the Democrats .
However , in any case , some prisoners have now left Guantánamo and are going to be tried in ordinary US courts , such as , for example , Khalid Sheikh Mohammed , the alleged brains behind the 11 September attacks , despite the concern that this generated in the United States .
We have therefore always been clear about our position in our contacts with the United States as well as recently , in the visit to Brussels by the United States ' special envoy on this issue , Daniel Fried , who was formerly responsible for relations between the United States and the European Union and who is now responsible for managing the closure of Guantánamo .
During his visit to Brussels , and in the context of the human rights dialogue that the European Union regularly holds with the United States , concern was expressed by the European Union about the use of the so-called military commissions and prolonged detention without trial , and naturally , we expressed our opposition to the death penalty .
These are very clear , firm positions that the European Union has maintained , is maintaining and will continue to maintain in its relations with the United States .
I imagine that in relations between members of the parliaments , in the transatlantic dialogue between legislators , you will also have had opportunities to uphold the same principles .
I believe that the European Union has fulfilled its agreement with the United States , an agreement that was set out in the joint declaration that I mentioned earlier .
There are Member States that have already agreed to receive people who have been or are prisoners in Guantánamo , and the number that we can handle at the moment , among the European countries who have quantified the number of prisoners , along with Switzerland , which is a partner of the European Union in the Schengen area , is around 16 .
In any case , you will also be aware that the decision as to whether or not to accept a prisoner from Guantánamo is naturally up to the Member States .
The mechanism agreed by the Home Affairs Ministers of the European Union was the realisation of this desire to help the United States .
We have always said that we wanted the Guantánamo prison to be closed , as it was clearly contrary to the most fundamental human rights .
The European Union therefore needs to help to make this possible , as far as we can and in accordance with the decisions taken - I repeat - by each Member State individually and sovereignly regarding the possibility of receiving these prisoners .
We can say that there were 242 prisoners in the detention centre when President Obama came to power , and that 44 of them have left the prison .
The existence of this detention centre is a serious problem , of course , for transatlantic relations .
The joint declaration on the closure of the centre was made on the understanding that something similar would not happen in the future .
This is , of course , the intention of the United States Government , and the position of the European Union has undoubtedly contributed to changing the position of the United States and its prison policy in relation to Guantánamo .
As we have said , we also want - and this is also part of the joint declaration by the European Union and the United States - to explore the possibility of establishing and agreeing a set of principles between the European Union and the United States of America that can be a common point of reference in the context of our effort to combat terrorism , which is also part of the joint declaration .
In the European Union , we have a strong desire for the Guantánamo Bay detention centre to be permanently closed , and we welcome the fact that President Obama is persisting in his commitment to do so .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the European Union , including the European Commission , has consistently called for the closure of the Guantánamo Bay detention facility .
As already mentioned by the Minister , the European Union established a two-tier framework to support the closure of Guantánamo , firstly through the Justice and Home Affairs Council conclusion of 4 June 2009 and the annexed information exchange mechanism and , secondly , through the Joint Statement of the European Union and its Member States and the United States of America on the Closure of the Guantánamo Bay Detention Facility and Future Counter-Terrorism Cooperation of 15 June 2009 .
The Council conclusions and the joint statement clearly state that the decisions on the reception of former detainees and the determination of their legal status fall within the sole responsibility and competence of a receiving EU Member State or Schengen-associated country .
Former detainees received under this scheme may have access to rehabilitation measures in the EU Member States under the applicable national laws .
In the context of the abovementioned statement on the closure of Guantánamo , on 16 June 2009 the President of the Council wrote to the co-chair of the US Detention Policy Task Force .
In this letter , the European Union put forward a non-paper with principles of international law relevant to the fight against terrorism .
It includes unequivocal statements on due process guarantees , such as access to court to challenge arrest , detention and transfer , as well as on the prohibition of torture .
They have been discussed in detail in the dialogue on counter-terrorism and international law .
The Commission considers these guarantees to be important to this dialogue , as they contribute to a better understanding of how the fight against terrorism should respect the rule of law and international law , including international human rights law , international refugee law and international humanitarian law .
As already mentioned , the European Union opposes the death penalty and has intervened in individual cases with third countries , including the United States , to prevent it from being carried out .
The Commission will consider appropriate steps in case the death penalty is imposed on a former Guantánamo detainee tried by a US court or military commission .
The European Commission appreciates the steps taken so far by President Obama to close Guantánamo and hopes to see further progress on this in the future .

Madam President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , I would first of all like to point out that the European Parliament has expressed its opinion on the situation of the prisoners in Guantánamo on various occasions through various resolutions .
In his inauguration speech , President Obama said that he was making a commitment to close the Guantánamo detention centre within a year .
This deadline passed on 22 January and the fact that it has not been closed is proof that often in politics it is easier to make promises than to keep them .
Also , as the representative of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council said , President Obama 's personal representative has visited the European Union , met with our President and with several Member States and asked for our cooperation , which has to be offered on the basis of a series of premises mentioned by the Commissioner .
One of these is that this is a problem created by the previous government of the United States , and that the European Union has to cooperate , but on the basis of certain requirements , in particular , the security of our Member States .
In this respect , I would like to recall the decision made by some Member States , including the one that currently holds the Presidency of the Council , my own country .
I would like to ask the representative of the Spanish Presidency if he is thinking of taking any additional measures to try to harmonise the response of the Member States to the problems that have arisen in Yemen in particular , or whether he is intending to leave this decision to the individual and sovereign context of each Member State , as decided by the Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs .

One final question , Madam President : it is indeed true that 100 out of the 190 or so prisoners that remain have been sent to their countries of origin or to third countries , and that 40 are going to be subject to the jurisdiction of the United States courts .
There are , however , still 50 that are not going to be released because there is not sufficient proof to take them into custody but the risk that they actually pose has forced the United States Government to decide that they should not be released .
I would like to ask the Commission and the Council what they think about the situation of these 50 people who are not going to be subject to the jurisdiction of the United States courts .
Guantánamo is a creation of the Bush Administration but it would not have been possible without the help of European allies and without the silence of the European Union .
Hence it falls to the Union to act in accordance with its values and interests , doing everything it can to close this sordid chapter of our history .
The image of the EU in the world , the transatlantic relationship , the fight against terrorism and freedom of movement within the Schengen Area all mean that the request to receive prisoners from Guantánamo merits a collective and consistent European response .
However , this response has been late in coming and is limited to bilateral understandings between the United States and some Member States .
It is shocking that large countries that were accomplices of Bush in the extraordinary renditions , in the secret prisons and in Guantánamo , such as Germany , the UK , Italy , Poland and Romania , should shirk their responsibilities by ignoring the appeals of the Obama Administration .
This is a topic for the common foreign and security policy , which should be dealt with by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the European Union , in view of Article 24 of the Treaty of Lisbon , and it must be based on mutual political solidarity among the Member States .
It falls to the High Representative , now equipped with the power of initiative , under Article 30 of the treaty , to propose and lead a true European strategy to assist in the closing of Guantánamo as quickly as possible , ensuring the necessary support for the individual recovery and social reintegration of released persons , including their right to family reunification .
I must welcome the contribution of my own country , Portugal , as the first to offer this assistance to the Obama Administration , for urging its other European partners to do the same , and for already welcoming persons who have unjustly suffered years of captivity in Guantánamo .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , some European governments actively participated in illegal rendition , torture and illegal detention .
Others gave background support .
Others pretended not to see .
So it was not something that just happened ' over there ' .
That is one of the reasons we have kept our continuing interests .
Of course , MEPs spent many years calling for the closure of Guantánamo , so we warmly welcome the announcement by President Obama and we understand the difficulties in unravelling the mess left by George Bush .
However , it is extremely frustrating that nearly 200 men remain there .
We also fully welcome the federal trials for people like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed , but why did it not happen eight years ago ?
The best response to the terrorists is criminal convictions .
We will continue to push EU governments to take more detainees for resettlement , both out of transatlantic solidarity and out of guilt at their own complicity , and we will resist Chinese threats regarding the Uighurs .
It does not help that the United States is unable to settle any of the 17 Uighurs in US territory .
My own constituent , Shaker Aamer , a legal UK resident whose family of a British wife and four British children live in Battersea in London , is still , after eight years , marooned in legal limbo in Guantánamo .
He appears to be the victim of pass-the-parcel , whereby the US and UK governments may be colluding to bundle him off to his home country Saudi Arabia .
He is a direct witness to his own and others ' torture , not only by the US but by UK secret agents .
This would be very convenient in preventing his testimony before UK courts .
We do , as I say , welcome the efforts to close Guantánamo , but we oppose military commissions and other continuing abuses .
Europe must do more as well .

Madam President , Mr López Garrido , the US High Representatives you mentioned also met us Members of the European Parliament when they visited Brussels recently .
Parliament may , of course , be in a key position to encourage Member States to try and establish a common policy with regard to closing Guantánamo .
It is very obvious that Guantánamo is still a glaring symbol of injustice and that its closure is in the interests of the European Union .
We expressed the opinion which the European Parliament also stated in its resolution in February last year .
We also told them that we did not just want to talk about where to place the Guantánamo detainees , but that at the same time , we also wanted to discuss with the United States the notion that their policy on the care of the prisoners and their penal code needed to be reformed comprehensively in order for it to comply with the principles of the rule of law .
Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , I would hope that you will take this seriously and discuss these matters with the US representatives in the dialogues you mentioned .
Finally , I want to say how important it is for the European Union to render an account of its own involvement in these secret arrests and detention centres .
I would like to refer to the important work done by my colleague , Mr Coelho , in the previous parliamentary term .
We must continue this work because , to this day , the European Union has still not explained in any way what the role of its Member States was in these secret arrests and detention centres on EU territory .
Madam President , in reference to the statement of my respected fellow Member who spoke before me , I would like to stress that , in fact , there is no firm evidence and there are no specific facts concerning the existence of CIA detention centres and prisons in some European countries , at least , not in Poland .
Once again , in the course of the last few years , we are talking about Guantánamo in the European Parliament .
I would like to point out that we have also talked about this during Barack Obama 's Presidency , and so it seems this problem is not something we can attribute exclusively to the dreadful and evil administration of George Bush junior .
It appears this is something more complicated .
I say this because the representative of the Council and the Spanish Presidency said that , in fact , the Americans still have not done everything they promised .
Finally , I would just like to add that it is very good that the European Union is speaking out on matters concerning citizens ' freedoms .
However , let us also remember the victims - those who are the victims of terrorists .
Mr Czarnecki , will you accept a question from Mrs Hautala ?
( PL ) Madam President , I was referring to the statement of the respected fellow Member of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance who spoke before me .
( FI ) Madam President , Mr Czarnecki perhaps does not know that on 22 December 2009 , a European government admitted for the first time that there had been such a secret detention centre on its own territory .
This happened when a Lithuanian parliamentary committee stated that a CIA prison of this sort had operated in Lithuania in the war against terrorism .
I am happy to note that the Lithuanian Government has acted robustly in response to this revelation .
Madam President , I thank the honourable Member for this remark , but I would like to inform her that I am a representative of Poland , not Lithuania .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I expressly welcome the fact that the European Parliament is once again debating the subject of the immediate closure of the prison of torture in Guantánamo Bay , and I endorse the words and standpoints of all my fellow Members who have called for decisive action by the European Union and the Member States .
In reality , it is a transatlantic cooperation problem .
Almost 800 people from over forty countries have been detained there in disregard of the Geneva Convention - without charge , without a lawyer and without a trial .
There are numerous reports of the murder and of the most dreadful abuse and humiliation of the detainees .
The fact that most Member States of the European Union have , up to now , shied away from declaring their willingness as third countries to receive detainees from Guantánamo Bay is , is , in my opinion , a disgrace and quite deplorable , and I call on the Commission to immediately bring this issue before the Council once again , including the subject of the discovery of the part played by European countries in the illegal detention of prisoners there .
I will perhaps finish with one last thought : the use of Guantánamo Bay as a torture prison constitutes a clear violation of the original lease agreement , and Baroness Ashton and the other Members of the Commission responsible for foreign policy should perhaps join with me in calling on the US Government to draw a symbolic line under this disgraceful chapter and give Guantánamo back to Cuba .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I come from the West Midlands , the home of the so-called ' Tipton Taliban ' , who were detained at Guantánamo .
As a UKIP MEP , I must agree that seizure and deportation of people from one country to be tried in another , without judicial oversight , and to face foreign imprisonment , is an alien process .
It is an affront to liberty , democracy , accountability and natural human rights .
I can give you a list of British citizens who have been forced into imprisonment in this way , into squalid and unfit jails , not at the hands of the CIA and its rendition programme , but at the hands of the EU Member States under the European arrest warrant which this House created .
It was made in the EU .
So , before you condemn the USA , look in the mirror and see your own hypocrisy .
( DE ) Madam President , the closure of Guantánamo is surely a sign that the US has to concede that it has violated human rights , including for the purpose of the fight against terrorism , and that it wants to put an end to it .
I therefore welcome this step .
Slovakia , Italy and other Member States have declared their willingness to accept detainees .
In my opinion , that needs to be discussed at European level , as former prisoners could end up in any Member State as a result of the Schengen Agreement .
In essence , however , we first need to clarify three points .
Firstly - and this is neither disgraceful nor deplorable , Mr Scholz - the security risk for the host country needs to be clarified .
Any specific relation of the detainee to the Member State in question must also be examined .
Finally and fundamentally , it should first be clarified conclusively why the prisoners in question cannot also be accommodated in the United States .
( PT ) Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , Guantánamo was one of the biggest mistakes of the Bush Administration .
It violated international conventions , such as the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel , Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Convention against Enforced Disappearance , and it permitted arbitrary treatment , disrespect for human rights , the imprisonment of innocent people and torture .
President Obama was entirely correct when he declared that it was essential to close Guantánamo in order to give back to the United States of America the moral authority which it lost by the use of extra-judicial instruments in the fight against terrorism .
President Obama made the decision on his first day in the White House to suspend the trials before military tribunals and to announce the closure of the Guantánamo base .
His task has not been easy , especially in view of the lack of cooperation on the part of the US Congress .
In this European Parliament , we have always been divided with respect to the transatlantic strategy , but we obtained a broad consensus against the prison of shame .
In the Council , deeply divided by the issue of the Iraq war , it was possible for all the Ministers for Foreign Affairs to be unanimous in demanding the closure of Guantánamo .
As Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra has already said , several Member States have agreed to receive ex-prisoners into their territories : France , Portugal , Ireland , Belgium , the UK , Italy and Hungary .
The decision whether or not to receive prisoners from Guantánamo is a decision exclusively for each of the Member States , but it should be taken on the basis of European coordination .
In a Europe without borders and with freedom of movement , information needs to be shared among the Member States .
Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , in expressing my concern at the delay in the situation in America , I should like to ask : what , in your opinion , might the European Union still do to assist ?
What is it that we are not doing but could still do ?
And what , in your opinion , is currently impeding or rendering it more difficult for the European Union to give this help ?
( ES ) Madam President , Guantánamo was a legal and humanitarian aberration , perhaps the most visible example of the Bush Administration 's unilateral concept of international society and international relations , with complete contempt for international law .
There was a great deal to repair following the Bush disaster , and President Obama is repairing it .
He started off on the right foot a year ago when he announced the closure of Guantánamo as one of his first decisions , a brave decision with which to restore the legitimacy of the United States in the world , and also a gesture towards the Muslim community .
However , the self-imposed deadline of 22 January for the closure of Guantánamo has passed and there are still 192 prisoners .
If the European Union governments really want to establish a genuine strategic relationship , they must support President Obama 's decision , and the best way to do so is to accept prisoners or detainees from Guantánamo .
Spain and other European Union countries are doing this on the basis of the joint declaration of 15 June which has been mentioned and which established a shared framework for receiving detainees .
However , although technically these are unilateral , sovereign decisions to be made by each Member State , it should be joint action by the European Union to demonstrate its support for a shared European Union decision that Parliament has demanded on several occasions , especially the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
This concerns 50 prisoners : those declared to be suitable for release .
This is a figure that should be manageable for the 27 .
In addition to the existing mechanisms for exchanging information between the Member States and the countries that are members of the Schengen area that are taking part in receiving prisoners , we need to have an exchange of information and experiences on suitable practices for socially integrating the former detainees .
( SL ) First of all , I should like to thank the representatives of both the Council and the Commission for their proactive stance on Guantánamo .
Guantánamo has been an anomaly and a disgrace since day one , since the day this prison opened .
Its opening could perhaps be more easily understood in the wake of the shocking attacks of 11 September , but years have passed since .
Yet , the disgrace of Guantánamo continues and , in fact , all of us who believe in the values of Western civilisation , such as respect for human rights and the rule of law , continue to feel ashamed of it .
This morning , I chanced upon a website of a government organisation called Joint Task Force Guantánamo .
You would laugh , if their description of the situation in Guantánamo were not so sad : it is described as a five-star hotel and as a place with all the comforts you could need .
It is high time we called on Mr Obama to close down this disgrace and spare us the reproach of such hypocrisy .
( FR ) Madam President , I , too , hope that everything is done at European level to encourage the Member States to assume their responsibilities and accommodate those Guantánamo detainees who have been proven innocent .
They are victims and must be accommodated safely on European soil .
Everyone knows , however , that the closure of Guantánamo will not stop questions being asked about human rights and counterterrorism , either in the United States or in Europe .
In the United States , as you said , the antiterrorism law still permits unlimited pre-trial detention and trials before military courts .
In Europe , well , the Guantánamo prisoners did not just fall out of the sky .
I genuinely believe that there has been a failure to shed light on this subject .
Mrs Hautala rightly spoke of the parliamentary investigation concluded on 22 December by Lithuania .
It should be praised to the skies .
It is exemplary . It must serve as an example .
Conclusions were not drawn from these illegal practices on European soil , and I believe that that is the job of the European Commission ; that is the job of the Council .
We must draw every possible conclusion from the illegal practices which took place and which led to the opening of Guantánamo , a decision in which the Member States were fully complicit .
( FR ) Madam President , first of all , we learnt very recently that the Guantánamo detention centre will close not in 2010 , as scheduled , but in 2013 - in other words , at the end of President Obama 's term of office .
Although that closure is taking longer than planned , we can still be glad that it is under way , because it could have also been stopped .
It is a response to a wish expressed by Europe .
Indeed , we cannot , on the one hand , criticise the United States for years about the Guantánamo centre and , on the other , fail to show much will or ambition on our side in order to help it solve this problem .
A short time ago , I met the Attorney General of the United States , Eric Holder , who explained the scale of the task to me , but who also made me aware of the desire and the will of the United States to benefit from the European Member States ' support .
This support would entail helping it to close that detention centre by accommodating some of the detainees in Europe .
We must therefore help the United States , as part of a coordinated effort , to turn the page on an institution that we Europeans have been opposing for many years .
( SK ) Why should the European Union have to put up with the consequences of American policies ?
It would be simpler to call for America and its President , who is fulfilling his pre-election promise - in which many leading politicians publicly support him , by the way - to sort out this large and unwelcome problem itself .
However , the European Union has much in common with this .
Terrorists have also threatened and attacked the EU and continue to threaten the entire world , of which the EU is an integral part .
Have we already forgotten the London underground , Germany , Holland , Spain and the dozens of foiled terrorist attempts ?
We are therefore in this together with America .
It affects all of us .
Our attention should rather at this stage be focused especially on the prevention and elimination of negative effects on these people , putting all possible efforts into assisting these people in their social reintegration , so that they can get back to normal life and lead a decent civilian life with the families .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to emphasise the point raised recently by Mrs Flautre .
It is very important that we help President Obama to close Guantánamo .
We have been asking for this for a long time , and it is essential that in the European Union , we also have the necessary support to receive all of the people that the Obama Administration is currently asking us to receive .
This should not , however , cause us to forget that this prison also existed to a large extent because it was encouraged by Europe .
We therefore have an historical responsibility that we cannot , under any circumstances , conceal .
We need to help to close Guantánamo because it is also essential that we assume our responsibility as Europeans , because this is a European responsibility .
For a long time , Europe has looked the other way , for example , in the case of aircraft .
When he was the Portuguese Prime Minister , the current President of the European Commission authorised and allowed flights to pass above Portuguese territory en route to Guantánamo .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Council and the Commission , this historical responsibility cannot be allowed under any circumstances .
( EL ) Madam President , we quite rightly all agree to give practical support to the decision by the United States of America to close the Guantánamo detention centre and , of course , we are urging the Member States of the Union to accept detainees .
It is commonly accepted that Guantánamo was a mistake on the part of the United States of America in their endeavour to fight terrorism .
However , we must ensure that similar errors are not repeated in future , especially not in Europe .
Unfortunately , however , the report to be tabled shortly before the UN Human Rights Council , in March 2010 , raises serious suspicions about the practice of the secret detention of suspects in the Member States of the European Union such as Great Britain , Romania and Poland .
We cannot condemn such conduct and say that they are right to close Guantánamo , on the one hand , and tolerate similar conduct , which we perhaps believe does not constitute such a serious problem , on the other .
We all need to face up to our responsibilities .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to start with what the previous speaker said here .
For you said most categorically , Mr Papanikolaou , that illegal prisons existed in Europe , including in Poland and Rumania .
Speaking as a Pole , I want to state clearly that there is no firm evidence that such prisons existed in Poland .
That is my first comment .
Now my second comment : I do not think there is any dispute among us , in this Chamber , about whether Guantánamo should cease to exist .
However , it is very easy to see that closing down Guantánamo is going to be a very complicated process , and that no one wants to help with this .
We have to ask what can be done about this .
Well , I would like to ask the following question : have any changes been made in terms of the techniques used to house and interrogate prisoners ?
For many methods have been used there - from submerging prisoners ' heads in water to depriving them of sleep for many nights .
Are we certain these inhumane techniques are now no longer used there ?
( HU ) I am pleased that my fellow Members are so outraged about the heavy-handed infringements of human rights taking place in Guantánamo in the name of combating terrorism .
I can take this outrage seriously , however , only if you finally make a commitment , in response to my numerous statements to this effect , to examine the matter of the Guantánamo that exists right here within the EU , in Hungary .
I repeat , for the umpteenth time , that in Hungary , there are twelve individuals belonging to the political opposition who have been in pre-trial detention for nearly a year on charges of terrorism , and who are kept in the same conditions and whose criminal procedural rights are being infringed just as much as those of the prisoners at Guantánamo .
I would ask that my fellow Members kindly indicate with a show of hands who among you is willing to take this case seriously and take part in a detailed investigation .
I am waiting for the show of hands by Madam President and my fellow Members .

Madam President , I would like to discuss two very specific matters that have been mentioned : one by Mr Salafranca and another by Mr Scholz .

The first matter is Yemen .
With regard to Yemen , I do not have any evidence that a specific decision has been made or is to be made connecting Yemen with prisoners that come from there and are in Guantánamo .
The situation in Yemen was the subject of conclusions of the first Foreign Affairs Council meeting in the history of the Union .
There has only been one ordinary Foreign Affairs Council meeting , on 25 January , and there was a conclusion inviting Yemen to conduct a programme of major political reforms , but no reference was made to the issue of Guantánamo .
We do , of course , support these conclusions , as well as the conference that was held in London on 27 January .
With regard to an allusion made by Mr Scholz to the Guantánamo Bay situation and the possibility of its territorial status being changed , this is an issue that arises from the international treaty of 1903 between the United States and Cuba .
Therefore , it is an entirely bilateral issue between Cuba and the United States .
I believe that there is a general agreement that the Guantánamo prison constitutes a series of serious human rights violations and legal aberrations that cannot be tolerated , that we do not want repeated , and that the European Union has severely criticised .
It is for this very reason that we want to work with the President of the United States , who decided to put an end to Guantánamo and to close the prison .
Not only this , but he also decided that there would be a review of United States prison policy .
There are therefore strong grounds for Mr Vajgl 's comments about the intrinsic need to close this prison due to massive human rights violations , and for other comments that have been made .
Moreover , I believe , in any case , that the fact that human rights violations take place in other countries of the world or in Europe does not mean that this situation should not be criticised or that we should not work to ensure that it does not happen again .
I am saying this in relation to the speech by Mr Nattrass , because I am of course sure that he agrees that there is nothing in Europe similar to the Guantánamo prison .
The European Union and the United States have worked very thoroughly on this issue .
I have mentioned the declaration made on 15 June last year in which the United States and the European Union committed to working for the consolidation of human rights and the fight against terrorism .
This concerns the human rights violated in the Guantánamo prison , but also the need for the fight against terrorism to be conducted with absolute respect for freedoms , fundamental rights and legality .
It is important for us to be in line with this .
I therefore completely agree with what Mr Coelho said about the importance of the European Union contributing to this .
However , we are not only talking about the decision by the United States to close Guantánamo , with all the problems that brings , which I discussed in my first speech .
It also has to be recognised that President Obama is genuinely breaking with the past .
This means turning over a new leaf , not only with Guantánamo , but with all of the practices that have surrounded it .
I think that this is very clear when we look at the measures that President Obama has adopted .
He has put an end to the secret detentions by the CIA , and has ordered that from now on , all United States prisoners be registered with the International Committee of the Red Cross .
He has put an end to the ' enhanced ' interrogation techniques , also by the CIA .
This means that US investigators can no longer use legal opinions on torture and interrogation techniques that arose after 11 September as justification , which of course means turning over a new leaf .
There has also been a re-examination of transfer policy to ensure that it is in line with international law .
This is something that we welcome , and we said so in the joint declaration .
We welcome the fact that there has been a thorough review of United States policy on detention , transfer , trial , interrogation and the fight against terrorism .
We therefore said explicitly in the declaration that we noted the commitment by the United States to reconsider all the issues surrounding security , and to comprehensively review the policies undertaken , thanks to the order signed by President Obama on 22 January 2009 .
I believe that this is something that needs to be pointed out .
In order to achieve it , we do , of course , need to cooperate , and Mrs Muñiz de Urquiza referred to this very explicitly : to cooperating with the United States .
Europe has criticised the prison on many occasions , and Europe needs to cooperate as far as possible , although there are two types of limitation .
There is one that affects the United States , which is that ultimately , it is United States legislation and United States sovereignty that is being applied .
The other is that the Member States of the European Union also sovereignly decide whether to accept prisoners from Guantánamo .
Of course the Presidency-in-Office of the Council is clearly in favour of cooperation and of encouraging cooperation , while respecting the right to security of every country and every citizen , which is therefore another principle that needs to be taken into account .
Therefore , as Mrs Gomes said , we need to promote cooperation between the United States and the European Union , but also cooperation between the Member States of the Union .
We need to cooperate among ourselves on this , we need to have dialogue among ourselves , and part of this dialogue needs to go even further than the specific subject of Guantánamo .
This matter has been mentioned in some of the speeches , for example , by Mrs Hautala and Mr Czarnecki : the subject of victims .
I think that this is one of the areas of dialogue that we should implement in our relations with the United States .
I think that this dialogue regarding the victims of the various terrorist crimes is a matter that needs to be dealt with in the future , but in any case , there is an in-depth dialogue ongoing with the United States on this issue .
I would like to finish by saying that the European Union has a very clear position regarding the issue of Guantánamo in favour of the closure of the prison .
The European Union has a very clear position that human rights and fundamental freedoms should not be violated on any grounds , and , of course , in favour of the fight against terrorism and the need to work together with the United States .
This is a credible position , given that there has undeniably been a radical change , an obvious radical change from the past , in terms of the counter-terrorism policy of the United States and of President Obama and in terms of a whole series of policies relating to detention , transfer and interrogation .
This is the position that we need to strengthen and help to consolidate .
The Council 's position is therefore one of clear cooperation with the United States in order to achieve what we all want , which is the permanent closure of the Guantánamo prison .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , I want to reiterate that we believe that it is in the interests of all of us in the European Union to close the Guantánamo detention centre , and , as I have stated before , the Commission expects further progress on closing Guantánamo in the near future to be made by the American Administration .
As a comment on Mr Scholz 's intervention , I would like to underline again that we believe that the prime responsibility for Guantánamo lies with the United States .
However , the Commission is of the opinion that we , the European Union , should be as helpful as possible in resolving the issue and some important steps have already been taken by the Obama Administration . They were mentioned by the Minister .
In response to Mr Zemke 's question , we should indeed mention that Obama ended the use of enhanced interrogation measures and techniques , and we welcome this step .
In response to Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra 's question about the 50 detainees whose fate is not decided yet , we believe that the US Administration will proceed with those 50 cases and they will achieve a state or solution similar to those achieved in the previous ones .
The Commission has not yet received the report of the task force , so we cannot give you any specific clarification , but in general , we believe that we want a due process for all .
Finally , we believe that we should continue to support a coordinated EU approach to the situation , and we will appreciate Parliament 's input and efforts in this respect .
The debate is closed .
Key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the CITES ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council on key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) in Doha , 13-25 March 2010 , by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B7-0003 / 2010 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission on key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) in Doha , 13-25 March 2010 , by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B7-0004 / 2010 ) .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Samecki , 2010 is the International Year of Biodiversity and the EU is about to press ahead with a new strategy for biodiversity , in other words , for the protection of flora and fauna within the area of the European Union .
It would greatly enhance the credibility of the European Union if we were also to work on an international level to protect endangered flora and fauna globally and to give this our support .
There will be an opportunity for this next month at the 15th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) in Doha .
The EU must make itself a champion for all species which , as a result of various different factors , but in particular , over-exploitation or destructive and illegal practices , are endangered or even threatened with extinction .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has debated this issue in detail and will table a proposal for a recommendation in plenary tomorrow , and we would be very pleased if the Council and the Commission were able to endorse these recommendations .
Due to the time constraints , I will just mention a few example species which , in our opinion , are in need of a high or an even higher level of protection .
Firstly , there is the African Elephant .
We are most definitely opposed to the downlisting of this animal from Appendix I to Appendix II .
The prohibition of international trade , particularly in ivory , must remain in place .
Secondly , there is the Asian tiger .
It is now on the brink of extinction , and we are demanding stricter protection regulations for many parties to the Convention , in particular to prevent the illegal trade in the body parts and derivatives of the tiger .
We know that there is a large market for tiger bones and components of the tiger in Asia and this is threatening the existence of this animal .
Thirdly , there is the protection of the polar bear .
Climate change is threatening to destroy the habitat of this species and there is also an increase in trade in the body parts of polar bears .
We are therefore in favour of uplisting the polar bear from Appendix II to Appendix I. I would also like to mention the protection of various species of shark .
Various shark species are being over-fished , in particular the porbeagle and the spiny dogfish , but other shark species are also affected by this .
Up to this point , there is consensus among us .
I now come to the controversial issue .
The source of the controversy is the classification of the Atlantic bluefin tuna , which is found in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are aware of the recommendations of the ad-hoc working group of the FAO , which wants to leave the Atlantic bluefin tuna in Appendix II .
However , we are also aware of the proposal by the CITES scientific committee , which wants to uplist the Atlantic bluefin tuna to Appendix I. The background to this proposal is the data which reveals what is happening with this species .
The stocks of Atlantic bluefin tuna declined by 75 % between 1957 and 2007 , and in the last ten years alone , there has been a decline of 60.9 % .
The risk to this fish is increasing and gaining momentum and therefore , the vast majority of us in the committee were of the opinion that this species should be included in Appendix I.
This means that there will only be restrictions and prohibitions on international fishing fleets , not local fishing .
Thus , the small , local fishermen can continue to catch this fish , and the preservation of the fish in the ecosystem is , in any case , more important than the general availability of sushi and sashimi .
That is the conflict that we face .
We need to take a long-term view and should provide proper protection for the Atlantic bluefin tuna in Appendix I.
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to be here on behalf of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council .
I am very grateful for your interest in the positions to be taken at the next Conference of the Parties to the CITES Convention - the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora - to be held in Doha ( Qatar ) on 13 to 25 March .
The Council considers the Washington Convention to be a fundamental instrument for the protection of species of fauna and flora that are in danger of extinction .
We therefore need to play an active role in order to ensure that CITES is maintained as an effective tool for its dual objective of conservation and the sustainable management of natural resources .
In this respect , it should be pointed out that the European Union applies much more restrictive regulations than the Convention itself , using the principle of precaution in order to maintain or , if necessary , reduce the loss of biodiversity .
The next Conference of the Parties , to be held in Doha in March , referred to as the ' COP XV ' , is a great opportunity to debate a series of proposals to change the classification of various species of flora and fauna in the appendices to the Convention according to the level of threat , and other proposals to improve the application and observance of the Convention .
The European Union will play a constructive role in the Conference of the Parties , and I am particularly keen to hear Parliament 's views on the various matters that we have on the table .
We have followed with interest the debates that have taken place in Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in order to draw up the resolution that I understand is to be put to the vote tomorrow on the strategic objectives that the European Union should set for the conference .
I must say that the Council is still awaiting a proposal from the Commission on the position that the European Union should adopt regarding the documents and proposals submitted to the Conference of the Parties to be debated and , if appropriate , adopted .
It is therefore difficult at this time to give detailed answers on these issues .
As soon as the Council receives the proposal from the Commission , the Spanish Presidency will ensure that it is examined , and that the corresponding decision can be adopted before the Conference of the Parties begins .
The Spanish Presidency will also inform Parliament of the Council 's position once it has been agreed .
As in previous meetings of the Conference of the Parties to CITES , the Member States will work together to defend the position agreed within the European Union , and will ensure that it is consistent with the Union 's policies .
It is important to point out in this respect that any amendment to the appendices to CITES should be based on the inclusion criteria set out in the Convention , which take into account the conservation status of the species concerned .
These amendments should also take into account the importance of controls in the context of CITES in order to improve conservation status , minimise unnecessary administrative burdens and ensure that resources are allocated directly to the areas that are of genuine concern for conservation .
The Conference of the Parties to CITES will once again have to adopt more crucial decisions to protect species threatened by over-exploitation , to which international trade could be contributing .
The European Union must ensure that the Convention continues to be an essential instrument for contributing to the conservation and sustainable management of precious wild flora and fauna resources .
The Presidency , working together with the Member States and the Commission , will attend the Doha conference in this spirit , and will work constructively to ensure its success .
I am waiting to hear your points of view , ladies and gentlemen , on the objectives that need to be defended at this next 15th Conference of the Parties to CITES , which I will pass on to the Council .
I know that the Council has the support of Parliament for participating in this conference with the common objective that the CITES Convention should continue to make a significant contribution to the sustainability of our planet , for our own benefit , and for the benefit of future generations .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the forthcoming 15th Conference of the Parties indeed offers a unique window of opportunity to improve the conservation and status of a wide number of species affected by trade .
The European Union is one of the major markets for wildlife products . Therefore , it has a specific responsibility to ensure that wildlife trade is sustainable and that robust international rules are adopted within the CITES Convention to that effect .
It is a priority for the Commission to make sure that international trade is not detrimental to the survival of endangered plants and animal species .
In this respect , the EU has been playing a leading role within CITES and will continue to do so at the next meeting .
The Commission will , in the coming days , adopt a proposal for the EU position in view of this meeting .
The common EU position will then be adopted by the Council .
In its discussions with the Member States , the Commission will make sure that the final common position supports ambitious and science-based measures .
I would also like to thank Parliament for its position on the most salient issues which will be discussed at the CITES Conference of Parties .
This resolution sends a clear message which we will need to take into consideration .
While the detailed position of the European Union has not been finalised yet , I can explain the principles and priorities which will guide our decisions on the most sensitive issues to be discussed in Doha .
In the first place , the European Union considers that CITES is an appropriate instrument to regulate trade in all species which are affected by trade .
This is the case for terrestrial as well as for marine species and for species subject to important commercial interests or not .
In that vein , the European Union has tabled proposals to regulate trade in two shark species : porbeagle and spiny dogfish .
It is of the utmost importance that sharks at last receive the protection they deserve after decades of overfishing .
A listing under CITES Appendix II would put an end to unregulated international trade in shark products which is one of the key drivers of their exploitation .
With such listing , trade in those shark products will only take place if they stem from sustainable managed stocks .
The European Union is also proposing to arrange for the protection afforded by CITES to the tiger , which is one of the most endangered species in the world .
2010 is the international year for tigers and is a perfect opportunity to strengthen the current mechanisms in CITES to allow for a merciless fight against illegal trade in this species and improved transparency in range states on how the tiger populations are conserved .
I would also like to touch upon some of the other important proposals which Parliament has also clearly identified .
The first is Atlantic bluefin tuna .
I have to repeat here that there is no final position on this issue .
What I can tell you is that there is concern within the Commission on the current state of the stock and that we are working hard to find an appropriate proposal that will help properly address this problem at the international level .
The final Commission position will take account of the latest scientific information on the stock and of the outcome of the meeting of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna which took place in November last year .
The second is elephants and the ivory trade .
This has been a longstanding , contentious issue within CITES , especially among African countries themselves .
The Commission is very worried about the high level of poaching for elephants and illegal ivory trade which has been observed recently .
The protection afforded to elephants needs to be reinforced , and the Commission will not support solutions which would present a risk of increasing poaching .
In that context , we believe that it would not be appropriate that the next Conference of Parties agrees on a resumption of the commercial ivory trade .
We also consider that proposals submitted to CITES with a view to downlisting some elephant populations from CITES Appendix I to Appendix II need to be assessed objectively on the basis of the rules agreed within CITES .
Allow me now to say a few words about the proposal by the USA related to the prohibition of the international trade in polar bears .
We are all aware that the ice melting in the Arctic is a dramatic threat for the survival of this species .
This needs to be addressed first and foremost via a very ambitious policy on climate change and I think that the EU has clearly shown the way to go in the matter .
We also believe that it is worth checking how any additional threat to this species might be mitigated .
International trade is limited but might exacerbate the pressure on the species .
Our final position will depend on how the measure proposed by the United States provides real benefits for the conservation of a species .
Finally , on the question of corals , there is no doubt that red and pink corals have been overharvested in many regions of the world .
At the last CITES meeting in 2007 , the European Union backed a proposal by the United States to regulate international trade in both species and we have again cosponsored a USA proposal for COP15 .
I believe that the European Union should be consistent in this support as the new information available does not show any improvement in the situation .
I would also like to stress that such regulation would by no means result in the prohibition of trade but would just make sure that trade is possible when it is sustainable .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , with regard to CITES decision making , I am a firm believer that the decision-making procedure should be transparent and it should be purely based on sound scientific facts .
That is behind Parliament 's resolution concerning polar bears , elephants , tigers , big Asian cats and sharks .
With particular regard to the question of listing bluefin tuna on Appendix I of the CITES convention , I would like to raise a couple of issues .
Firstly , a broad majority of the scientific community agrees with the need for a ban on international trade to ensure the future existence of the species .
According to ICCAT , the current spawning stock biomass is less than 15 % of what it was before fishing began .
From these scientific estimates , it follows that there is a very realistic fear that spawners might become virtually extinct by 2012 .
A majority of the FAO ad hoc expert advisory panel considered that the available evidence supported the proposal to include Atlantic bluefin tuna in CITES Appendix I , and further stated that the listing would at least ensure that recent unsustainable catches in the east Atlantic and Mediterranean were reduced .
Due to the fact that the panel needs to take unanimous decisions , and due to heavy resistance from Japan , this was not the panel 's final suggestion .
However , the view of the unquestionable majority of the panel cannot be disregarded .
Furthermore , on the basis of scientists ' decisions , it clearly concluded that the criteria for the inclusion of bluefin tuna in the CITES Appendix I have been met .
This is a matter of political opinion in several cases but , on the matter of biodiversity and extinctions , we cannot compromise and we cannot haggle .
When there are no fish , there is no catch .
Mr President , Mr Leinen has covered everything else I wanted to say , so I shall focus mainly on the question of tuna .
We really do need to look at this issue from a scientific point of view .
Bluefin tuna is in immediate danger of extinction .
That is why absolute protection from global trade , in other words , trade outside the European Union , is the only appropriate solution .
The CITES Secretariat announced last week that it proposes including listing tuna in Appendix I , which means a ban on global trade .
It said , and I quote : ' the Secretariat concurs with the majority of the FAO ad hoc expert advisory panel that these species meet the criteria for inclosing appendix I ' . In other words , it supports this proposal in the corresponding FAO proposal , which is based on the ICCAT proposal .
So the scientific part of the debate has been resolved .
Now let us examine it from a political and social perspective .
Tuna stocks are collapsing .
Scientific agencies maintain that , if global trade is not banned , in a few years there will be no bluefin tuna .
The regulation of fisheries has so far failed to deliver .
Instead of 19 000 tonnes of bluefin tuna , as proposed by the ICCAT for 2008 , it is estimated that 50 000 tonnes were caught .
We propose that the global trade should be stopped today , while we still have time to save tuna , that trade should continue within the European Union , which is not affected by CITES and , at the same time , that the European Union should compensate fishermen and undertakings affected by the ban on exports .
The S & D Group has tabled an amendment to this effect .
It will allow stocks of bluefin tuna to recover and trade to resume .
In this direction , by way of exception , provision has been made to allow the ban on global trade to be lifted as soon as tuna stocks have recovered , rather than gradually , as provided for other species .
If global trade is not banned , then stocks of bluefin tuna will collapse , the fisheries sector will go under and then no one will be entitled to compensation .
If we truly want to protect fishermen , we must support the inclusion of bluefin tuna in Appendix I to the CITES Convention . Otherwise , jobs and a beautiful and unique species will be lost forever .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , today is supposed to represent a new start for Europe , but what have we here ?
We have a Commissioner and a Minister just going through the motions .
No fault to you , Commissioner , but please go back to the College and say we need to debate with the Commissioners responsible for the briefs in question .
It is almost as shameful as this resolution before us , which just highlights species after species facing extinction : a real reflection of mankind 's failure to plan for the future .
Of course , this issue of bluefin tuna , which no doubt will dominate the debate , really highlights the issue , it focuses it , and it is , of course , a species purely in European waters .
The most expensive fish in the world , each one selling for tens of thousands of euros .
Japan is stockpiling en masse .
Japan , where apparently the word ' conservation ' actually means buy en masse , kill the fish , and freeze them for 20 or 30 years so that they can be eaten in a couple of decades time .
There will be no fish left in the Mediterranean by then , but people will still be able to eat sushi if they can afford the bill .
This is a case where even organised crime is involved in the fishing industry , and it is not surprising when so much money is to be made .
The Mafia gets involved in this business .
And then you look at ICCAT , the International Council for the Conservation of Tuna .
' Conservation of tuna ' !
Species have dropped by 80 to 90 % .
We are facing extinction and you have a body which is set up supposedly to look after the tuna !
It has failed completely .
The targets which it has set itself will fail completely .
It ignores scientific advice ; it keeps setting quotas far , far too high .
Now some Members will say Appendix II is enough , but there is no evidence of that .
Appendix II will make no difference .
They will come back in a few years ' time and say , ' Sorry , got it wrong ' .
There will be no tuna left .
So let us back the proposal that this fish be cited on Appendix I. Let us just remember it is time we tried to control mankind 's greed ; it is time we tried to give a bit of thought to the future of our seas .
The way in which humans deal with natural resources , the way in which humans destroy habitats and overexploit wild plants and animal species , the way in which humans illegally trade in wild fauna and flora , all of this represents an ongoing attack on the biodiversity of spaceship Earth .
That very biodiversity is crucial .
This explains the importance of CITES ( the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species ) and it is why the conference next month in Doha is so important .
We have a strong resolution in front of us .
However , we must concede that attempts are being made to weaken that resolution behind the scenes .
A fierce battle is being fought over this .
That is why I ask everyone , especially my fellow Members from southern countries , from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , to ensure most emphatically that the recommendation of the Commission 's environmental policy to include bluefin tuna in CITES Appendix 1 be adopted .
This is crucial for the survival of this species .


Mr Leinen , many thanks ; you have said it all , we can talk about very many animals : the elephant , the Asian tiger , coral .
However , I want to pay specific attention to just one .
Yesterday , Blijdorp Zoo in Rotterdam announced that not a single European zoo has managed to breed polar bears .
The European breeding programmes for polar bears are unsuccessful and that is very bad news , mainly because the polar bear is threatened with extinction in the wild .
The sea ice is shrinking and the polar bear 's habitat is gradually being lost .
More than 70 % of the polar bear population in the wild may disappear within 45 years .
In addition , the polar bear is also threatened by trophy hunting and trading .
People apparently get a kick from shooting polar bears for fun , which I find truly repulsive .
That is why I am calling on the EU to support the proposal for a ban on the commercial trade in polar bears before it is too late ; the bluefin tuna also belongs in Appendix 1 without further ado .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , we are here today to talk about endangered species .
We are talking about sharks , tuna , polar bears , big cats and elephants .
We are talking about fishing quotas , conservation , maintaining habitats , and so on and so forth .
We are talking about whether these animals should be listed in Appendix I or II , or whether they are simply expendable .
We have at least two sides represented in this House , with differing attitudes .
One side wants the total conservation of a long list of species that are on the verge of extinction .
The other side cannot get the fishing and consumption quotas high enough and promises local fishermen short-sighted fishing rights that will result in the total eradication of certain species within a sport space of time .
We need a well-balanced middle path which ensures that we and our planet can continue to thrive in the future .
The documents we have here are full of so many technical details that one might get the impression that we were all specialists in this area .
Should we not spend our time instead on together preventing fish and shellfish being fished during their breeding periods in general , on ensuring that animals , plants and seas remain viable food providers long into the future , on giving the animals that we eat a reasonable life for their species before they are humanely slaughtered ?
Our thinking is too short-term and we are not thinking of the biodiversity that our planet needs .
It is not just about endangered flora and fauna ; this is a far more complex issue .
There is plenty to get on with - and how unusual it would be if we were to start taking preventive action instead of reacting at the last moment .
( RO ) The statistics show that bluefin tuna is fished in quantities which far exceed the permitted levels , which means that the bluefin tuna population is dwindling with every year that passes .
The proposal put forward by Monaco to include bluefin tuna in Appendix 1 of CITES may prove to be beneficial , given that this species is condemned to extinction unless urgent drastic measures are taken to protect it .
In 1992 , the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna adopted the recommendation on monitoring the trade in bluefin tuna .
Unfortunately , this has turned out to be a far from effective instrument .
In 2007 , the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna adopted a much more comprehensive programme known as the ' Blue Tuna Catch Documentation Programme ' , which came into force in spring 2008 .
Although this marks a step forward , it is still too early to give an assessment of this programme 's effectiveness .
As a result , I feel obliged to ask the following : to what extent can the position of the European Union in favour of including bluefin tuna in Appendix 1 offset , as part of the CITES conference , the desire of certain bodies and states which are not members of the European Union to adopt a standby policy until the hypothetical results of the recent initiatives from the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna can be assessed ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have heard the Minister describe CITES as an effective instrument and the Commission describe it as an appropriate instrument .
I agree .
So let us not change this instrument which , up to now , contrary to what many Members have said , has worked very well indeed .
Since tuna fishing was regulated and since lower quotas were set , fishermen have started to see not only more tuna , but also larger tuna .
The instrument works .
Including in Appendix I , which concerns species that are genuinely endangered , a species that still numbers - thank God - millions of living specimens would set a very dangerous precedent .
We are waiting for the new figures and it is on those figures that I hope we will base our regulations since , as a famous American journalist said , ' figures don 't lie , but liars figure ' , and how they lie !
We are accustomed , especially on the environmental issue , to hearing wildly inconsistent figures : there will be some figures that lie and some that do not lie .
The bluefin tuna is not facing extinction , but the bluefin tuna needs to be regulated .
Let us remember that there are entire communities that survive on this ancient activity , which dates back at least 11 200 years , so much so that in some cases , UNESCO considers it an activity to be preserved and promoted .
( PT ) Mr President , the UN states that biological diversity is currently experiencing its worst crisis since the dinosaurs became extinct 65 million years ago .
The destruction of coral reefs in the tropics , the growing desertification in Africa and deforestation threaten biodiversity and are having negative impacts on many sectors of the economy , such as food production , tourism , the pharmaceutical industry and energy production .
The UN also recognises that there has been a failure to achieve the target , set in 2002 , of reducing the present rate of loss of biological diversity by 2010 .
CITES constituted the principal global agreement on the conservation of wild species with the aim of avoiding the over-exploitation of species of wild fauna and flora by international trade .
The human consumption of natural resources , the destruction of habitats , climate change , the over-exploitation of wild species and illicit trade constitute the principal causes of the impoverishment of biodiversity .
It is therefore important to guarantee that , in the International Year of Biodiversity , the fundamental strategic objectives of the European Union in the context of the forthcoming Conference of the Parties to CITES will address the objective of protecting biological diversity , something which is fundamental for the well-being and survival of humanity .
We must be ambitious and demand the protection of all species threatened with extinction .
( NL ) I could talk about all the species on the agenda of the CITES conference at the end of March , but I want to highlight one , just because it so perfectly represents what we as a species are currently engaged in : the bluefin tuna .
This is a magnificent , impressive fish , which has been fished for centuries and which we have eaten for centuries .
Unfortunately , this fish is now on the point of dying out .
After years of mismanagement by politicians , who ignored biological recommendations time after time , who allowed short-term economic interests to prevail over the long-term perspectives of the sector , we now have no choice other than to totally ban the trade in bluefin tuna .
There are amendments on the table proposing a course of action other than banning the trade , but it is too late for that , unfortunately .
A few weeks ago , EUR 120 000 was paid for a single bluefin tuna .
That is the current reality .
It also explains the enormous illegal catches which are estimated to be twice the size of the set quotas .
That is why quotas do not offer any comfort .
They make no sense , as a result of the illegal catch .
The only salvation for the bluefin tuna is an international trade ban .
I know that the consequences for the sector will be hard , I fully realise that , but let us learn from this experience : when the sea is empty , things really will be over for the sector .
Therefore , let us deal more carefully with our environment , for economic reasons as well as ecological ones .
I call upon the European Commission to quickly present the decision to the Council in order to place the bluefin tuna in Appendix 1 and I ask the Spanish Presidency to step out of its own shadow and to adopt that decision .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the seventeenth century , humans exterminated the dodo .
Let us humans show that we have the ability to learn and avoid the bluefin tuna becoming the dodo of the 21st century .
( NL ) There is another UN summit in March , this time on the trade in threatened animal species .
It is the opportunity for the EU to speak with one voice again and , above all , for science to play an important role .
Let us look at what the science tells us .
Opting for short-term interests may mean opting for short-term interests for fishermen and hunters , but in the long term , this means the end of animal species as well as the end of many sectors .
The alternative is opting for the long term ; in the case of the bluefin tuna , we are talking about 2012 !
That is not the long term , that is tomorrow .
You must thus follow the recommendations of the European Parliament on a ban on the trade in bluefin tuna , but also ban the trade in polar bears and , moreover , have the African elephant placed on the said list in order to prevent it being increasingly hunted again .
Finally , there will also be a delegation from the European Parliament in Doha .
My wish is that the EP delegation will also play its part in determining the EU 's position , so that , together , we can ensure that these animal species are saved for our future .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to ask the Spanish Presidency to indeed preserve bluefin tuna , but also to preserve the traditional Mediterranean almadraba fishing methods .
These methods , which have coexisted with bluefin tuna for more than a thousand years , have never endangered it .
What is really endangering bluefin tuna is illegal fishing , industrial fishing , seine fishing and the proliferation of farms .
This is the real problem for bluefin tuna .
We should not be unfair : we need to be able to differentiate what is really endangering bluefin tuna , which is this type of industrial fishing - seine fishing - from traditional fishing methods .
The policy needs to be fair , and therefore we need to seek a path that does preserve tuna but that does not , of course , punish these traditional fishing methods .
I think that is the perfect balance which , at times , is impossible to achieve , but we need to try to find this path so that we can preserve this species and ensure that it does not become extinct , without punishing the traditional Mediterranean fishing methods such as the almadraba technique .
( PL ) Mr President , many cases of the illegal smuggling of endangered animals have been noted in Member States of the European Union .
At border checks , customs officials find birds pushed inside bottles and turtles squeezed in between the body and upholstery of cars .
According to a report of the Polish Customs Service , in 2008 , a record number of as many as 200 889 live specimens of protected animals and products made from protected animals were intercepted at the border .
In India , an inept fight against smugglers has led to a situation in which a dramatic rise in poaching has once again threatened the population of the Bengal tiger , for example .
The European Union , which has common external borders , should take particular care not to become a market where protected species of animals or plants are smuggled or brought in with impunity .
The European Commission should place particular emphasis on an educational campaign and appropriate communication with citizens .
The objective of this policy should be to raise the awareness of European tourists .
For every year , customs officials find products made from specimens of disappearing animal and plant species in the suitcases of Europeans returning from foreign trips .
The debate currently under way on the population of bluefin tuna is most certainly justified .
The statistics speak for themselves .
Over the last 50 years , the population of this species has fallen by as much as 75 % .
Stocks of tuna in the Mediterranean Sea are also gravely threatened .
Inclusion of the bluefin tuna in Appendix I to the CITES convention would appear to be fully justified and the only way to prevent its becoming extinct .
( ES ) Mr President , I share the concern regarding the biological situation of the population of bluefin tuna , and I agree with the need to adopt effective conservation and management measures that not only prevent it from collapsing , but also guarantee the sustainability of fisheries and responsible trade .
My country has been working towards this for years .
In addition to the age-old example of almadraba fishing techniques , it has created a protection zone in the Mediterranean , it has limited the seine fleet to six vessels , and has been pioneering in terms of adopting a recovery plan for the species and documented monitoring of trade .
Incorporating bluefin tuna into Appendix 1 of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) would ban international trade without solving the underlying problems .
The volume of catches is not limited , fishing flags can be switched to consumer countries , and it is a step outside of the recent agreements by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) , the regional fisheries management organisation responsible for managing this fishery .
It would therefore weaken international governance of the seas and the principle of responsible fishing .
We need to get to the root of the problems .
We advocate the reduction in catches already agreed in the ICCAT , and even a moratorium if it is determined by the scientific reports that are under way for the next season .
We want the European Union to strengthen its use of controls and fulfil the ICCAT recommendations for ensuring the traceability of catch processes and sales .
This line of action is compatible with the integration of bluefin tuna into Appendix 2 of CITES , but it cannot be reconciled with Appendix 1 , which should be reserved for a different scenario and not be subject to conditions that would erode its credibility as a CITES instrument .
In any case , this debate must send out a clear message : the European Union is completely committed to the sustainability of bluefin tuna , and will adopt the necessary measures to preserve it .
The industry must demonstrate that quotas work and are applied , and that illegal fishing can be controlled .
In order to save fishing , we need to save the species .
( GA ) Mr President , the condition of the bluefin tuna stock in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean is a source of worry for us all .
The scientific information cannot be disputed .
However , ICCAT - the international commission responsible for conserving bluefin tuna and for restoring and conserving the stock - has made tremendous efforts .
If the bluefin tuna is listed in Appendix I of CITES , bluefin tuna fishing will be completely banned for at least ten years .
To treat the fishing industry in Europe in this way is unacceptable .
It is vitally important that ICCAT is allowed to do its job .
For example , in 2006 , the total allowable catch was 36 000 tonnes .
The total allowable catch for this year has been reduced to 13 500 tonnes .
In 2011 , as ICCAT have proposed , this will undergo a reduction of at least 50 % to under 6 750 tonnes .
Further reductions in the total allowable catches will occur in 2012 and 2013 .
The measures undertaken by ICCAT must be carefully monitored .
If they are proven to be unsuccessful , then a total ban under Appendix I must be considered .
From an Irish perspective - and let me say that we have no vested interest apart from the fact that we have a bycatch of 100 tonnes of bluefin tuna - are we to catch bluefin tuna by way of a bycatch , and when they are caught and killed to put them back into the sea ?
That is certainly not a sensible way to proceed .
I believe it is important to take sensible and realistic measures to protect both stocks and the fishing sector in Europe .
While there are people here who are most anxious to protect tuna , let me say to those people who might come from rural areas depending on fishing , you must also think of the other endangered species - that is , our fishermen .
Therefore , I will be voting for the amendment to include bluefin tuna under Appendix II .
( SV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , look around you in this Chamber .
The empty seats can be seen as representing all the predatory fish that have disappeared from the world 's seas in the space of around 50 years .
The world 's fishing fleets have succeeded in emptying the planet of the predatory fish that are so important for ecosystems .
These include tuna , cod and salmon .
The EU is the second largest fishing nation in the world and our responsibility for the depletion of fish stocks is indisputable .
In the years 2000-2008 , for example , the EU fisheries fund paid more than EUR 23 million towards the building of new tuna fishing vessels - in other words , to an industry that also costs taxpayers millions every year in surveillance in order to reduce illegal fisheries ; and all so that 70 % of the fish can be exported to Japan to be eaten at exclusive business dinners !
I would like to remind you all that listing the bluefin tuna in Appendix I of the CITES Convention does not mean that small-scale fishery in Europe will be banned , but will merely bring to an end exports that are heavily subsidised by taxpayers .
It would make a good start to the UN 's International Year of Biodiversity .
( FR ) Mr President , today there remains less than 15 % of the original bluefin tuna stock .
In the face of such figures , the solution seems obvious .
Nevertheless , we should not forget about the jobs affected by the decision that we are discussing today .
It should be pointed out that the aim of the CITES is not to prohibit fishing but merely the international trade in this type of fish , 80 % of which is exported to Japan .
By protecting tuna , we are certainly protecting an endangered species , but we are also encouraging the continuation of a more balanced and sustainable fishing activity , one that is destined for our internal market and which generates employment .
I am in favour of the idea of listing bluefin tuna in Appendix I of the CITES and , while I believe that this decision will be positive , the help of the Commission will be crucial , since it will mean that the fisheries sector can be completely overhauled .
My question therefore concerns the conditions of this support .
France is requesting an 18-month extension accompanied by financial measures for those fishermen and ship-owners affected by a trade ban .
What is the Commission 's view on the subject ?
Moreover , I , like many of my colleagues , am concerned about fairness .
How can we guarantee that boats flying the flag of countries such as Tunisia , Libya and so on will apply the international trade ban as rigorously as we do ?
What will the new control and penalty measures consist of ?
Our policy of having sustainable economic activities has to be practical , and sometimes even unpopular in certain sectors , but I hope that the Commission and the Council do not lose sight of the adjustments needed in order to implement these measures .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I support - and I have also tabled amendments in this regard - the inclusion of bluefin tuna in Appendix II .
Supporting this certainly does not make feel me like a criminal .
On the contrary , I feel very much on the same wavelength as those who , before me , starting with Mrs Gardini , upheld a different position .
It is deeply flawed to put tigers , polar bears , elephants and tuna on equal terms .
The FAO would never allow itself to say anything different or to support a different position for these other endangered species .
Holding a different view on how to manage the tuna issue certainly does not mean forgetting that biodiversity is a value that must be defended at all costs .
The spirit of the motion for a resolution is absolutely worthy of support .
However , at a time when some people seem to be taking a step backwards in terms of estimating tuna biomass in the sea , rapidly moving towards inclusion in Appendix I probably means overlooking the side effects of this choice , which are severe and sometimes irreversible in many sectors of our economy .
In some ways , the same goes for the issue of coral and for its inclusion in Appendix II .
Here , too , there is data that does not definitely indicate the extinction or endangerment of deep coral , coral that is at a depth of more than 150-200 metres , which is what is covered by the measure .
( SV ) Mr President , once upon a time , it was actually possible to fish for bluefin tuna up in my part of the Baltic Sea , but we know what the situation is today .
The bluefin tuna is threatened with extinction because of intensive overfishing .
We are having this rather sad debate because the right decision was not made at the right time .
We have ended up here because for years now , we decision makers have refused to listen to scientific advice .
As a result , we end up in a situation in which drastic action is required .
In this connection , let me remind you of previous failures by humanity on this front .
The Canadian coast provides a good example of how man succeeded in totally destroying cod stocks .
These collapsed entirely because of overfishing , and they had just the same discussion there as we are having here today .
We must not allow the bluefin tuna to suffer the same fate .
That is why the French proposal , among others , is not a particularly good one , because it could have precisely this effect .
Of course , the fact that half - or nearly all - of the Committee on Fisheries is sitting here also shows that this House does not deal with these issues in the best way ; that is to say , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has discussions and comes up with ideas , and then those of us working on fisheries issues come here and debate them .
That is something that we should reflect on .
Nonetheless , I think that the Committee 's proposal is a good one .
It has a sound scientific basis , and there is no reason to change the Committee on the Environment 's approach to this issue .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , bluefin tuna has been on red alert for some time , and for years we have been hearing reports that clearly demonstrate that stocks are weak and how we have contributed to this , including through public subsidies .
The European Union has been spending up to EUR 34 million on modernisation in recent years .
I think that we have to say this , we have to take responsibility for the situation that we are in .
We have driven stocks of bluefin tuna to the brink of collapse , and we cannot say now that we are not responsible in any way .
We now have the opportunity to correct this problem by incorporating bluefin tuna into Appendix 1 of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , and this is the only way that we can do so , because I would like to stress that a lot of people rely on it for their livelihood .
It is true that there are sectors that have done the right thing and can and should continue to do so , but in order for them to do the right thing , there needs to be tuna .
If there is no tuna , they are not going to be able to do anything at all .
The only guarantee of this is Appendix 1 , and therefore any other measure that could clearly counteract this proposal is a bad measure that will prolong the agony , not put an end to it .
Therefore , let us not be mistaken , let us not cheat : we have an historical responsibility to this species , and to the people and the families who depend on it for their livelihood .
Let us assume our responsibility courageously and with the honour that the European Union is worthy of at this time .
( EL ) Mr President , my fellow members have already addressed every aspect of this issue .
I should like to state that I endorse the positions taken by Mr Milana earlier and to say that we need to bear in mind that including bluefin tuna in Appendix I will have numerous social and economic consequences , such as bankruptcies and the closure of numerous undertakings , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , job losses and a loss of competitiveness for Europe .
We must remember that bluefin tuna feeds a EUR 6 billion global market .
I should , in fact , like to hear a few scientifically-backed proposals which are designed to secure the future viability of populations of bluefin tuna , but which also take account of the viability of European fishermen and their families .
In my view , the best and most appropriate way is to include it in Appendix II .
Nor must we forget that the European Union is not out fishing on its own , either in the Mediterranean or the Atlantic .
Bluefin tuna fishing is a global activity .
European fishermen face strong - often unfair - competition from North African countries .
Unilateral viability of tuna populations makes no sense .
We must ensure that everyone is playing the game by the same rules .
Also , the fact that Japan has 30 000 tonnes of frozen bluefin tuna is perhaps of some interest and the ban may well cause stock prices to rise from USD 10 billion today to USD 20 billion .

Mr President , all elements of this agreement are important but I want to focus on the bluefin tuna issue .
It is vital that we act now to prevent a stock collapse and to allow the numbers of bluefin tuna to recover .
In 2006 , the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna agreed on an action plan designed to improve reporting and monitoring of stocks and inspection of vessels .
But it is clear that it is not enough .
The stocks , particularly the eastern stock in the Mediterranean , remains critically low and there is a very real risk that we will soon witness the extinction of this endangered species .
The Conference of the Parties to CITES should therefore agree to place bluefin tuna in Appendix I of the Convention , and the Member States and the Commission must do more to combat illegal fishing and to enforce agreed restrictions and quotas .
( ES ) Mr President , with regard to the possible prohibition of bluefin tuna fishing in the Mediterranean , I am very concerned that legal fishing will end up being pushed out by illegal fishing , and that the innocent will end up paying for the sins of the guilty .
In Catalonia , hundreds of jobs are at stake .
The fishing practised there is respectful , fully regulated and monitored , in terms of both fisheries management and trade management .
Since 2006 , in the East Atlantic and the Mediterranean , fishing of bluefin tuna has been reduced by 30 000 tonnes to 13 500 tonnes .
The minimum size of fish has increased from 10 to 30 kilos , and an 11-month fishing season has become an 11-month closed season .
Finally , I do not think there is a consensus between the international specialists regarding the threat of extinction of bluefin tuna .
If populations are compared between 1970 and 2010 , which is when there is monitoring data , the population of bluefin tuna is above 15 % .
It is between 21 % and 30 % , therefore clearly above the 15 % for Appendix 1 of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) .
( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to talk about commercial fishing species , and I would like to make it very clear that regional fisheries organisations are already responsible for managing and conserving these species .
In fact , one only has to skim through the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) to realise that it is perhaps designed for elephants and polar bears , but it is not , of course , designed for commercial fishing species .
I am not against protecting bluefin tuna , as that would be absurd , if only because of its importance to the fleet .
I do , however , think that the measures need to be decided by bodies that have the best specialists in both managing fisheries and scientific research , because there is a reason why the CITES has to take external advice when it receives proposals on these species .
I therefore think that the proposal to include bluefin tuna in Appendix 1 of CITES is unnecessary and unjustified , because it already has the measures imposed by International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) .
It is unfair , because it would gratuitously damage a fleet that has just embarked on a huge drive to reduce fishing , and even counterproductive , because it could give rise to an uncontrollable black market in bluefin tuna .
I understand the enormous pressure that public opinion in general and this House in particular - as we are seeing - is experiencing from environmental NGOs .
My political group has therefore decided to support inclusion in Appendix II as a compromise between the proposal of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and those of us who think that fisheries management cannot be snatched away from regional fisheries organisations .
Our proposal is indeed based on the scientific advice to CITES .
The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations ( FAO ) has recommended that bluefin tuna only be included in Appendix II of CITES , which demonstrates that many people have not even read the FAO report .
Mr President , I welcome the assurances we have been given here this evening that the EU will not support any proposals which would lead to an increase in illegal ivory poaching , yet I am dismayed to hear that the Commission then goes on to state that any proposals to downgrade the African elephant from CITES Appendix I to Appendix II need to be assessed objectively on the basis of the rules laid down by CITES .
These two statements are in direct contradiction to each other .
Any discussion of relaxing the protection afforded to elephants under the CITES Convention will send a green light to poachers in the hope that soon there will be a market for their illegal and cruelly acquired goods .
Zambia and Tanzania are in violation of the Convention as they did not consult all the elephant range states as required in Resolution 9.24 of the CITES criteria for amendments .
We expect the Commission and Council to ensure that the constitution of CITES , and the agreed moratorium , are respected .
How do they intend to prevent the illegal proposals from Tanzania and Zambia from being placed on the agenda in the very first place ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe I can state with sufficient confidence that the speech by the Chair of the Committee on Fisheries , Mrs Fraga Estévez , provided some technical information that either we are pretending not to know , or we probably do not actually know .
She mentioned what the FAO 's recommendation is , what the truth is and what is being called for .
Everything else is manipulation and conditioning of this Parliament and many Members .
I would not want us to forget that policy must be sovereign and that we must keep the influence and pressures of economic groups , which likely want different things , out of this Parliament .
We know that in the last two years , the price of tuna has fallen and we know that we have set restrictions whereby there has already been a reduction of 40 % .
Going on the basis of studies that none of us is sure are true , everything else is manipulation on the part of economic powers that probably want the exact opposite of what we are seeking , namely to increase the price of tuna beyond all proportion and to see to it that , in the end , the only ones to pay are the small economies of small fishing fleets , on which many regions of this wonderful Europe of ours depend .
Next I would like to recommend that the Commission and the Commissioner - also in view of the fact that the new Commission includes a Minister for Foreign Affairs , now surely more titled that in the past - ensure that agreements are reached with other non-European states so that the ban on bluefin tuna fishing does not apply only to Europe , and seek to control prices , including for non-European countries .
Clearly we support Mrs Fraga Estevéz 's amendment and all that it entails as far as Appendix II is concerned .
( PT ) In November last year , the ICCAT adopted strong measures to restrict catches of Atlantic bluefin tuna : a reduction in catches from 22 000 to 13 500 tonnes in 2010 and a restriction on purse seining between 15 May and 15 June .
Ambitious and unprecedented measures , in the words of the then Commissioner , Joe Borg .
These decisions were taken in accordance with the latest scientific views on the species and their impact should be evaluated before the end of 2010 .
It therefore makes no sense to bring forward new restrictions which will be economically and socially punitive for the sector , especially in the period of serious crisis that it is experiencing , such as those which are equivalent to the inclusion of Atlantic bluefin tuna in Appendix I. The fisheries sector requires a dynamic balance between its three pillars : the environmental , economic and social pillars .
With respect to its environmental requirements , these must be scientifically-grounded , as in fact was the case in the ICCAT meeting given the active participation of the European Union .
This being so , to include Atlantic bluefin tuna in Appendix I would constitute a serious precedent of ignoring the need for : first , a scientific basis for the announcement of restrictions ; and second , a balance between the environmental , economic and social pillars .
It would thus open the door to other decisions taken in an overly swift and biased manner , perverting the norms of responsible management .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the proposal made by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to list bluefin tuna in Appendix I of the CITES is too radical a measure .
I shall therefore make it dependent on three requirements , which I believe allow a fair compromise .
The first concerns the independent scientific opinion that is due to be published in October 2010 and approved by the CITES meeting in September 2011 .
I believe that this scientific opinion is crucial .
We must be certain that the species is genuinely endangered before taking a radical decision on the fishing of and trade in bluefin tuna .
Secondly , it is vital to have a guarantee that Regulation ( EC ) No 865 / 2006 on the CITES will be amended , since this will result in a general exemption for the internal trade in bluefin tuna .
This amendment will mean that we obtain what we all want : the survival of our small-scale coastal fishing , particularly in the Mediterranean .
Thirdly , I believe that , since we are deciding to include this listing in Appendix I , financial support from the European Union for the fishermen and ship-owners affected by the decisions is essential .
Lastly , this decision , if approved under the conditions that I have just mentioned , will have to be accompanied by significantly stricter controls to combat illegal fishing .
It is under these conditions and these conditions only that I can agree to the listing of bluefin tuna in Appendix I of the CITES . Without these assurances , a listing in Appendix II remains the least worst solution , if not , in fact , the best solution .
( NL ) Mr President , we cannot permit ourselves to ignore the loss of biodiversity .
Those could have been my words , but they are those of the European Commission , of the Commissioner for the Environment , Mr Dimas , to be precise , during the presentation last month of a communication on biodiversity .
I assume that the new Commission sees this in just the same way and considers the importance of biodiversity just as seriously .
If not , then I would like to be told that .
Precisely because of the involvement of the European Commission in biodiversity , it surprises me that it is the Commission that is doing everything to save species and to push back the loss of biodiversity on the one hand , while the same Commission does not - or does not yet - have the courage to simply propose adding an endangered species such as the bluefin tuna to CITES Appendix I. That sounds like two sides of the same coin .
Of course , we must financially support fishermen who work in good faith in order to pass this intervention .
On that point , I agree with the previous speaker .
In addition , we must deal more firmly with the illegal catch of tuna .
However , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , I would go one step further . For me , CITES and , in particular , the bluefin tuna , is a test case .
A test case to establish whether you , the Commission , are in a position to follow up your words with action . A test case to see whether this new Commission can show leadership or whether it will permanently lend a willing ear to the Member States , who , as we know , will not agree on this , and whether it can avoid getting bogged down in wordings and communications , but will instead actually take action .
I have just cited your words ; you say you are prepared to do this , so it is now time to move from words to deeds , and I would say to the Commission : start with the bluefin tuna .
( MT ) If we permit the fishermen to do as they please , then we will be contributing to the depletion and extermination of tuna stocks .
Similarly , however , Mr President , if we place a total ban on the trade in tuna , then we would be destroying the fishermen , the fishing community , their families and the community that depends on them .
I believe that these are two extremes : neither should we annihilate tuna stocks nor should we destroy the sector that relies completely on it .
However between these two extremes there is a path that we can take , that leads to a compromise .
There is the path whereby one can control the fishing sector much more than was previously done without closing it down completely .
Therefore , I believe that placing tuna in Appendix I of the CITES Convention is an extreme measure that should be avoided .
We would be better off following what ICCAT is proposing , as it has been reducing quotas for fish catches for years .
However , in order to reach a compromise , we could also place it in Appendix II of the CITES Convention .
Mr President , in order to avoid the depletion of tuna stocks , we do not need to put an end to the many fishermen that depend upon them .
It is possible to reconcile these two .
Mr President , if you will pardon the pun , I think this is a Catch-22 situation for many of us because , if we ban the catching of fish , and particularly of bluefin tuna , fishermen will go out of existence .
If we do not ban it , then there will be nothing to catch .
I think one of the key elements here - and it is constantly coming up in many of our debates - is the scientific evidence .
People have said that the scientific evidence is not reliable enough , it is not extensive enough and it is not up-to-date enough .
I would like to ask the Commission and the Council : are they happy with the scientific evidence that is being produced ?
Because you can quote scientific evidence but then somebody might come along with a different example of a recommendation from other scientists .
So I think that is a key element in this , and I would like to hear what the Commission and the Council have to say about it .
( ES ) Mr President , today we have heard illegal fishing being confused with mafias , and I also want to speak out in favour of a sector that has demonstrated on many occasions that it is responsible .
I advocate the need to control fishing .
I also advocate the need to control mafias .
This cannot , however , be a reason for including bluefin tuna in Appendix I.
I must also say that the Basque fishing fleet , which is going to be significantly affected by this decision , if it is taken , has demonstrated that it is very responsible , because in order to defend the sector , on occasions it has asked for fishing to be suspended in other fisheries , for example , anchovies .
I also have to say that we should listen to what the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) says since , in 2009 , it adopted more restrictive and stronger management measures in line with the recommendations of the Scientific Committee .
I would like to point out that for 2010 , a fishing quota of 3 500 tonnes has been decided .
In 2009 , it was 22 000 tonnes and in 2006 , it was 32 000 tonnes .
Therefore , the compromise was made to implement new control measures if necessary .
I am not in favour of the inclusion of bluefin tuna in Appendix I , as it could damage many sectors , including the small-scale sector , which has not been considered today .
We should therefore only support its inclusion in the event that these measures are not effective .
( DE ) Mr President , as a European from the Alpine region , allow me to move from the water back to the land .
I would like the Commission to take a request to Doha concerning the proposal for an identity marking requirement .
As we know , bred birds of prey - I am thinking specifically of falcons - are subject to an identity marking requirement when traded .
The animals are registered , ringed or , in the case of larger animals , tagged with chips so that they can be identified if necessary .
Without this identity marking , there can be no trade .
Thus , the point I would like to make is that for other species of animals that are endangered or bred , like the lynx in Central Europe , for example , there is no such requirement .
Thus , it can happen that free-roaming , escaped or traded animals are not identity marked and it is not possible to identify them precisely .
That is bad , both for behaviour research and for stock level research , and , of course , it also makes illegal trade easier .
I therefore propose that this identity marking be taken to Doha as a useful contribution to the debate .
Mr President , I came to the Chamber to be educated , or at least I hoped that would happen , because there are two very valid sides to this debate , in particular , concerning bluefin tuna .
The first point I would make is that we have spoken about illegal fishing practices , and it seems to me that illegal practitioners do not care about what appendix anything is in .
They will continue unless we have effective policing of these rules and regulations .
On the one hand , we can see some of the logic for an Appendix I classification , but there are socio-economic issues .
I think we need to focus on the results .
There is the issue of discards and the impact of an Appendix I categorisation on this matter for fishermen .
I am inclined to the view - but will be talking to colleagues later to discuss it within our group - that it should not be classified in Appendix I , and perhaps Appendix II is the place .
It goes to show that even with the length and quality of this debate , there is still some confusion , in my mind at least .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the controversial scientific data that we have heard from several parties and in view of a stock level that is certainly not yet , not even in the worst-case scenario , such as to warrant compulsory inclusion in Appendix I , I do not believe that such a restrictive measure , even with the limitations that clearly would be placed on certain territories in terms of fishing , is the best solution .
Also , in the light of the efforts that have been made in recent years towards reducing the level of fishing by specialist tuna fishing companies , in my view , we need to continue in this direction , keeping tuna in Appendix II and avoiding rushing ahead , which would be extremely dangerous for some territories and for companies in the sector .
First of all , I would like to thank all of you for your speeches , which I have found to be very useful for contributing to shaping the common position that the European Union should take to the next Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) .
The vast majority have highlighted the validity of the CITES in terms of helping to conserve species that are in danger of extinction .
As I said at the beginning , after the Commission has made its proposal to the Council , the Council will be able to shape its position at CITES with regard to the different items on the agenda for the meeting relating to the main endangered species .
For example , people have talked about tigers and about elephants - Mrs Bearder - about polar bears - Mrs Liotard - but the vast majority of the speeches have referred to the case of bluefin tuna .
Regarding this issue , we have heard a variety of opinions based on a variety of arguments .
The Council is , of course , aware of the results of the last meeting of the Scientific Committee of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna ( ICCAT ) in October 2009 , and also the recommendations of the FAO panel of independent experts in December 2009 .
The Council is therefore fully aware of the implications of the proposal to include tuna in the appendices of CITES , and not only for the conservation of the species , but also for the survival of the traditional fishing methods of some fisheries that have demonstrated that they are sustainable for the species .
The Council will therefore carefully evaluate all of the issues before adopting its position .
To conclude , I would like to reiterate the thanks of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council to you for your speeches and contributions during this decisive phase for shaping the European Union 's position for the next CITES conference , and I will be delighted to pass on the content of your speeches to the Council along with your great interest in the issues that are going to be discussed in Doha .
I would also like to convey to you the commitment of the Spanish Presidency to ensuring the conservation and sustainable development of endangered species .
We know that the Council has Parliament 's full support in this .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , my first general remark is to say that I really appreciate the contribution of all the speakers concerning all the objectives ahead of discussions at the conference .
I can assure you that the Commission will be in favour of sustainable trade for the benefits of both biodiversity and the communities which need to live in harmony with the species concerned .
Now , a few more specific comments in relation to your remarks ; first of all , as I explained , the overall position of the Commission on bluefin tuna will be adopted very soon .
This is an important matter because it relates mainly to the catches by the EU fishing fleets .
It has been felt that it is more appropriate that , instead of the outgoing Commission , the new Commission takes a clear position on this issue because the new Commission will be in charge of defending or promoting the EU position at the conference .
I am really confident that this proposal will ensure a sustainable future for both this species and the associated fishing industry .
This will need to balance short-term and long-term perspectives on this issue .
But , on more specific items and the questions raised by the distinguished Members of Parliament , on the question of support which could potentially be given to the fishermen affected , I think that we should stress that the Commission would be ready to assess the possibility of providing such support to the maximum possible extent , but we also need to remember that budgetary reallocations have been decided for many years and that we would also need to assess the financial consequences while we have a rigid financial budget for the perspective 2007-2013 .
There is one specific issue concerning the proposal to include bluefin tuna in Appendix II and I think it is important to note that there are very specific provisions in CITES which would apply in the case of an Appendix II .
There would be a lot of legal and technical discussions on what such a listing in Appendix II would actually mean .
The practical impact of such a listing would be uncertain .
That is why we need to think of what the practical consequences of putting bluefin tuna in Appendix II would be .
Regarding Mrs Bearder 's question on elephants , there are procedural weaknesses in the motions of Tanzania and Zambia but in our legal assessment , these flaws cannot be sufficient ground to procedurally reject these motions ex ante .
Finally , I will comment on Mr Kelly 's question .
Is the Commission happy with scientific evidence on many issues ?
I think it is difficult for the Commission to question scientific evidence because it would mean that the Commission has better scientific or research capacity than the research institutes , which is not the case .
That is why it is sometimes very difficult to take a position on the scientific evidence .
I have received seven motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate we are holding today on the 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to CITES in March is particularly important for the rational use of wild flora and fauna .
The motion for a resolution on the subject seems to be skewed in favour of a ban on the use of many resources .
I am referring , in particular , to the proposal to include Mediterranean red coral in CITES Appendix II .
I should like to point out that the scientific community feels that there is no threat of extinction to species in the family Coralliidae , given the abundance of this species in all waters in which they live .
Including coral in Appendix II therefore seems excessive and uncorroborated by scientific data .
Trade in red coral is a significant source of income in vast areas of the Mediterranean , and including it in CITES would have significant consequences for the economies of numerous countries , including Italy , with acute public alarm and resulting job losses .
For these reasons , we are against the inclusion of this species family in CITES Appendix II .
Furthermore , I would ask the European Commission to review the position it has adopted up to now , which appears to be more the result of excessive environmental extremism than considered scientific analysis .
Europe has always been attentive to problems associated with the overexploitation of wild species and illegal trade in fauna and flora .
Let us remember , though , that the CITES Convention should base its own decisions on results and on scientific data provided by the appropriate international bodies .
Two points are particularly sensitive : the proposal to include the species Corallium spp. and Paracorallium spp. in Appendix II , and the request to include bluefin tuna in Appendix I.
With regard to coral , we feel it is right to reiterate our opposition in the light of the negative opinion issued by the FAO 's scientific assessment panel in mid-December 2009 , which showed that there was no data on the decline of the species that would support their inclusion in Appendix II .
All that would seriously jeopardise the competitiveness of the coral goods craft industry , which is of major importance in terms of the economy and jobs in some areas of Italy ( Torre del Greco in particular , Alghero and Trapani ) .
As for tuna , there are countries such as France and Italy that are most concerned with bluefin tuna fishing and thus with protecting the species so it can be exploited sustainably .
We can support this motion but ask , however , that this inclusion be conditional on the implementation of the decision being deferred for 12-18 months and the provision of compensation for the sector .
Contrary to the impression that some people tend to give , the CITES is not an instrument designed to prohibit trade ; rather , its aim is to ensure that the international trade in wild animal and plant species does not threaten their survival .
Two weeks ago , I had the opportunity to meet the Namibian Minister for the Environment and Tourism .
By putting an actual monetary value on elephants in Namibia and by thus enabling a strictly regulated elephant trade to be established , the conditions are today in place to manage and to protect against poaching .
Thanks to those measures , the number of individual animals belonging to that species - the survival of which is not under threat - has significantly increased .
In the light of these points , I encourage you to support the proposal by Tanzania and Zambia to transfer the African elephant from Appendix I to Appendix II of the CITES , and to reject the proposal by Kenya .
in writing . - I strongly believe in sustainable development and do not question that the bluefin tuna ( BFT ) species is over-exploited and needs protecting .
CITES has been successfully used to protect exotic species from extinction , in cases where it is impossible to control innumerable poachers and hunters especially in developing countries .
But do we have the same situation here ?
The BFT of the north-east Atlantic is being over-exploited by a handful of trawling companies , each catching thousands of tonnes .
These trawling companies are from leading EU countries : France , Spain , and Italy .
The EU does not need an international environmental body to assist it in controlling the fishing industry practised in its Member States .
Of course , we have to be pragmatic .
If international political opinion means we cannot stop BFT from being listed within CITES , let us apply common sense and proportionality by listing the species under Appendix II , as has been suggested by an FAO expert group .
Putting BFT on Appendix I of CITES would cost my country 's economy close to 2 % of GDP .
It is no different than asking to close down the whole salmon industry in Scotland in one swipe .
Nearly 1 % of the labour force would lose their jobs .
Eligibility of housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Lambert van Nistelrooij , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , concerning draft Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council ( EC ) No ... / 2009 , amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1080 / 2006 , on the European Regional Development Fund as regards the eligibility of housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities
- C7-0095 / 2009 -

The European Parliament is dynamic ; from fish and CITES we move onto humans , because it is also important that they , too , are dealt with in a responsible manner .
I am glad that we are able to amend the European Regional Development Fund Regulation today in relation to housing people in difficult circumstances , marginalised groups throughout the Union .
I am also glad that we managed to reach agreement last week in the first reading on a whole range of problems that arose in a legal sense within the framework of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Together , we have come up with a wording for the first amendment of legislation under the Treaty of Lisbon , the first amendment of legislation in this new parliamentary term .
A whole range of other proposals have been blocked , but this proposal will make it .
I also thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for the pressure you exerted .
Together , we have said , ' This was actually already an agreement under the Treaty of Nice ' .
However , there was not enough progress .
It was linked to other areas , which is why an agreement was not reached under the Swedish Presidency .
There is also talk of a new situation this year , because 2010 is the European year of the fight against poverty and social exclusion , the best year by far to bring this type of instrument into being .
Together with others , I have therefore exercised great pressure to have this area completed , and just in time , I would say .
I am also glad and content , however , that the projects that were originally intended for problem groups in urban areas can now also be set up for implementation in rural areas .
Furthermore , the arrangement will apply to every country in the European Union .
The idea of cohesion continues to be a combination of social cohesion , economic cohesion and territorial cohesion .
In this proposal , the social dimension , social cohesion , is given top billing .
Throughout the consultation process , I have also been able to emphasise a number of points , which I will reiterate for you now : 1. expansion to all EU states , to all 27 Member States of the European Union ; 2. the criteria of sustainability ; and 3. the creation of more specific criteria for the integration of this type of building project into society ; many of the present locations do not actually meet the criteria and instead represent bad housing in bad places .
Rebuilding in bad places solves nothing .
Spending the funds - and we are talking about half a billion euros per year that can be paid within the regional funds -is , in itself , unjustified , if we do not choose good locations ; hence , specifying more detailed criteria .
Of course , none of this will solve the problem of the 9 million Roma , but housing is essential , the physical element is important and the Member States can now set about doing something .
I ask the European Commission , the outgoing Commissioner , to give an answer to the question of whether we will be informed in more detail about the implementation of the total package and be involved in it .
Finally , in my previous positions , I was responsible , amongst other things , for the problem of caravans in the Netherlands and I have seen how difficult this was to deal with .
I have paid visits to Romania and other countries in Eastern Europe and I recognise much of what I saw .
I think it really is very good that we are now able to take this decision .
Without good housing , good places and supplemental social policy , education and employment , we will not succeed .
I am very glad that we are able to do this and I thank everyone for their sound cooperation in recent months .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the proposal we are debating today is a tangible sign of the commitment of all EU institutions to promote integration of extremely marginalised and deprived communities into mainstream society .
The proposal meets the request of Parliament and of the Council and confirms that the Structural Funds have a role to play , not only by contributing financially but also by promoting an integrated approach to tackling social and economic conditions of marginalised communities .
The proposal specifically targets the Roma population which , in Europe , accounts for 10 million people .
However , in accordance with the common basic principles on Roma inclusion , the proposal does not exclude other marginalised groups sharing similar social economic circumstances .
The current compromise proposal extends housing interventions for marginalised communities to all 27 Member States and not only to the EU-12 as the Commission initially proposed .
The existing Article 7 applies only to housing interventions in urban areas , while the amendment proposes that housing interventions also be allowed in rural areas .
This extension is justified since the majority of the Roma population in the EU-12 is settled in rural and not in urban areas .
Under the proposed amendment , both the renovation of existing housing and the construction of new houses are eligible .
In fact , renovation of houses of extremely poor quality might result in a waste of public resources .
During the discussion of the proposal , the Committee on Regional Development asked for a specific reference to desegregation measures .
Recital 6 of the proposal now includes such desegregation measures as examples of actions which should go along with housing interventions .
Indeed , segregated settlements imply insecurity , no easy access to education or employment , as well as exposure to violent attacks and criminality .
The creation of new marginalised areas , although with decent and ERDF-supported houses , is definitively not our objective .
We know that many Member States have put in place integration policies of the Roma communities with particular focus on housing .
The implementation of these policies is not an easy task .
The Structural Funds can participate in this effort , supporting not only housing but more importantly actions improving the productive capacities of these communities , such as support for SMEs , women , entrepreneurship initiatives , etc .
In this respect , I would like to stress that the main objective of the cohesion policy is to make the regional economies converge by fostering the productive capacities .
As you are certainly aware , the new regulation will be accompanied by a declaration from the Commission - and indeed most Member States - stating that the eligibility of housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities throughout the European Union under the ERDF is of an exceptional nature .
This exception should in no way be regarded as a general opening of cohesion policy to financing housing interventions .
I would like now to refer to the proposal by the Committee on Regional Development to insert a specific recital on comitology into the text .
In this context , I would like to remind you that a horizontal solution of transitional provisions relating to comitology has , in principle , been found between the three institutions .
The aim of the Declaration of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission concerning the implementation of Article 291 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is to avoid raising institutional discussions on each individual file during the interim period pending the entry into force of a new comitology framework regulation .
The Commission therefore regrets the introduction of the recital , but will not block - for this reason - the agreement in first reading between the colegislators .
I am looking forward to the debate .
Mr President , I would like to stress that the amendment to the regulation which is under consideration today is of dual significance .
On the one hand , it directly concerns the problems of marginalised societies , even if that term is not very well defined .
On the other hand , however , it introduces an element which is also very important for the economy , I mean the possibility of finance from the European Regional Development Fund for the construction of housing , which caused a very serious controversy in the last term of the European Parliament .
This is , undoubtedly , a rather surprising effect of the crisis - arguments which MEPs put forward several years ago were rejected , and spending on housing was accepted only for the new Member States , while today , in the light of new economic and financial conditions , there is consent to the use of funds for housing in a highly specific context .
I think the experiment which is under way , and which is a very positive element , should be continued , and spending on housing should have a place in future cohesion policy , just as it does today .
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr van Nistelrooij , who , thanks to his persistence and patience during the last trialogue , managed to ensure that this important report was tabled for debate today and the vote tomorrow and that we do not waste valuable time by postponing it until March .
The report is extremely important , because it makes provision for the scope of the regulation on the eligibility of housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities to be extended to the entire European Union and not only to the new Member States , as provided for in the European Commission 's initial proposal .
It was unthinkable , both for the members of my political group and for our committee , that the old Member States should not be included in this extension to the scope of the regulation , because - as we all know - the housing problems faced by marginalised social groups , especially the Roma , are a serious issue , with social repercussions in all the Member States of the European Union .
We believe that the report and the extension of the scope of housing interventions to the entire European Union strengthens cohesion between all the regions , with no discrimination between old and new Member States .
It sends out a clear message that Community funding is based on the principle of combating social problems , regardless of the region of the Union in which they arise .
Mr President , 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , and it is in this context that we shall adopt , I hope , the report by Mr van Nistelrooij , which represents a major advance in the improvement of the living conditions of disadvantaged populations , insofar as it makes eligible for European aid , via the ERDF , projects for renovating and building housing and for combating energy poverty in all the Member States .
This proposal , which is supported by the Council of Europe , has long been awaited by all those who campaign for respect for the integration rights of marginalised communities , and particularly of the Roma .
On behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I welcome the fact that the Union is investing heavily in the improvement of housing for the most disadvantaged communities , but we must not stop now that we are doing so well .
We will be very vigilant with regard to the actual use of these funds , since they must not result in the exclusion of marginalised communities .
Indeed , there are numerous examples of urban renovation projects .
They include the restoration of the city centre of Barcelona , and the work to regenerate the historic centres in the new Member States , which have done particularly well out of real estate speculation through the explosion in rent and rental charges .
This , in turn , has led to the most disadvantaged families being driven away from the city centres .
These people absolutely must receive genuine social support and access to all public services , such as education , health care and public transport , but - as we proposed during the examination in committee - they must also receive resources sufficient to enable them to remain in these neighbourhoods , so that the latter do not become gentrified .
Parliament will have to evaluate the projects carried out before these funds are renewed in 2013 and will have to be involved in drafting the future regulation laying down the eligibility criteria , particularly in relation to transparency , so as to ensure that every single vulnerable population actually receives these funds and is afforded a dignified existence in the long term .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know what ghettos and slums are like from our own experience .
People living in these places earn the lowest pay and are often unemployed or dependent on social handouts .
They are people who do not pay their rent , electricity bills or water rates on time .
Rubbish is often found strewn around the streets and backyards in these districts .
All of the buildings that are shared or not owned by anyone are falling into disrepair .
We know from our own experience that socially marginalised groups live here .
These may consist of just a few families or individuals living in one block of flats or they may occupy an entire neighbourhood with thousands of inhabitants .
The location may be in the centre of a city or on the outskirts , or even somewhere completely outside built-up areas .
It is therefore good that the proposed change extends the scope of allocations from European funds to include the housing of marginalised groups and makes it possible for resources to be invested not only in cities , but also in the countryside , either by repairing the existing housing stock or by building new houses .
I firmly believe , however , that mere physical investment in infrastructure will not solve the problems of ghettos .
The fact that rubbish is cleared away , building facades are repaired , entrances renovated and buildings painted does not in itself mean that after a few years , a place will not look the same as it does today .
Ghettos are not just a matter of environment or buildings but also of the people who live here .
In future we should therefore look for ways to combine this investment with on-site social work , to accompany it with employment support for people living in the ghettos and particularly to enable young people to break free from the social poverty trap .
Only in this way will ghettos and slums become proper parts of our cities .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , Amendment 1 of this housing resolution proposes to extend use of the European Regional Development Fund to all Member States , not just those joining in 2004 .
So this is directly relevant to Britain .
It is clear from the resolution that the Roma population is the largest marginalised community in the report receiving support , plus others of similar socio-economic condition .
The overall budget for the European cohesion policy is a staggering EUR 347 billion over seven years - larger than many economies , even .
My constituents in East Anglia are already deeply concerned at the scale of the traveller and gypsy communities , particularly so in Essex .
They will be angry should any of these measures facilitate yet more EU mass immigration .
Britain has already seen a rise in population of three and a half million - half the size of London - in the 12 years since the Labour Government came to power in 1997 .
Given , too , that nearly nine out of ten new British homes - 86 % - will be due to immigration over the next 30 years , proposals like these seem to be yet another bridgehead for major immigration into Britain .
We do not have the room .
It is about space , not race .
Controlled immigration through permits and visas is a good thing , but uncontrolled immigration is a bad thing , for that is the fast route to extremism , which none of us desire .
( DE ) Mr President , support for housing interventions for households with particularly difficult socio-economic circumstances is , in itself , a very good idea .
The fact , too , that urban and rural areas are now to benefit equally from the support is very much to be welcomed .
However , the support must by no means only be allocated to certain Member States and certain communities , thus clearly favouring those groups .
That would be blatant discrimination against the other groups .
However , that is precisely what this proposal does .
It focuses , in particular , on the Roma people and also on legal migrants .
Furthermore , marginalisation must always be fought bilaterally - on the one hand , by the public authorities but , on the other , also by the groups affected , who should also play an active part in their own integration .
Finally , we need to evaluate very carefully how worthwhile all of these measures are and we need to say a definite ' no ' to preference on account of ethnic criteria .
( HU ) I would like to welcome the amendments to the European Regional Development Fund and to congratulate my fellow Member , Mr van Nistelrooij , on his report .
The ERDF supports numerous programmes which could significantly improve and do improve the living conditions of the Roma , who are Europe 's largest and most excluded minority , while not forgetting other groups who are in similar social and economic conditions .
It has long been an objective that arrangements regarding housing should no longer be limited only to cities , but should extend to the construction of new housing , and that these forms of support be made available to the old Member States as well , since this problem affects all of Europe .
Regions which , compared to the regional average , are considerably underdeveloped and ghettoised hamper the development of all of Europe .
A significant proportion of Roma live in disadvantaged areas throughout Europe , areas that are developed with the help of considerable support .
Immediate and joint action is needed .
For this reason , we must carefully consider ring-fencing at European Union level some of the resources exclusively for bringing some of the LAU level l statistical units up to standard .
It is very important to include an integrated approach in this regulation , ensuring that arrangements will take place in the context of a broader , more complex framework , taking into consideration perspectives such as education , economic activity and public service as well .
What is needed , in keeping with the positions adopted by the European Parliament , is a complex Community action plan that spans parties and cycles and which , with the help of appropriate financial resources and legal force , is able to achieve substantial improvement on each of the Laeken indicators that reflect the true extent of social exclusion .
( SK ) The aim of regional policy is to eliminate economic and social differences .
The EU has 27 Member States divided up into 271 regions .
In every fourth region , per capita GDP is 75 % lower than the average for the 27 EU countries .
This is an alarming figure .
European regional policy brings added value through measures that are implemented directly in the field .
It helps to finance specific projects to the benefit of regions , towns and villages and their inhabitants .
A very positive step was taken last year when the OEP changed the rules on the European Fund for Regional Development so that all Member States could use it for reducing the energy consumption of buildings .
Today , we already have concrete positive results .
In many towns , we have not only insulated buildings , but also the aesthetic value , the quality of life and the reduced cost of living are by no means negligible .
I am a Member from Eastern Slovakia , from one of the regions that are far below the EU average .
I therefore welcome the new draft regulation , which aims to extend the eligibility of housing to the benefit of marginalised groups .
In the 21st century , there are many groups of people living in demeaning conditions .
Their social status makes it impossible for them to get better housing for themselves and their children .
Local authorities will therefore be able gradually to integrate this group of inhabitants into the majority .
I welcome this proposal and I support it , together with my fellow Members from Slovakia and the S & D grouping .
Mr President , the problem which this report and its amendments on European regional development funding allegedly seeks to address is the one of the homeless or , as the report terms them , the marginalised communities .
The EU solution is to throw millions of euros at renovating and building thousands of houses .
This report initially concerned itself with funding housing in Member States that had acceded to the EU on or after 1 May 2004 .
Now funds are to be disbursed to all Member States .
According to the 2007 South-West Observatory Report for the south-western counties in England , the region 's population has been increasing rapidly , entirely because of migration .
Despite strong and growing public opposition to these developments , and the unsuitability of many proposed building sites , the EU house-building programme in Britain thunders on in complete disregard of democratic processes .
The South-West Leaders ' Council has now assumed control of , and approval for , planning - a classic EU example of statutory powers being vested in a non-statutory body .
The public mood in Britain is one of growing dismay .
Unlimited , uncontrolled immigration is feeding public anger .
Funding to support house building in Britain , and encouraging even greater numbers of immigrants to come to our shores , only exacerbates an already volatile situation .
Unless , as originally intended , this report addresses only those countries which joined the EU on or after 1 May 2004 , the way of life in Britain , particularly in rural areas , will significantly change with a correspondingly violent resentment from the British people .
( RO ) I welcome the report which has been presented and congratulate Mr van Nistelrooij for the way in which he has handled and finalised it .
I think that the ERDF regulation must be amended to allow states to use these finances to refurbish and build housing for marginalised communities .
The objective of the actions taken by national and local authorities must be sustainable social inclusion of these communities , both in towns and rural areas .
I welcome the fact that the concentrated effort to support the Roma community must involve all European Union Member States .
This is because the Roma population is the largest marginalised community in Europe , with a high level of cross-border mobility within Europe .
However , we must take into consideration the needs of other communities too , especially those comprising legal immigrants , as well as communities of workers engaged in temporary employment in other EU states .
For these reasons , it is a good idea to allow ERDF finances to be used for housing in all EU countries .
I believe in the success of this programme and I hope that we will continue by launching a new phase in supporting families from marginalised communities by providing suitable facilities and helping them find and hold down jobs , particularly during the current crisis .
I support this report which will also allow Romania to access funds for facilitating the social inclusion of marginalised people , including Roma , in both urban and rural areas .
( PT ) The aim of this report on the ERDF is to broaden eligibility for intervention in the housing sector in favour of the marginalised communities of our Member States .
Until now , this support only applied to marginalised communities living in urban areas in the new Member States .
In other words , given that the great majority of communities of this type live in rural areas and in shelters , such communities could not benefit from this support to replace poor quality housing .
Ultimately , it is a question of filling a gap and giving the Member States and their regions greater opportunities in terms of the policy to mitigate the specific difficulties of these communities .
I also welcome its equal treatment for all Member States , because marginalised communities with a need for assistance and integration deserve our concern , regardless of the Member State to which they belong .
If this important report in the fight against poverty and for human dignity is concluded at first reading , it will also be possible to implement it quickly within the economic recovery plan , thus responding swiftly to the crisis which is affecting us .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European cohesion policy was created in order to provide real answers , with the help of sizeable financial resources , to the questions posed by other European policies .
It was intended , in particular , to help the most fragile Member States cope with competition within the internal market .
Today , its main task is to find solutions to the challenges presented by the opening-up of borders and the free movement of persons , which are a very good thing but which may create temporary difficulties .
The issue of the living conditions of the Roma is linked to that of the opening-up of borders .
This is an eminently European issue .
Therefore , it is only right that all the Member States should be able to use the European Regional Development Fund , the ERDF , to build housing for the Roma and thus ensure true solidarity among Europeans .
I have requested , via several amendments tabled in the Committee on Regional Development , that this measure be extended to all the Member States of the European Union .
I am delighted that this idea has been taken up and I give my full support to this amended text .
In my view , this increased eligibility of housing for expenses cofinanced by the ERDF must lead us to consider other possible developments , in the medium and long terms , whether it be in terms of funding eligibility or of the earmarking of funds for certain strategic priorities .
( HU ) I , too , am pleased to welcome the amendment to the ERDF regulation and believe that this is now a concrete tool that can be of significant help in finding truly Europe-wide solutions to improving the situation of Roma communities , even if this tool does not serve Roma communities exclusively , but other marginalised communities as well .
To those colleagues who were speaking of immigration , I would like to say that , after all , if differences decrease , if living conditions improve , this works to counter immigration , and I think that we can expect that to be the result here as well .
I would like to enumerate a few perspectives that must in any event be taken into consideration in the regulation and its implementation .
It is very important that these resources should be available not only in an urban but also in a rural environment , in order that they may be used to increase housing supply by renovating as well as building new houses , that the reduction of segregation should be an important goal , and that the approach be an integrated one ; thus , it should go hand in hand with educational and occupational programmes , in a way that represents a sustainable , lasting solution .
Let me add that an important priority of the Trio Presidency is the improvement of the situation of the Roma .
The Spanish Presidency is taking significant steps in this direction , and the Hungarian Presidency will continue to do so as well .
Mr President , firstly I would like to compliment my colleague , Mr van Nistelrooij , for his industry and leadership in this very important area .
Owning a house is something I think many people aspire to , and it reminds me of the first lines of a poem I learnt from an Irish poet a long time ago .
It went , ' Oh , to have a little house !
To own the hearth , the stool and all !
The dresser filled with shining delph , The pile of turf against the wall ! ' .
And I think what we are doing here today is helping to bring that dream into reality for many people across the European Union , but specifically the Roma community .
It has been pointed out and , having discussed it , we suggest that it should be expanded to other marginalised groups .
In particular , I had in mind my own area of Limerick where , in places like Myross and Southill , they have suffered hugely due to drug-pushing and violence associated with it .
There is now a need for a major regeneration to alleviate these terrible situations .
Under these proposals , that can be done , and also it will be very important in kick-starting the building industry , which has suffered hugely right across the European Union as a result of the economic downturn .
So , we are moving at the right time and it can benefit the most marginalised so that they can all look forward to having a house , a hearth , a stool and the shining delph .
( RO ) The eligibility of housing interventions financed by the ERDF in favour of marginalised communities will help Member States improve the absorption of European funds .
My personal view is that this eligibility must be applied to all Member States .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1080 / 2006 was modified recently to allow all Member States to improve energy efficiency in homes .
The new text stipulates a rate of 4 % . For the sake of textual consistency and reducing bureaucracy , it would have perhaps been a good idea for us to retain the same percentage .
The new provisions stipulate the need to promote some urban development projects for areas threatened by physical deterioration or social exclusion , as well as for marginalised communities .
This also includes those areas affected by disasters such as flooding or earthquakes .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by urging the Commission to join forces with Member States and use 2010 to review the operational programmes in order to increase the absorption of European funds with a view to improving the social housing stock .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a well known fact that the consequences of the current economic crisis fall hardest on socially vulnerable groups of citizens .
I therefore welcome the fact that the EU is looking for ways to help these people .
While it is already possible for the European Fund for Regional Development to intervene in order to assist marginalised groups living in cities , rural areas have hitherto been virtually excluded from this type of intervention and must make do with payments from the financially weaker Fund for Rural Development .
I firmly believe that this financial imbalance must be corrected .
It is important for recognised expenditure not to be limited to replacing existing buildings with new ones , but also to include the renovation of existing residential buildings .
This would dramatically expand the range of possible interventions and increase the effectiveness of the measures .
In the new Member States in particular , the housing situation for these groups is often critical and solutions require immediate and decisive intervention by public bodies .
A broad opportunity is opening up for the EU Structural Funds to supplement in an effective way national resources that are , in themselves , insufficient to bring about a fundamental improvement in the situation .
I fully agree with the specific reference to the Roma population as the largest socially marginalised group and , at the same time , I endorse the view that interventions targeting the Roma should not exclude other people who find themselves in similar social and economic circumstances .
( LT ) People throughout the European Union have problems renovating their homes , but the situation is particularly complicated in the new European Union Member States .
The new Member States are united by a common trait - they all inherited inefficient apartment blocks , which are very expensive to maintain , and processes of renovation are either taking place very slowly or not at all .
It is very important that the application of this regulation is not exclusively limited to large , socially isolated communities , but that its provisions can also be applied to the most socially vulnerable groups , like the disabled , the poor , needy young families , immigrants and others , who also suffer from social isolation and do not have opportunities to renovate their homes .
I am convinced that , by taking advantage of assistance from the Structural Funds , this document will give every region of the European Union the opportunity to invest in social infrastructure , ensuring access to housing , and this , in turn , will not only help reduce social isolation , but will contribute to the creation of a stable social , economic and environmental protection policy in the whole Community .
( PL ) Mr President , the proposal of the European Commission concerning the Regulation on the European Regional Development Fund assumes that initiatives in the area of housing can be put into effect exclusively in urban areas and in the form of the renovation of existing housing .
The provisions do not cover rural areas , which means that many people from marginalised social groups living in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will not benefit from the proposed solutions .
This stems from the fact that in the new Member States , the poorest groups , which suffer social exclusion because of their low material status , live mainly in rural areas .
In my opinion , the introduction of amendments will be a beneficial addition to the regulation , which will also allow protection to be given to communities living outwith urban areas , which will give significant support to the work of the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development .
Change of this type will make it possible to improve the material status of the poorest communities , in which people are disadvantaged because of the place where they live .
This stems from the fact that in the new Member States , the difference in standard of living between rural and urban areas is much greater than in Western Europe .
In this part of Europe , unfortunately , material status is still a visible barrier to access to education , employment and participation in cultural life .
Ensuring better housing conditions to groups of people who suffer the greatest social exclusion will open the way for them to improve their social status and will encourage them to develop themselves .
Local governments and non-governmental organisations should join the efforts to help in the area of tackling social exclusion .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , allow me to begin by highlighting the role of the rapporteur , Mr van Nistelrooij , for his work in search of consensus in this matter and also for the willingness that he always demonstrated to include other contributions in his report .
Tomorrow , we shall vote upon amendments to the ERDF Regulation which are of particular importance for the so-called old Member States and also for Portugal .
These changes will expand the use of the ERDF in the housing sector in favour of marginalised communities since , at the moment , this fund can only be used for urban development operations .
The amendments that I and my fellow Members proposed , and which were approved by a large majority in the Committee on Regional Development , will allow the old Member States , and not only the new ones , as the original draft proposed , to be able to benefit as well from this possibility of financing .
In doing so , I tried to avoid creating a precedent , which I consider to be dangerous , and which would exclude all the old Member States from this and , in all probability , from additional uses of Union aid .
That would not make any sense , given that housing problems , especially those of marginalised communities , exist in both the new and the old Member States .
I welcome the opportunity to reiterate that the length of membership of the European Union must not be a criterion in the attribution of structural funds and that this criterion must be immediately abandoned .
The negotiation of the post-2013 cohesion policy must be based on solidarity , aiming at territorial cohesion , and it must be directed in a way that rewards , rather than punishes , the regions which have shown themselves to be exemplary in their use of community aid .
( PL ) Mr President , in the context of today 's discussion , I would like to draw attention to the controversial proposal to amend Article 47 of the Commission Regulation of 2006 .
This article states that areas selected for housing operations shall comply with at least three of the criteria listed in the article .
However , the new regulation proposes qualification on the basis of only one of the criteria , which means that , in practice , areas which are not entitled will be able to apply for funds by adjusting their situation to the legal requirements .
I would like to point out , for example , that the criterion of ' a low level of economic activity ' is very easy to achieve in new housing estates built in rural areas .
Then , instead of going to the most needy , help with housing will go to developers and affluent residents of new estates .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that housing is a difficult issue to deal with at European level because it is not really part of the European Union 's remit .
However , it is widely accepted that the development of quality housing is necessary to ensure social cohesion and to help ensure the success of the Commission 's recovery plan .
I am therefore delighted that the financing of investments in the housing sector , and particularly in the area of energy efficiency , is increasingly being covered by the Structural Funds , but we must go further .
Therefore , going beyond this proposal , we should pay particular attention to the homeless , of whom there are an estimated three million in Europe .
That is why this point is one of the priorities of the Belgian Presidency , which will assume office in the second half of 2010 .
I hope that it will lead to this subject being put on the European agenda , so that we can undertake yet more formal work on it .
This work will involve , among other things , introducing precise methods of recording the number of homeless people in order to achieve a global awareness of this phenomenon , and increasing the support for social housing .
Mr President , I know that this report is specifically in relation to Roma families and other specific groups .
I want to stress that all people deserve and need social housing that is fit for purpose .
However , this Parliament should not forget that there are many people in ordinary communities , either in the inner cities or in rural areas , who live in very poor housing and who find it impossible to access decent housing .
These people need to know that this Parliament recognises their need .
They are just as marginalised , whether it is through poverty , drugs or crime .
One issue that is causing concern to providers of social housing in Northern Ireland is the rules around public procurement .
And , while they are intended to promote fair competition across the European Union , they are having unintended negative effects on the development of badly needed social housing in marginalised communities , mainly because of the difficulty of obtaining land in what was , until recently , a speculators ' market .
Northern Ireland has been seriously affected by this and last year , the problem meant that replacements had to be found in the social housing programme for 500 out of 1 500 houses that were planned .
These are issues that we need to address as well .
I would encourage this House to look at this as part of the problem of housing in marginalised communities .
( RO ) The new regulations on housing eligibility provide an example of the way in which the same funds can be used to a greater effect , without being topped up .
The first step was taken last year when the rules for using European funds to improve energy efficiency were relaxed .
On this point , I just want to say that it was a small step and the percentage allowed could be re-examined .
The second step is the one being taken today .
In both instances , it involved adapting texts which date , in some cases , from very different times to the current period we are going through .
This is why I wonder whether other aspects of the use of European funds should not perhaps be re-examined as well in order to amend those criteria which no longer meet current needs .
( RO ) 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Unfortunately , there are a huge number of people facing dire poverty and marginalisation , contrary to the European Union 's fundamental principles and values .
The vulnerability of these communities has tangibly increased during the current period of economic crisis .
Against this background , I welcome the initiative to extend the eligibility conditions within the European Regional Development Fund , which is an important and vital instrument in the fight against poverty .
Due to the poor quality of housing conditions , I feel it is necessary to speed up the granting of financial assistance .
Financial support must be offered for housing in both urban and rural areas .
In addition , no differentiation must be made between the Roma population and other social groups in similar situations when this financial support is allocated .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work .
I much appreciate it . Secondly , two comments on the substance of the debate .
I heard some concerns about the potential side effects in the form of additional immigration .
In fact , this proposal is not about incentives to immigration ; it is about how to deal with the current state .
I think it should be perceived , as Mrs Göncz mentioned , as a disincentive to immigration .
The second comment on the substance .
The Commission will , of course , look forward to the revision of operational programmes : this will depend on the initiative of national and regional authorities but we will look very warmly at such changes .
Finally , let me welcome this debate which sets out Parliament 's commitment to the inclusion of marginalised communities .
It is a further step in support of an open and inclusive Europe 2020 .
I think we will count on the national and regional authorities to make good use of these new facilities .

I am uncommonly satisfied about the support and the creativity , but at this moment , I nevertheless want to emphasise that we are not there yet ; we may be adopting the frameworks , but the criteria must then be defined and that is still extraordinarily exciting , because you can do everything with money , even the wrong things , which I still have a few concerns about .
This is something I will doubtless remind the new Commissioner about , as well as the Council .
A second point is that it is , in a manner of speaking , a voluntary framework .
This framework is now being offered to the Member States in legislation .
There is no certainty that it will subsequently be given priority .
In this context , I call for active information from the European Commission , because this concerns a choice in principle .
Today , we have been told ' You are choosing for Europe ' ; for this new Commission with a social face , it is important that we are actively involved in the implementation .
The social groupings in question must also be involved in the implementation , because we will then arrive at a better product and a more sustainable result .
I would like to thank everyone one more time and I hope for a positive result tomorrow .
We are keeping an eye on the ball and will follow the situation on the ground .
Finally , the fact that we are the first legislative dossier under the new treaty is mainly due to the priority we have set .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I strongly believe the Commission was right to propose amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1080 / 2006 on the European Regional Development Fund as regards the eligibility of housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities .
Furthermore , I think that the Council also realised the importance of the proposal in terms of underlining the need for a new integrated point of view .
In Central Europe , and especially in Hungary , there are many seriously disabled persons who are living in old , dilapidated buildings .
A lot of places had served as castles or mansions before the Second World War , but Communism forgot them , along with the abandoned people they placed in them .
I know that a lot of disadvantaged groups have special circumstances and problems , and I feel strongly that we must take the consequences of financial and economic crisis into account .
We should support such amendments - in accordance with the views of civil stakeholders - that allow for much better integrated projects involving the building industry , tourism , the labour market , rural development and social integration at the same time .
We cannot let European taxpayers ' money be spent on dead ends .
We must focus on the real solutions .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was suspended at 20.10 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 08.30 )
Recent earthquake in Haiti ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Situation in Iran ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Situation in Yemen ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Trafficking in human beings ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Outcome of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
2009 progress report on Croatia - 2009 progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia - 2009 progress report on Turkey ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the Council and Commission statements on the :
2009 progress report on Croatia
2009 progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
2009 progress report on Turkey
Mr President , I would like to begin by reiterating the firm commitment of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council to the enlargement of the European Union .
Our work in this respect will follow the line of the renewed consensus on enlargement approved at the December 2006 European Council and the Council conclusions of 8 December 2009 , which have also been endorsed by the European Council .
As highlighted in this House 's resolution , which we are now going to debate , the first half of this year will be crucial for the negotiations with Croatia .
They have entered their final phase , yet much remains to be done before we can reach a successful conclusion .
We are going to have to look at difficult chapters such as those on competition , fisheries , the judiciary and fundamental rights , the environment , and foreign security and defence policy .
We will also have to close provisionally some chapters with financial implications .
Therefore , a great deal of work lies ahead .
New Commissioner , Štefan Füle , who was a former colleague of mine when I was Europe Minister - and I would like to welcome him and congratulate him on his appointment - is going to be extremely busy with the enlargement issue as far as Croatia is concerned , because as soon as next week , we plan to hold an initial intergovernmental conference at ministerial level to open the chapters on fisheries and the environment , two very important chapters that , as you can imagine , will require an enormous amount of work and dedication .
Allow me to remind you about the conclusions on Croatia adopted by the Council in December .
You are already aware of them but I would like to highlight a number of points .
The Council commended Croatia for the considerable efforts it had made over the past year and the good overall progress made .
It also referred to a series of financial measures for Croatia 's accession negotiations and noted that the negotiations were entering their final phase .
The Council underlined that building on the progress already made , Croatia still had to make significant improvements in fundamental spheres such as the judicial system , public administration , and the fight against corruption and organised crime .
It also needs to guarantee the rights of persons belonging to minorities , including the return of refugees and prosecution of war crimes , in order to build up a convincing track record in these areas .
The Council noted , too , Croatia 's cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia , although it felt that further efforts were necessary .
We believe that we could achieve new goals in that area .
Naturally , we also welcomed the signing of the arbitration agreement on the contentious border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia .
The agreement was signed on 4 November in Stockholm and ratified by the Croatian Parliament on 20 November .
The Council encouraged Croatia to build on these efforts in order to solve all outstanding bilateral issues , especially border disputes .
The Council also welcomed the creation in December , just over a month ago , of a working group to prepare the draft Accession Treaty of Croatia .
Finally , implementation of the revised Accession Partnership will be crucial when preparing for the country 's eventual integration into the EU .
As I said , we have a great deal of work ahead of us .
Since this is a joint debate on Croatia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey , I would like to state that the Western Balkans are one of the European Union 's main priorities .
Stability in that region is vitally important to us , and in 2010 , we are going to see a number of milestones in the region 's transition : progress on the applications for accession - as we have just discussed - fresh impetus for the network of Stabilisation and Association agreements , closer regional cooperation and progress towards a more liberal visa regime .
We know that the prospect of joining the Union - what we call the European perspective of the Western Balkans - is the most important catalyst for stability and reform in these countries .
It is undoubtedly a prospect , a real prospect , but it is not an automatic right .
Moving on to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I would like to begin with a summary of the country 's general situation and I will refer to the European Parliament 's resolution , for which the rapporteur was Mr Zoran Thaler .
The resolution does a very good job of presenting a dynamic situation , full of possibilities for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
It highlights many of the challenges facing the country : widespread failure to comply with the law , corruption , implementation of the recommendations of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights , allocation of funds for effective decentralisation , access to justice , greater participation of women in political life , support for civil society organisations , persistently high unemployment , environmental problems , etc .
The resolution underlines the importance of having a timetable for the opening of negotiations as well as the common desire to find , as soon as possible , an acceptable solution to the issue of the country 's name , which , as you know , is currently the subject of a dispute with Greece .
I would like to make a few comments in relation to events you refer to in your resolution , such as the local elections in March and April - which the OSCE considered to have met the standards laid down - and the sixth meeting of the Stabilisation and Association Council , held in July 2009 , which we concluded and which revealed that the country was truly fulfilling the commitments it had made under that agreement .
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has continued to work on its relations with the European Union , which is why the European Commission stated that it had made real progress and recommended that accession negotiations be opened .
In its conclusions last December , the Council acknowledged the progress referred to by the Commission and agreed to return to the matter in the next few months .
The European Parliament , as you know , has taken note of these Council conclusions of 8 December 2009 .
Moreover , 19 December saw the entry into force of the visa-free regime , in accordance with the Schengen system , for citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We should also mention a number of specific points relating to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : inter-ethnic relations , differences of opinion between Macedonian Slavs over the ' antiquity ' of the country and differences of opinion over its relations with neighbouring countries .
All of these topics are reflected in various sections of Parliament 's resolution .
In summary , I would like to say that some aspects warrant close attention , beyond the mere adoption and application of laws ; some issues fall under the auspices of the Ohrid Framework Agreement , some are purely national matters , and some relate to neighbouring countries .
The European institutions believe that the future of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia involves membership of the European Union and that such aspirations will have to take the shape of full national integration , in accordance with the Ohrid Framework Agreement .
This is what the European Union believes and will continue to believe .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to look in greater detail at the state of Turkey 's negotiations and to present the Spanish Presidency 's plans for this important enlargement issue .
It is important - and I want to say this at the outset - that we continue the negotiations with Turkey , that we keep the process on track .
Building on the work of previous presidencies , we hope to convince everyone of the need to move this process forward where possible .
The negotiations have entered a phase which we could say is somewhat more complicated or somewhat more problematic , which requires Turkey to redouble its efforts to meet the conditions laid down .
A number of technically difficult negotiating chapters await us .
However , it is important - and I want to say this at the outset , too - that Turkey makes progress on the reforms concerning the European Union .
At present , as the new Commissioner knows all too well , the technical work is focusing on four negotiating chapters : public procurement ; competition ; food safety , veterinary and phytosanitary policy ; and social policy and employment .
We must stress that the energy chapter is also important and it has become especially relevant following the signing of the Nabucco Agreement .
At its last part-session , Parliament debated Turkey and , in particular , the country 's democratisation .
There is a contrast between , on the one hand , the process of democratic initiative , as the Turkish Government calls it , and , on the other , some worrying decisions such as the recent decision by the Constitutional Court concerning the ban on a political party , which has also been mentioned here and is a very sensitive topic .
Therefore , in spite of the progress made , further efforts to ensure that Turkey fully meets the Copenhagen criteria are required in a number of areas , including freedom of expression , freedom of the press , freedom of religion in law and in practice for all religious communities , respect for property rights , trade union rights , rights of persons belonging to minorities , civilian supervision of the military , women 's and children 's rights , and anti-discrimination and gender equality measures .
This is clearly reflected in both Parliament 's resolution and the Council conclusions of 8 December .
I would also like to mention some other aspects of the Council conclusions .
For example , the Council stressed that Turkey needs to commit itself unequivocally to good neighbourly relations and to the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the United Nations Charter , having recourse , if necessary , to the International Court of Justice .
In this context , the Union urged Turkey - as we have done in the bilateral meetings with Turkey - to avoid any kind of threat , source of friction or actions that could damage good neighbourly relations and the peaceful settlement of disputes .
The Council also noted with deep regret that Turkey has yet to implement the Additional Protocol to the Association Agreement , the so-called Ankara Protocol , and that it has not made sufficient progress towards normalisation of its relations with the Republic of Cyprus .
In the first half of 2010 , in the Association Council and the Association Committee with Turkey , we will have a chance to assess the development of our relations ; it will be a good opportunity to examine significant problems , such as the political criteria , the progress made in adapting national legislation and the application of the acquis .
We have also planned a series of political dialogue meetings at ministerial level , between political leaders , that will enable us to look at our relations in the wider international context .
In this respect , the Council expects Turkey to support the ongoing negotiations within the UN framework on the issue that I just referred to , namely the Cyprus problem , in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council resolutions and in line with the principles on which the Union is founded .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I look forward to hearing your views and will respond to any comments or questions you might like to put to me .
I will now give the floor to Commissioner Füle .
I would also like to congratulate him because it is his first day in office .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I am delighted that my very first official engagement since taking up office just some hours ago is here in the European Parliament .
I also think that it is an excellent turn of events that the very first debate in this high House with a new Commission is taking place on enlargement .
Thirdly , I am delighted that the European Parliament expressed its strong support for enlargement in three reports .
The resolutions are proof of the commitment of the European Parliament to the accession prospects of Croatia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey .
This is a clear signal that enlargement will continue to be a top priority of the European Parliament and , together with my colleagues , I will do my utmost to bring this success story forward .
I am very glad that my friend , Secretary of State López Garrido , has just reconfirmed full support for this process on behalf of the Council and its Presidency .
On Croatia , I appreciate Parliament 's fair and balanced report and would like to congratulate Mr Hannes Swoboda , the rapporteur .
The report highlights the progress achieved by Croatia in meeting the criteria for accession but , at the same time , recognises the efforts that are still necessary for concluding the negotiations .
Your report thus reinforces the messages and supports the work undertaken by the Commission .
Let me underline that closure of negotiations in 2010 is still possible , provided that Croatia progresses in fulfilling all outstanding benchmarks .
The ball is clearly in Croatia 's court .
Croatia has come a long way over recent years but important challenges still remain to be tackled .
Here , we share a common assessment .
Croatia needs to focus , in particular , on the further reform of its judiciary and public administration , the fight against corruption and organised crime , respect for minority rights including refugee return , as well as war crimes trials and full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
We are encouraged by recent developments in fighting corruption .
We hope that investigation into wrongdoing leads to concrete results .
As for cooperation with the ICTY , which is a fundamental requirement , Chief Prosecutor Brammertz confirmed that full cooperation has still not been achieved .
However , he acknowledged recent positive steps such as the setting up of the task force aimed at stepping up investigation efforts .
I hope that the work of the task force will soon produce concrete results .
Finally , the arbitration agreement of November 2009 between Slovenia and Croatia on the handling of the bilateral border issue has started a new momentum in the negotiations process which , I trust , Croatia will be able to seize by intensifying its efforts to address the remaining outstanding issues .
As regards the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , 2009 was a good year as regards its reform process .
Thanks to political consensus between all the main political forces , the country was able to make significant progress in key areas .
It achieved visa liberalisation , and the Commission could recommend starting accession negotiations .
I am glad to see that there is a strong consensus between Parliament and the Commission that accession negotiations should start , as expressed in Mr Thaler 's constructive and forward-looking report .
Now the challenge for the country is to maintain the reform momentum .
While the country met the political criteria , there is still much work to be done .
A shared vision of the future and effective political dialogue between the political forces will be crucial to ensuring progress .
Continued efforts are needed in particular on fully implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement and improving inter-ethnic relations , ensuring the rule of law and an independent judiciary , and successfully prosecuting high-level corruption cases .
The economic crisis has not left the country untouched .
Unfortunately , the country was already suffering one of the highest unemployment rates in Europe .
Now , more than ever , prudent macro-economic management and active labour market measures are needed to contain , and then reduce unemployment .
Like you , I am convinced that the start of accession negotiations is key to maintaining the reform momentum in the country .
Equally important , it will enhance the European perspective for the wider region .
It is therefore in the strategic interest of the European Union .
This is the message which I will be putting forward to the Member States and to the country so as to take the process forward .
On Turkey , I would like to thank your rapporteur , Ms Oomen-Ruijten , for her continued efforts towards a fair and balanced approach in her report on Turkey .
The Commission remains committed to the accession process with Turkey as this process gives strong encouragement to political and economic reform .
Work on the political criteria remains of the utmost importance , in particular , as regards fundamental freedoms .
A number of landmark reforms have been carried out in the past year .
Some of them were next to impossible only a few years ago .
Last week , the security protocol that allowed the army to intervene without authorisation in the case of security threats was annulled .
This is a landmark achievement in civilian-military relations .
We will observe closely the follow-up of this conciliation .
The submission of a draft law setting up an independent human rights institution and the much awaited anti-corruption strategy , adopted in principle by the Turkish Government on 21 January , are also promising .
We continue to support the democratic opening launched by the government .
The success of this initiative requires the participation and support of all political parties and all segments of society .
However , the Commission has concerns following the decision of the Constitutional Court to close the pro-Kurdish party represented in Parliament , the DTP .
We also regret the arrests that took place in the south-east at the end of December .
We condemn the terrorist attacks that took place at the same time .
None of these developments is really conducive to the successful implementation of the democratic opening .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to extend my warm thanks to the Council and to Mr Füle for their statements , in particular , on Croatia .
These statements indicate that both the Council and the Commission have the determination to complete this process as quickly as possible .
I also agree with Mr Füle that it is possible to complete the negotiations with Croatia this year , given the necessary good will and the appropriate policies .
Of course , it is also Croatia 's responsibility , in particular , to take the decisive steps .
I would like to say at this point that Croatia has made considerable progress , particularly in recent months and with regard to corruption .
Croatia has shown that no one is outside the law or exempt from measures to combat corruption .
This sends out an important signal .
Croatia has also come to an agreement with Slovenia and has ratified the agreement relatively quickly in parliament , which shows that there is a strong shared determination to meet the necessary requirements .
I hope that the same thing will happen soon in Slovenia .
I am convinced that the Slovenian Government fully supports the agreement and I hope that the domestic political problems can soon be resolved and that the agreement can be ratified .
However , there is still some work to be done .
The point has already been made that the fight against corruption is an important element .
However , the situation will not change overnight .
There are many unresolved issues in this area , but I am certain that the government and the relevant public bodies have the will to continue this fight without exerting political influence .
As for the reform of the judiciary , this is not only about combating corruption , but also about a number of other issues , such as training for judges .
Several steps need to be taken by Croatia to establish a modern judicial system and I hope that this will happen soon .
With regard to the collaboration with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , Mr Füle has given us an accurate and complex description of the situation .
Mr Brammertz has assured the Committee on Foreign Affairs that a great deal is being done .
It is only a case of finding some documents relating to the case against General Gotovina , but Mr Brammertz himself has said that he does not know whether these documents still exist or whether they have already been destroyed .
It may be that some of them have never existed .
Nevertheless , I hope that Croatia does everything in its power in this respect .
I would like the task force mentioned by Mr Füle to have broad support from experts from other countries , without giving automatic approval in advance to the efforts made by Croatia .
However , I believe that a great deal of progress has been made in this area .
I hope that the few small items outstanding will be completed in the next few weeks or months in order to convince Mr Brammertz that he is receiving full cooperation .
A great deal has also been achieved with regard to the return of refugees or internally displaced persons .
There are still a few problems at a detailed level which are relatively difficult to solve .
When people have fled from houses that did not belong to them , where they were tenants , such as the social housing which existed in the former Yugoslavia , it is difficult to organise their return and ensure that they have a home again .
Although a lot of people want to return in principle , as a result of the economic crisis and unemployment , when they arrive in regions where there are already high levels of unemployment , it may not actually be practical for them to return in such large numbers .
It is true that a great deal of progress has been made in this area .
I am convinced that the current government and , I hope , also the opposition will work together to take the final steps .
It has become clear over and over again in Croatia in recent months that a joint approach to European issues is the decisive factor .
There must be widespread determination to solve the outstanding problems and , despite internal differences , to make it clear that the path leads to Europe and that Croatia must arrive there as quickly as possible .
( Applause )
2009 was a good year for the candidate country of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) .
The Commission of the European Union has confirmed this and the two presidencies-in-office , both the Swedish and now the Spanish one , have confirmed this .
And that is what I , too , have said in my draft report .
The authorities in Skopje have addressed and fulfilled the key priorities of the accession partnership , commonly known as benchmarks .
Secondly , FYROM was the first country in the region to comply with all the visa liberalisation requirements .
It did so by as early as July last year and the visa-free regime came into force on 19 December .
It has solved the border dispute with Kosovo and has cooperated successfully on regional initiatives , such as CEFTA and the South-East European Cooperation Process .
It has also cooperated successfully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the Hague .
Last week , the FYROM Parliament passed a resolution on Srebrenica .
What are we trying to achieve in Parliament with this resolution and with my report on FYROM 's progress ?
Above all , we want to help .
We want to help FYROM progress along the road of stability towards the European Union .
We should remember that FYROM was the only former Yugoslav republic that successfully avoided Milošević 's wars .
Secondly , we want to help our fellow Member State , Greece , and thereby the European Union as a whole , because we need to bear in mind that any country thrives only in so far as its neighbouring countries do .
That is an empirical fact and one which can be proven .
That is why I invite our friends in Greece , our fellow Member State , to try to solve this problem together with the government in Skopje and to relax its approach north of its borders .
I invite Greece to be a true , fair and broad-minded leader , a mentor and a sponsor of the Balkans .
The Balkans of today needs that .
In this respect , I would particularly like to welcome Agenda 2014 , an initiative prepared by the new Greek Government of Mr Papandreou .
Well done for this initiative !
I stand together with Greece .
Let us do everything we can to reach this goal .
Let us show solidarity with both Greece , our fellow Member State , and with the FYROM .
Solidarity must be mutual .
We need to bear in mind that the Balkans is like a bicycle ride .
As long as it is moving , as long as it is pedalling forward , everything is more or less OK , but if it stops , it there is a blockage , if it reaches a stalemate , we fall down , all of us fall down .
If we stopped now , peace , stability , security and social cohesion would break down .
By way of conclusion , let me stress one more fact : FYROM has been a candidate since 2005 .
We all need to be aware of the consequences of our decisions or failure to take decisions .
Whenever I visit Skopje , I always make it clear to them that they are responsible for finding a solution with Greece , their neighbour .
Let us therefore appeal here to the authorities in Skopje , Athens and Sofia , as well as to the Spanish Presidency , Commissioner Füle , Foreign Affairs High Representative Ashton and Parliament : let us do everything , each within their own remit , to help solve this problem .
That is how we can achieve a different Balkans and a better Balkans than we have seen over the past 20 years .

Let me begin by warmly welcoming Commissioner Füle : congratulations on your appointment and I look forward to sound collaboration with you .
Mr President , I would like to thank all my fellow Members , whose constructive contributions to the report have made it possible for us to achieve a consensus in most areas .
I would also like to reiterate that my aim as rapporteur for this Parliament is to bring about a situation where we send out a clear , balanced and coherent message .
I believe that we can only do that if we seek out a broad majority together .
I actually have three messages for Turkey .
First of all , and this is how the report begins , too , we have open debate , then there is the constitution and the enforcement of legislation .
I will begin with open debate , democratic opening .
From an entirely objective point of view , we welcome the broad debate that the Turkish Government initiated last year in respect of the rights of Kurds , the Alevi , the role of the army , and so on .
However , Mr President , the judgment from the Constitutional Court last December ensured that terrorist attacks would take place once again .
There was a wave of arrests of Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) members , and the threat of arrest still hangs over members of the Turkish Parliament .
The open and positive debate that there had been since the summer thus seems likely to come to a premature end as a result .
Of course , Mr President , as a representative of the people , I have respect for legal verdicts , but I also understand that the Constitutional Court has also said of the prohibition of political parties that Turkey should now enthusiastically engage with what has been recommended by the Council of Europe and the Venice Commission .
I ask Turkey , then , to do so , to ensure that this kind of unfortunate situation does not arise again .
Mr President , that brings me to another verdict by the Court , namely the annulment of the law restricting the jurisdiction of the military court .
As parliamentarians , we are in no position to criticise the judgment , but it does show , once again , that the basis of these judgments , the constitution , is inadequate , in the sense that - and I need to word this carefully - in any case , it gives grounds for such judgments to be made .
That is why we are all calling , once again , for Turkey to bring forward a revision of its constitution without delay , as that is the only thing that can bring about the real reforms that are so necessary to modernise Turkish society .
Mr President , my third , fundamental point concerns the implementation and the enforcement of legislation that has been adopted .
In the areas of women 's rights , freedom of religion and the maltreatment of criminal suspects , the standards laid down also need to be complied with throughout Turkey .
Mr President , I am therefore calling for additional attention to be paid to enforcement .
I will turn now to the amendments .
On Cyprus , I attempted to reach a clear and broad-based compromise with the shadow rapporteurs .
Turkey needs to know that the supplementary protocol that has been agreed must be accepted without delay .
In paragraph 34 , I have called on all parties to ensure that a solution is reached in respect of the division of Cyprus .
With this paragraph , then , I am specifically asking Turkey to send out positive signals .
Mr President , we emphasise , in a new paragraph 48 , that both leaders must be encouraged to have courage in order to reach a solution for the island soon .
This is absolutely necessary .
I would say to Mrs Cornelissen that , although your amendment about violence against women is probably a little redundant , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will also , as expected , support it .
Mr President , finally , I would like to reiterate , once again , that , this year , too , my aim is to produce a report that offers a very clear message that is critical , but also balanced .
It is my belief that , if we adopt this report with a large majority , we will also be finding a good solution for Turkey in modernising the country and making it prosperous for all of its citizens .
Mr President , we have clear expectations of the Council and the Commission .
We expect negotiations with Croatia to be completed and negotiations with Macedonia to be started this year .
This includes recognising that the policy on minority groups in these two countries is better than in many Member States of the European Union and that all the minorities and ethnic groups in both countries are represented in their governments .
Mr Füle , the question of the return of the refugees , if you will pardon my saying so , has been handled by Croatia in a way which could serve as a model for other states .
Therefore , I would like to say quite clearly that we should , of course , explain to these countries that they still need to make an effort .
However , saying that the ball is solely in Croatia 's court is totally unacceptable .
Croatia has ratified the border agreement and I would like to join with Mr Swoboda in calling on the Slovenian Parliament to do the same thing .
Three negotiating chapters remain to be opened by the Council .
I would like to call on the Spanish representative of the Council of Ministers to ensure that they are opened during the Spanish Presidency .
This will allow Croatia , if it is treated fairly , to complete the negotiations this year .
As far as the appalling blockade of Macedonia on account of the name issue is concerned , in this case , the ball is not solely in Macedonia 's court either .
Instead , the responsibility lies with an EU Member State which has set up a blockade that runs contrary to international law .
I would like to make it clear at this point that the EU must behave in a credible way , in other words , we must demand things from others , but we must also live up to our own standards , otherwise we will lose all credibility .
I feel that it is important for us to work towards voting on Croatia this year in this Parliament , after following a long and difficult path .
Then the observers can come here , in the same way that the Czech , Slovenian and Hungarian observers came and were welcomed by us .
I hope that European elections can take place in Croatia either next year or the year after and that Croatian Members will join us here in Parliament and help to prepare for the accession of other southern European states , with Macedonia being the first in line .
Mr President , Mr Füle , I want to join in congratulating you as a new member of the European Commission and say that it may , in fact , be an important sign that on this very day , the first debate in this Parliament involving the new Commission is actually on enlargement .
In fact , we do not need to reiterate that enlargement has turned out and proved to be one of the European Union 's most successful policies .
I wish you every success .
Our Parliament will do its utmost to support you in these efforts because those of us here in the European Parliament are actually the strongest proponents of the enlargement of this region of security , prosperity and citizens ' rights , which is the European Union .
In this respect , I think that the statements from the three rapporteurs highlighted the serious work which was done by the Committee on Foreign Affairs and them personally .
I want to congratulate them on this and say that these three reports which we are discussing today were adopted by a huge majority in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I believe that this will also be the case today .
I want to stress that we wish to use our reports to give a very clear signal to the three countries as well , even though the general debate will probably dilute our messages to some extent , that we remain committed to the process , but that there are issues which cannot be avoided and on which the three countries must take action .
They are mainly linked to the fact that the European Parliament cannot and will not close its eyes to a whole series of issues related to the fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria supporting the protection of fundamental rights , media freedom and freedom of association , as well as the protection of minorities ' rights , good neighbourly relations , etc .
I would like to dwell briefly on three issues which , in my view , are of fundamental importance to making progress on the three countries ' accession .
Firstly , it is clear with regard to Croatia that the path to membership is already open for this country .
The agreement reached with Slovenia is extremely important , but we call for its ratification as soon as possible so that it will provide the opportunity for the negotiations with Croatia to be concluded by the end of this year .
With regard to Macedonia , we hope that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will demonstrate the necessary flexibility .
We also hope that the new Greek Government will find a solution to the name issue so that Macedonia can receive a date for starting negotiations by this year .
As far as Turkey is concerned , the Cyprus question cannot be avoided .
Until progress is made on this first , Turkey cannot hope to make substantial progress in its process of integration .
With the Resolution on Croatia , which Parliament is to adopt here today , we will recognise that this country has made progress in terms of fulfilling the criteria for accession to the European Union , carrying out democratic system reforms and harmonising its legislation with the requirements of the acquis .
That places Croatia firmly at the top of the list of countries with the prospect of becoming fully-fledged members of the European Union .
That also opens up the possibility for Croatia to wrap up negotiations as early as this year , as we have stated in our report .
We are very pleased to note that Mrs Kosor , the new Croatian Prime Minister , has quickly and successfully taken steps in the areas where we have met the greatest obstacles so far : in the fight against corruption and organised crime , in implementing a programme of administrative reform , in addressing war crimes and in ensuring legal or constitutional protection for ethnic and other minorities .
By signing a border arbitration agreement with its neighbour Slovenia , the new Croatian Government has not only eliminated an obstacle to the negotiating process , but has also paved the way for the resolution of other issues .
It is important that Croatia continues to address border disputes with its other neighbours and ensures that these negotiations are conducted in good faith and according to the principle of pacta sunt servanda .
I should also point out that this resolution , which was drafted under the excellent guidance of my fellow member and rapporteur , Hannes Swoboda , has , in an objective and positive way , also highlighted problem areas where Croatia still has a great deal of work to do .
To name but a few , these include cooperation with the Hague Tribunal , efforts made so far in prosecuting corruption , restructuring the economy and finances and greater commitment and sincerity in eliminating the obstacles to the return of Croatia 's Serbian population .
Croatia is their homeland , too .
The positive reports on the progress of Croatia and FYROM should also be seen as a definite signal of the EU 's openness to enlargement to all the countries in the Western Balkans and a confirmation of the commitments we have undertaken towards these countries , Turkey included , provided they meet all relevant criteria .
That , however , depends primarily on them .
Let me conclude by wishing Mr Füle , our new commissioner , every success .
I know he will do an excellent job .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , I should first like to extend a warm welcome to this House to Mr Füle as Commissioner .
We are happy to work with you and look forward to our future cooperation .
I would also like to thank Mr Swoboda for the good cooperation on the Croatia report .
I think there was good cooperation in the process and I thank my colleagues .
I would just like to say that we would have preferred to have had the debate en bloc so that we had all three countries , but separate sections , in the morning .
We think that would have made more sense instead of having them all mixed up together , but that is a side note .
( DE ) The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is in favour of Croatia joining the European Union quickly and we welcome very much the rapid progress which this country has made .
Croatia 's quick accession will send out an important signal on security policy to the entire Western Balkans .
It means that the promise of membership made by European Heads of State or Government in Thessaloniki to all the countries in the Western Balkans still holds .
The credibility and validity of this promise represent an enormous incentive for all the states in the region to implement far-reaching reforms which will make these countries more secure , more stable and more prosperous .
It is important to say with regard to Croatia that the civil service there must be strengthened and made more transparent .
The decisive factor here is not only the adoption of new legislation but , above all , the administrative implementation of the laws .
We in the Verts / ALE group would like to see better results in this area .
We believe that the only solution to the problems of corruption and organised crime is the consistent implementation of new laws and directives .
The same applies to the judiciary and the particularly important chapter concerning the judicial system that has not yet been negotiated .
The announcements made by the Croatian Government are a good thing , but they must be followed by action that brings about de facto improvements in the situation in the courts .
We would like to see more transparency and less political influence in this area as well .
For this reason , we are proposing four amendments , which I would like to encourage you to vote for .
The first concerns the fight against corruption .
We would like the construction and urban planning sector to be included in particular , as this is where the largest public contracts are awarded .
Secondly , we would like a reference in paragraph 19 to the fact that the situation of gay men and lesbians is unsatisfactory .
There have been repeated attacks on people from these minority groups .
We have now received assurances from the Croatian Government that some of these cases are being investigated .
We feel that this is a very positive sign and would like to encourage the Croatian authorities to speed up the implementation of the anti-discrimination act .
My final point is that we have no vision for a new energy policy for Croatia .
Therefore , we would like to call on you to support our Amendment 7 .
We are looking forward to Croatia joining the European Union soon .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the ECR Group favours enlargement of the European Union .
We see not only significant benefits in a larger single market , but we also look - unlike some Members of this House - for a dilution of the federalist ambition at the heart of the European Union .
However , candidates must be subject to rigorous and exacting standards as laid out in the Copenhagen criteria .
We therefore fully endorse the Commission 's thorough approach to preparing candidates for membership and its willingness to learn the lessons of previous enlargements , in particular , the most recent ones to Bulgaria and Romania , where there were outstanding problems in the areas of organised crime and corruption .
Croatia , along with Iceland - if approved as a candidate - is undoubtedly the country most ready to join the European Union , and its accession will help stabilise the Western Balkans .
While recognising that a border dispute with Slovenia remains outstanding , we do not think that bilateral disputes can be allowed to delay Croatia 's membership .
Italy , after all , did not stop Slovenia joining in spite of border and minority disputes at the time .
As the Commission report makes clear , Croatia has also made some substantial progress in meeting the negotiating benchmarks , and the country 's commitment to the EU 's expectations remains strong .
Macedonia is also now fully back on track towards membership , and we welcome its EU visa liberalisation , along with Serbia and Montenegro , and support immediate calls now to the Council to allow the opening of negotiations for membership for Macedonia .
The ECR Group believes that the almost comical name dispute with Greece should be resolved sensibly and rapidly .
President Ivanov has helped to add momentum to Macedonia 's EU ambitions , and we hope his request to meet the newly re-elected President of Greece will be reciprocated in the spirit of friendship and neighbourhood relationships .
Meanwhile , Turkey 's EU membership application remains problematic , not least in the field of human rights .
The recent horrifying case of a teenage girl buried alive for talking to boys simply gives ammunition to those who say that Turkey has no place in the European Union .
Its failure to recognise Cyprus or implement the Ankara protocols , as well as stalling in the ratification of the treaty to re-establish relations with Armenia , is a disappointment .
Finally , as permanent rapporteur of the Parliament for Montenegro , I should just like to add that in my view , having recently visited this country , it is well on its way to candidate status , and I hope to see that happen as soon as possible .
Lastly , I , too , would like to take the opportunity on behalf of my group , the ECR Group , to congratulate Commissioner Füle on his electoral appointment yesterday , and my group will be fully cooperating with him in his challenging tasks ahead .
We wish to emphasise from the outset that we are in favour of the integration of Turkey .
We mean this and we believe in it .
It is necessary , primarily for Turkey itself , in order to safeguard the rights of all minorities , to reduce the electoral limit for seats in Parliament and to safeguard labour rights , such as the right to strike and collective bargaining .
Finding a real political solution to the Kurdish problem , recognising the Armenian genocide , normalising relations with neighbouring countries and ending the occupation of Cyprus are some of the issues which Turkey is required to address .
As emphasised by the Council , it needs , urgently and without further delay , to comply fully and without discrimination with the additional protocol to the Ankara Agreement .
In ignoring international law , Turkey is preventing the Republic of Cyprus from exercising its sovereign rights in its exclusive economic zone .
As such , we declare that we disagree with the position that the relevant energy chapter should be opened .
To close , I should like to mention the intention of some members to vote for an amendment calling for all interested parties to help to resolve the Cyprus question .
I am sure that everyone will help .
However , is this not unacceptably making everyone equally responsible , making the victim and the occupier equally responsible ?
If we want a solution to the Cyprus question , we must underline Turkey 's responsibilities .
We must speak openly to Turkey , whose integration , I repeat in closing , we support .
However , it is the integration of Turkey into the European Union that we support , not the integration of the European Union into Turkey .
At the risk of upsetting Turkish diplomats again - note their reaction to numerous European Parliament amendments - I urge the Council and the Commission to put the following five points on the agenda in the forthcoming negotiations with the Turkish authorities .
1 .
The granting of legal personality to all religious communities in Turkey - the fundamental precondition for the realisation of the freedom of religion in Turkey .
2 .
The immediate ending of the public hate campaign against Turkish Christians beneath the cover of allowing the doubly negative loaded term ' missionary activities ' in schoolbooks and local media , as if Turkish Christians were , by definition , subversive and bent on undermining the state .
3 .
The immediate ending of the conspicuous discrimination against non-Islamic minorities when filling important civilian and military posts within the Turkish Government apparatus .
4 .
Effective government measures against growing anti-Semitism in public life in Turkey .
A Turkish academic recently spoke of a poisoned atmosphere .
I am pleased that the atmosphere is still open enough for an academic to openly come out and say such a thing .
What is needed , therefore , is effective government measures against the growing anti-Semitism in public life in Turkey , in which regard Prime Minister Erdoğan , specifically , should take the lead role .
5 .
Finally , a strict bringing into line of relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran with transatlantic policy on Tehran and its controversial nuclear programme .
Turkey must spell out where it stands on the increasingly urgent issue of Tehran 's nuclear programme .
As a NATO member and EU candidate country , Turkey must nail its colours to the mast .
It must make a clear choice .
I call on the Council and the Commission to take the Copenhagen criteria and the urgent criticisms of Turkey that I have mentioned seriously and , Commissioner , once again , I would like to wish you all the best in your new role .
I look forward to constructive consultation and I also have faith that you will take the Copenhagen criteria seriously and that we will thus be able to work on modernising Turkey , a country that I also want to respect .
( NL ) Mr Füle , welcome to the House !
Mr President , the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) , my party , has chosen to operate independently in this Parliament .
In this case , we have enjoyed excellent collaboration with the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group and with Mr Messerschmidt , to whom I would like to offer my heartfelt thanks .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that the PVV is not in favour of enlargement - not to Croatia , not to Macedonia and certainly not to Turkey .
Turkey 's occupation of Cyprus is illegal , all of us in this Chamber believe that , and yet we continue to be involved with Turkey without seriously denouncing them for this .
We do not impose any sanctions - or next to no sanctions - on Turkey .
This , to me , is really weak-fisted behaviour , and I have therefore tabled an amendment that condemns this occupation and orders Turkey to withdraw its troops from Cyprus , and to do so immediately .
I therefore hope that you will all support this amendment .
What is more , the freedom of the press in Turkey is under severe pressure .
When I was visiting Turkey , the press was even moved on .
We must strongly condemn this and that is why I have tabled Amendment 16 .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , we come to Iran , a rogue state .
Mr Ahmadinejad , an Islamic dictator , terrorises his own population , wants to wipe Israel from the map and says so openly , is working on long-distance missiles , regularly carries out missile tests and yesterday began enriching uranium , which is suitable for nuclear weapons .
Ladies and gentlemen , we can but express our disgust about this .
Turkey , which wants to accede to the EU , counts the Iranian Government as a great friend and must be strongly condemned for this , which is why I have tabled Amendment 17 .
I count on your support .
Next , I want to mention the negotiations with Turkey .
Turkey , which counts Iran as a friend , occupies Cyprus , oppresses Christians , violates the rights of women , is a member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference ( OIC ) , operates Sharia law , which limits human rights , and is an Islamic country , can never accede to this Union .
We should not allow that to happen , for which reason I have tabled Amendments 18 and 19 , which aim to bring an end to the accession negotiations .
Thus , I hope that you will all support my amendments .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Zoran Thaler on his report and thank him and all other colleagues for their very constructive work in preparing this draft resolution .
A sincere welcome to Commissioner Füle , and my best wishes for the success of his future work .
The European People 's Party considers that FYROM went through many positive developments during the last year .
The progress it made in fulfilling most of the criteria towards starting EU accession negotiations is indeed both significant and remarkable .
The fact that the Commission has recommended the opening of negotiations with FYROM should be seen as a clear message that this country is on the right track .
Parliament should therefore stand firmly behind this recommendation and , by adopting this resolution , send a positive signal to the country and indeed the whole region .
I hope the European Council will confirm the Commission 's decision and the call included in this resolution , and will give the green light for negotiations with FYROM in the near future without further delay .
I also believe that up until this happens , the negotiations on the name issue will progress and relations with neighbouring countries will get better .
FYROM should rise to the challenge and show that it is ready to fulfil all the Copenhagen criteria , on the basis of which its ambitions to become a member of the EU should be assessed .
( ES ) I think the report we are going to be voting on today , concerning Turkey 's progress towards European accession , is a positive one .
It is frank , and some criticisms can be made ; but it is a balanced report and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , for that .
Obviously , our political group would have placed greater emphasis on certain aspects .
However , we have negotiated a broad consensus because we believe the report should be given as much support as possible by this Chamber .
We need to send out a clear message on that point .
It should be a positive message , one of good will , but it should also be rigorous so as to boost the negotiating process and stimulate the advancement of modernising , democratic reforms in Turkey .
We have to be clear on this matter : we need to overcome this phase of sluggishness and indecision in the negotiation process .
According to opinion polls , public support for accession in Turkey has waned , and that public perception needs to change .
The only way to achieve this is to ensure that the negotiations and reforms continue to move forward , that the European Union shows itself to be consistent with the commitments it has undertaken , and that it also avoids sending out contradictory signals which create uncertainty .
Of course , Turkey must also take decisive steps on the path towards reform .
Two scenarios lie ahead : a vicious circle of divisions , confrontations and mistrust ; or a virtuous circle of serious , rigorous , yet unambiguous negotiation .
If this report makes even a modest contribution to progress along those lines , then I think we can be satisfied .
( DE ) Mr President , as the head of the delegation , I would like , first of all , to congratulate Mr Thaler on his very balanced report .
Skopje has carried out reforms and is on the way to joining the European Union .
We welcome this very much and are very pleased about it .
The visa liberalisation was perhaps the clearest and most visible sign .
It was a milestone in our cooperation .
This objective has only been achieved as a result of close collaboration with the EU Member States .
It represents openness , interaction and cooperation .
However , we must not forget that Macedonia was granted the status of accession candidate four years ago and since then , we have constantly been asking ourselves when it would finally join the European Union .
I would like to call on all the parties to ensure that the name conflict , which is currently the focus of attention , is resolved .
We must make use of the momentum generated by the Council decision in December and by the new Greek Government .
This momentum is diminishing day by day .
I would like to explain to the parties that if we concentrate now on other topics , such as the financial crisis , the goal of Macedonia 's accession will be pushed further into the background .
We surely do not wish this to happen and this is why we must continue to make every effort in this area .
( NL ) Over the last six months , I have seized every opportunity to travel to the Balkans and to Turkey and to talk to people there .
It is tremendous to actually see what is going on on the ground there with a view to accession : major political breakthroughs , but also , and above all , entirely practical changes that benefit the people who live there .
In Montenegro , for example , the existence of homosexuality is finally being recognised .
In Turkey , the shelters for women have finally succeeded in achieving good relations with the police , to name just two examples .
We should be enthusiastic about what is being achieved in these countries and what is going well , but , at the same time , we need to be very clear about what still has to be done .
The European Parliament and the Member States must continue to insist on the criteria that we laid down at the beginning of the process .
However , we also need to avoid watering down the power of the accession process by erecting extra obstacles .
I just want to focus in on Macedonia for a moment .
We all agree that the bilateral problem of the name must be resolved .
We also all agree that the EU must provide all possible support in this process .
Bilateral problems , in themselves , should not represent an obstacle to the accession process .
This applies to Macedonia , but also just as much to Croatia , Serbia , Turkey , Kosovo and Iceland .
For the people who live there , the prospect of accession is too important to be held hostage to the resolution of a bilateral disagreement .
I therefore ask you all to also vote in favour of our amendment , Amendment 4 , which aims to insert a new paragraph 30 ( 2 ) into the report on Macedonia .
I also ask you all to really bear in mind , in respect of these three reports , how very important the accession process is .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to congratulate you , Mr Füle , on your election to this capacity .
I am certain we are going to work fruitfully and effectively together for further enlargement of the European Union .
I am sure that you will complete the negotiation process of the European Union with Croatia before the end of the year .
I am sure that you will also begin the process of negotiation with Macedonia soon .
I hope this will also be this year .
In this speech , I would like to stress the exceptional role of Croatia as a future Member State of the European Union , particularly in the context of the defence of our common values and the security of our continent .
We value the fact that Croatian units , as part of NATO , are present in Kosovo and Afghanistan .
Around 300 Croatian soldiers , diplomats and police officers are also taking part in ISAF operations in three regions of Afghanistan .
Our new ally has bravely supported our fight against terrorism in several NATO missions .
I am certain that Croatia 's membership of the European Union will contribute to continued stability in a part of Europe which only a few years ago experienced a cruel conflict and ethnic cleansing .
If Croatia completes all the reforms , it can finish negotiations with the European Union before the end of the year .
This is a good objective , and I call upon everyone to support these efforts .
We should value the fact that Zagreb has carried out numerous reforms , especially in the area of the judicial system and public administration , and also concerning the fight against corruption and organised crime .
Bringing Croatia into the family of Member States of the European Union is part of our strategy to build a continent of democracy and prosperity .
The example of this Balkan country confirms that the process of European Union enlargement is a strong incentive to political and economic reform in countries which aspire to membership .
Let us remember this , too , when we look at our eastern neighbour , Ukraine .
( EL ) Mr President , over the last year , Turkey 's multifaceted foreign policy has caused confusion both within the international community and among the secular section of Turkish society .
Where is Turkey heading ?
Is it heading towards a multicultural Europe or towards a pan-Islamic state ?
May I briefly remind the House of its political conduct towards Iran , its unacceptable diplomatic language against Israel , the dispute with Egypt on the Gaza borders and the Turkish Government 's recent decision to abolish entry visas for 7 Arabic countries .
As we know , many of them harbour extremist Islamic associations whose members can now easily enter Europe and the West .
The issue of the abolition of visas , in particular , has outraged the secular state in Turkey .
If we introduce new sanctions against Iran , Turkey 's stand in the UN Security Council will be a starting point for clarifying the future of modern Turkey , at which point we shall speak differently about Turkey in this Chamber .
( NL ) For understandable reasons , public opinion in Europe is sharply against the accession of Turkey , a non-European and Islamic country .
The previous Commission promised that negotiations with Turkey would be suspended if it came to light that Turkey was failing in its democratic obligations and that the negotiations would have to keep pace with the reform process in Turkey .
Neither of these promises has been kept .
On the contrary , new chapters have been opened time after time , while Turkey is moving backwards rather than forwards .
Political parties are being outlawed , Kurdish mayors arrested and Christians are subject to intimidation , violence and administrative prejudice .
Christian writers and academics are having to go into hiding .
I have not even got on to phenomena such as forced marriages and so-called honour killings .
What deadline will the Commission issue Turkey with to recognise all the Member States of the European Union ?
When will Turkey have to comply with the Ankara Protocol ?
When will the illegal military occupation of Cyprus be brought to an end ?

( ES ) Mr President , like my fellow Members , I also wish to congratulate Mr Füle on having taken office and I hope that the excellent impression he made in his Committee on Foreign Affairs hearing will be confirmed over the course of his mandate , particularly in the sensitive area of enlargement .
I would like to say a few words about Turkey , firstly to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for the excellent results obtained in the committee .
Her report , which refers to 2008 and 2009 , neither overstates nor underplays matters ; it highlights the efforts Turkey is making to try to meet the Copenhagen conditions and criteria .
In my view , however , these efforts need to be considered within Turkey 's current context and political situation : seven years of Mr Erdoğan 's moderate Islamic government , with elections expected in July 2011 ; a country that is seething from the Operation Sledgehammer cases ; from the annulment of the Emasya Protocol , which handed major powers over to the military ; and , in particular , from the ruling that has banned the activities of the Democratic Society Party in Turkey .
This context , Commissioner , means that the Turkish case needs to be handled with great caution .
Turkey has to meet the conditions and requirements of the Copenhagen criteria and , obviously , it has to comply with the Ankara Protocol .
However , in this particular context and situation , it goes without saying , Commissioner , that if any wrong signal is sent out , it could have very serious consequences for the security of the European Union , especially when the governing party does not have the three-fifths majority it needs in parliament in order to modify the constitution ; such a signal could seriously give rise to alarming turmoil in an already unstable country that is a strategic partner for the West , in the context of the Atlantic Alliance .
We need to use the utmost caution in the negotiating process in order not to make any mistakes .
Mr President , first , could I repeat in public my own congratulations to Commissioner Füle .
We got you up early this morning on your first day in the job , and I think it will not be the only time that we do so .
In Turkey , there is significant public scepticism that the EU will keep its promise and , just as you confront scepticism amongst some of our publics within the EU , your challenge , Commissioner , is to be fair and objective - and , yes , that wins public trust .
But also to put the positive case for enlargement , to win over sceptic publics , and our group will support you in doing so .
On Turkey , the Socialist and Democrat Group remains pro-accession , pro-reform .
The Commission 's progress report says that reform efforts have been resumed but should be intensified .
We agree .
So , on this first report during the five years of this Parliament , let me focus my opening remarks on how we as a Parliament should deal with Turkey .
To the rapporteur , I respect your sincere commitment to pursuing consensus in this House and I thank you for your cooperation .
I hope , in future years , that you will seek agreement of the political groups before submitting plenary amendments to agreed compromises at committee , as our differences are small .
But the real test of your rapporteurship and for this Parliament is to ensure that we use our influence to secure , year by year , steady progress in shepherding Turkey towards accession , and that requires leadership here as well as in the country .
To our Cypriot colleagues we understand the pain of injustice you feel .
In our group , we have sought to include you fully in our consensus , but we are determined at this crucial time to seek to take positions which support reconciliation efforts to provide justice to both communities and not to prejudge their outcome on behalf of either side .
To others in this House , constructive criticism of Turkey is needed ; we ourselves are critical friends .
But to those who speak in this debate opposing Turkey , we say that you are a minority ; too many of you are motivated by religious intolerance against Islam and seeking your own political advantage by deliberately creating false fears about immigration .
These arguments are loathsome and repellent , and so are you .
Finally , to the majority of this House who want Turkey 's accession , we have to say so again and again . The shrill voice of the rejectionist must not be allowed to drown us out .
We expect our Turkish counterparts to continue to make painful changes in their own society with difficult impact on their domestic politics .
These reforms are good in their own right , but , those of us who say in this Parliament we want accession : we have to make their pain worthwhile by ourselves doing what we say , opening and closing chapters on merit , delivering the promises of the Council , ourselves acting in good faith .
( RO ) I am only going to refer to Macedonia in my speech as I want to stress that the report records progress in Macedonia 's situation and supports a political decision to launch negotiations with this country .
I am not going to mention the report 's balance and the way in which it describes in detail the positive and negative factors the country is contending with .
I would like to emphasise two things .
The exit polls and opinion polls in Macedonia highlight that this country is one of the most ' Euro-optimistic ' in the region .
I think that support from the population is a condition for success in the negotiation process .
Secondly , I think that , as a Member State of the European Union , Greece must understand the European models for reconciling with history and make every effort to ensure that the dispute over the name of Macedonia does not present an obstacle to this country 's progress towards Europe , because any other attitude is contrary to the spirit and destiny of Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , firstly , I should like to welcome and congratulate Commissioner Füle .
The 12th hearing of the trial of the alleged assassins of Hrant Dink was held in Istanbul on Monday .
For the first time , official observers at that trial felt that the court was sincerely trying to establish the truth and that the connections between this trial - that of the alleged assassins of Hrant Dink - and other trials under way - such as that of the Ergenekon network - had been highlighted by the prosecutor .
This fact is extremely significant because it is every political assassination , intolerance within society and the impunity that still prevails that are being put on trial here .
Moreover , this is a view that the families of the victims of these political assassinations eloquently expressed when , referring to the Turkish ' Deep State ' , they declared themselves to be Hrant Dink 's ' deep family ' .
I am telling you this because things are moving forward and because , within Turkish civil society , there is a desire and a movement for reform aimed at promoting democracy and rights , and this desire and this movement are exceptionally powerful .
I should also like to cite another example which is making the headlines in the newspapers at the moment -family honour crimes have already been mentioned - and that is the young 16-year-old girl who was found buried in a chicken pen and who had been sentenced by the family council for having spoken to boys .
This is terrifying and it is a crime .
The members of that family will obviously have to be put in prison .
The fact is , a few years ago , these crimes did not make the headlines .
It is therefore pleasing today to see that these so-called ' honour crimes ' , which are simply barbaric crimes , are no longer being tolerated in Turkish society .
Turkish society is in a state of flux , it is in turmoil even , and I think that , when we discuss Turkey , we must be keenly aware that any reform in that country deeply affects relations between citizens , the establishment , Turkish history and democracy .
These are absolutely crucial elements .
I believe that our process must be totally sincere .
Today , the sincerity of our process is acknowledged , and it matches our ability to support the complicated , critical and historic process in Cyprus .
Today , the EU must say clearly to Cyprus that we are ready to support and to guarantee , using all the means at our disposal , economic and financial means included , any agreement reached between the north and the south and that we are also determined to ensure that nothing in the body of EU law can hinder the achievement of a consensus in Cyprus .
We must forge ahead ; the future of Turkey 's membership of the EU is also riding on this issue .
Mr President , it is not often that I agree with Mrs Flautre , but I do agree with many of the remarks she has just made .
First of all , could I call for more honesty in our approach to Turkey .
I am sure all of us want good relations with Turkey and many of us , probably the majority , wish to see Turkey one day as a member of the European Union , a different European Union to what is being developed today .
It is because some recognise that Turkish accession would inevitably change the nature of the EU project , driving as it is towards unwanted political integration , that they are so resistant to it .
I have one or two questions for the Commission .
What has happened to the negotiations with Turkey ?
Why are so few chapters open ?
At a time when , in all our countries , we have serious concerns about energy security , and Turkey is in such a key geographical position in providing the routes for pipelines from the Caspian , why is the energy chapter not open ?
And , with presidential elections imminent in Cyprus , and unification talks in progress , Cyprus is very much on our minds .
Turkey , of course , can hardly ever be discussed in this Chamber without reference to Cyprus , but perhaps it would be more helpful if instead of always criticising Turkey , the EU endeavoured to provide it with more support on this issue .
Why do we just call on Turkey to use its influence when Greece and the Republic of Cyprus , both EU members , have a crucial role to play ?
I agree that the Turkish garrison in Northern Cyprus should be much reduced .
In fact , I regularly propose to Turkish emissaries that a unilateral reduction in troops would be a bold confidence-building measure , but we all know that had the Annan Plan been put into effect , the Turkish troop presence would have been reduced to a mere 650 and the Greek presence to 950 .
It is scandalous that no real progress has been made in opening international trade with Northern Cyprus .
Why has the European Union not kept its promise given in May 2004 to end the isolation of Northern Cyprus ?
Of all the places in the world where the EU might actually play a useful role and exert some benign influence , Cyprus stands out - yet we are absent .
Let us not blame Turkey for the EU 's internal difficulties .
( EL ) Mr President , our stand against the enlargement of the European Union is consistent with our stand against the integration of Greece , my country , into the European Union and with the fight to free it from this imperialist machine .
The entire enlargement process is in keeping with the strengthening of NATO and the NATO occupation of the Western Balkans , with the secession of Kosovo and with the destabilisation of Bosnia and Herzegovina , with the European Union 's contesting the borders and stability in the area , with coercion against the people of Serbia , with new frictions and oppositions in the Balkans .
Because the so-called bilateral issues are not bilateral issues at all ; they are international issues , which is why they are being addressed by the UN .
At the same time , there is an unbelievable crisis in the area of the Balkans , obviously caused by the reforms to which the people in these counties have been subjected in order to accede to the European Union .
This process is in keeping with Ankara 's intransigence on the Cyprus question , with the casus belli in the Aegean , which is being backed by Frontex contesting the borders in the area , and by effectively banning trade unionism and other anti-democratic arrangements in Turkey .
This is yet another reason why we stand by the workers in these countries against integration , so that they can fight for their rights .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Swedish and Spanish Presidencies have made Turkey 's membership of the European Union a priority topic , as though it were now a foregone conclusion .

We do not feel that Turkey 's membership is either realistic or opportune for many reasons .
Firstly , because Turkey is not geographically located within Europe ; secondly , because Turkey is becoming more and more Islamic and Ankara is actually a leading member of the largest international pan-Islamic organisation , the OIC ; thirdly , because religious minorities are persecuted and their inferiority is ingrained in society ; fourthly , because Turkey continues to officially deny the genocide of one and a half million Armenian Christians and occupies Cyprus in both military and political terms in breach of international law .
We must also remember that with Turkey in the European Union , we will have countries such as Iraq , Iran and Syria on our borders .
Lastly , we must also remember that Turkey , with its 90 million inhabitants , will be the most populated country in the European Union by 2030 .
This means that it would have the highest number of MEPs and the most significant percentage vote in the European Council ; the balance of Europe would certainly be destabilised .
Mr President , like many other colleagues within this Chamber this morning , I would appeal for honesty and realism in the debate in relation in particular to Turkey .
I welcome those colleagues who have asked for proactive support for Cyprus in reaching some sort of resolution with Turkey .
I want to turn our attention very quickly to one aspect of this that has come to my attention , and that is the plight of many of the citizens whom I represent who are suffering grave financial loss as a result of property scams within Turkey .
Since I became an MEP in July , I have been contacted by many constituents who have invested substantial sums of money in properties , ranging from EUR 50 000 to EUR 150 000 , and who have subsequently lost out on that investment in what , in many cases , looks like blatant fraudulent activity .
I would request that the Commission look into this and act proactively in relation to it .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , until now , the enlargement policy has been successful , although as we have seen in the last round , we must focus more closely in particular on the internal developments in these countries with regard to the rule of law , corruption and similar issues .
I believe that this is happening in the current negotiations .
In my opinion , we have made very good progress with Croatia and we can complete the process quickly .
However , it is , of course , important that the Copenhagen criteria are met in every case , including the integration capacity of the European Union , because we must be aware of the risk of overstretching ourselves .
We will meet our obligations to the Western Balkans , but in individual cases , the path may be a long one .
We must be aware of this , so that we do not arouse false hopes .
On the other hand , it is clear that the European perspective is a valuable tool and perhaps the only one available for maintaining a certain amount of pressure to ensure that the internal reform process in these countries continues , with regard both to the maturity of the market and the political system .
I have problems with Turkey when I look at its behaviour towards Berlin and when I consider Cyprus , religious freedom , freedom of opinion , the ban on political parties and similar issues .
I can only ask myself whether the last steps that are needed - from the point of view of the mentality and not of the form - will be taken to ensure that Turkey can become a member and whether we can be sure that the European Union has the capacity to integrate Turkey .
Mr Füle , you have an important opportunity , because you have a broader range of responsibilities , which include enlargement policy and neighbourhood policy .
Both of these things relate to the European perspective , but they use different toolboxes .
For this reason , you have an interesting job and I hope very much that you enjoy it .
Mr President , I welcome the accession reports and I want to speak specifically on Macedonia and Croatia , and then Turkey .
I am pleased to follow my distinguished friend , Mr Brok , who mentioned the Copenhagen criteria .
Can I reinforce that the Copenhagen criteria are non-negotiable , especially when it comes to minority rights and human rights , and Macedonia and Croatia are therefore failing to reflect the Community acquis , especially as regards non-discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
I would say to both of those countries that the accession procedure is an opportunity to bring your laws into line and to explain to your citizens the need to do so , and that once you join this club you , do not join a club which is based on an à la carte menu .
We will enforce the acquis rigorously , and especially Article 19 , which gives the Union the right to combat discrimination on the grounds of - and it is a very important list - race , ethnicity , religion , belief , age , disability and sexual orientation .
Why is this important ?
Because one person could experience discrimination on each separate ground , and to do nothing on one is to make irrelevant all the good that you have done on the other .
I therefore say that lesbian , gay and bisexual rights are non-negotiable .
Bring in anti-discrimination legislation now .
The litmus test of any civilisation is not how it treats its majority , but how it treats the minorities that make up that majority .
On Turkey , there has been progress , and I am pleased to quote Ban Ki-moon , who says that there has been progress on Cyprus .
We in Parliament should welcome that .
Mrs Dodds is right : if we are going to be a part of the resolution , we have to be absolutely honest and bring the sides together .
But again , on anti-discrimination , I wish them to go further .
Non-discrimination is in the Constitution , but it needs to be reflected in the laws , especially again in relation to lesbians , gay men , bisexual and transgendered people who are often murdered for no other reason than they are transsexual .
So , allow Turkey to proceed along this route , on the same terms , the same conditions .
If we undermine the principles of accession , we have no principles left .

( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that I am rather surprised that , of all people , Mr Cashman from the United Kingdom , who I hold in great esteem , should remind us that a country which joins the European Union must become involved in every aspect of the Union and cannot take an à la carte approach .
That seems rather strange to me .
However , I would like to discuss the subject of Turkey .
Other speakers have said that Turkey is a society in motion and that is true .
However , for the sake of honesty , we must explain that this is not a linear movement towards European values .
Turkey is moving forwards and backwards .
Let us take the example of the armed forces .
We are , of course , pleased about the decree that prevents the armed forces from intervening without political authorisation .
This is a good thing .
However , the judgment of the constitutional court also makes up another part of the picture and this prevents members of the armed forces from being brought before civilian courts .
That , of course , is not a good thing .
If we look at the example of freedom of speech and opinion , it is true that there is a lively debate taking place on a number of topics which were previously taboo , including the rights of minorities and sexual minorities , Mr Cashman .
We think that is very good .
However , at the same time , there is the ban on YouTube and there are legal provisions which create a framework that generates legal uncertainty about the question of freedom of speech and opinion , which is particularly important to the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
There is also the ' private war ' against the Doğan group .
All of this is very unfortunate .
Another example is that of the role of women .
Of course , it is good that so-called honour killings , which are a barbaric crime , are being discussed in the media , but do we really believe that Turkish society is moving in a linear fashion towards adopting European values on equality ?
I do not think that this is the case .
I would also like to say something about what Mr Howitt has said .
It is true that we have a process - the accession negotiations - which we must follow in good faith .
However , this is not an automatic process .
During this process , we are not only responsible for the accession candidate .
Our primary responsibility is to the European Union .
Our enlargement policy must be credible and we need to take an honest and credible approach to the accession candidates .
I must say that I sometimes find it disturbing that there is an alliance between the Greens , who want a strong Europe and enlargement as soon as possible , and Members such as Mr van Orden , who want to bring in new countries as quickly as possible in order to weaken the European Union .
This seems to me very strange .
There is an accession perspective , but accession will only come about when all the criteria have been met .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , Mr Lambsdorff made an accusation against the United Kingdom .
I would ask him to point out to the House where the United Kingdom is in breach of its treaty obligations .
( DE ) Mr President , I did not say that the United Kingdom is in breach of its treaty obligations .
I simply referred to the fact that the United Kingdom opted out of certain important areas of policy relating to European integration , such as Schengen , the Euro , the Social Charter and - if I have understood this correctly - the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
These are all areas which are not exactly marginal .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say to Mr Lambsdorff that I reject your accusation .
You said that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance wanted enlargement at any price .
It is quite clear to us that we are in favour of enlargement , including Turkey and the Balkans , of course , but only if all the criteria are met .
On the subject of Turkey , I would like to say that , despite all the problems that have been referred to today , I believe that the Turkish Government has the will to continue .
For example , the Ministry of Interior has annulled the protocol which , until now , has allowed the armed forces to intervene independently in security issues .
This is very important .
I hope that a majority of this House will support our Amendment 10 which concerns keeping track of the goal of accession .
This is the only way in which the EU can maintain its credibility with regard to the promises it has made - the goal of accession , with all the criteria being met .
On the question of Macedonia , there has been a great deal of progress in many areas .
I recognise this and I am pleased about it .
However , with reference to one point which Mr Cashman has already mentioned , it is not right for a government to introduce anti-discrimination legislation that does not include sexual orientation .
That is European law .
Human rights are not negotiable and I hope that a majority of this House will also vote in favour of these common European human rights in our amendment .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate you , Mr Füle , and to say I hope you will be as good a Commissioner as you were a candidate .
Your hearing was truly superb .
I would like to assure Mr Lambsdorff that Mr Van Orden loves Europe very much .
However , he does not want Euro-bureaucracy to come between that Europe and its citizens .
We are talking , today , about enlargement , and it is good that we are talking about it , because , and let us not hide this , the European Union is going through a certain institutional crisis , and so one way of moving out of it is to enlarge the European Union .
This could give us a certain energy , a certain vigour , so it is worth taking this route .
A Europe without that Balkan lung is not Europe .
The accession of Croatia , a European country with a European culture and a European history , should be accomplished as quickly as possible .
However , let us also think realistically about receiving into membership as quickly as possible countries such as Serbia , Montenegro , Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
This is something which is , truly , very important .
Turkey 's membership is something which is much further away , and certainly will not happen within the next 10 years .
( EL ) Mr President , the fact that , as the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , we are in favour of the enlargement of the European Union , especially as regards the Western Balkans , does not mean that we are not concerned about two things :
The first is that what is ultimately being fabricated is not a Europe of social cohesion and solidarity ; it is marketplace Europe and , secondly , in certain instances , enlargement policy has problematic relations with international law .
I refer to the report on FYROM in which , where the rapporteur does not unilaterally resolve the name issue , as in paragraph 17 , he systematically avoids stating that the solution is being sought and must be sought within the UN .
This reference makes the problem an international problem , as indeed it is , not a bilateral problem , and sends out a more accurate message than just generally hoping that the problem will resolve itself .
Also , o tempora o mores you may say , the fact that FYROM is participating - I repeat participating - in EU military missions in Afghanistan is considered to be an important attribute for FYROM , a country with poor economic and military resources , as is the fact that it unilaterally recognises Kosovo , contrary to UN Resolution 1244 / 1999 .
Political enlargement with problematic relations with international law is , I would say , problematic in itself .
( SK ) I would like to begin by saying that I consider the reports on Croatia and Macedonia to be good and well-prepared reports and I think we should applaud the work of the rapporteurs and back the adoption of the reports .
As far as Turkey is concerned , I get the feeling that we are playing hide and seek in this area .
The Turkish authorities outwardly declare efforts to change but in the real world , there is little change in society .
Fathers still sell their daughters or swap them for cattle .
The men who buy wives treat them like slaves .
I firmly believe that the process of convergence of civilisations will be complicated and lengthy and it will be simple neither for us nor for Turkish society .
I therefore think that in this case , we must arm ourselves with patience and we must be prepared for long negotiations but , in these negotiations , we must act correctly and honourably and speak openly about all of the problems .
It is in our interests and also in the interests of the Turkish people , and when this problem is sorted out and brought to a successful conclusion , it will be an achievement both for Europe and for Turkey .
Mr President , in the EPP Group , everybody is in favour of following the Commission recommendations that FYROM should begin accession negotiations .
We also know that FYROM and Greece need to reach an agreement on the name issue so that these negotiations can begin .
The name issue is a real political issue in Greece .
No Greek Government can survive if negotiations are allowed to begin without an agreement on the name .
This is a political reality .
Irrespective of how colleagues judge this issue , if we want to be good advisers , we must give FYROM friendly , flexible advice .
By dismissing the name issue , calling it ' comical ' for instance , we become bad advisers to FYROM and we do not serve its cause .
Turkey should know how large the Turkish dossier is for a country with its size of population .
It regards the capacity of the EU to absorb such an enlargement , the budgetary constraints and so on , so Turkey should understand how much easier - and without obstacles and frozen chapters - her accession road would be without the weight of the problem of Cyprus .
It needs to contribute on the issue of guarantees , the presence of troops and the right of unilateral military intervention that Cyprus does not need .
Mr President , I welcome all the efforts and the progress made by Croatia towards its accession to the European Union .
This will certainly represent a major step forward in the direction of European integration for the entire Western Balkans region .
I hope 2010 will be a very good year for Croatia and for the Western Balkans too , but I would also like to underline the necessity of considering and adequately addressing the issue of refugees and the internally displaced persons .
See the last report of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees .
As you know , in 2005 , an agreement was signed in Sarajevo by Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia , and Montenegro - the so-called Sarajevo Declaration .
The agreement was aimed at sorting out the problem of the very large numbers of refugees and internally displaced people deriving from the conflict in the region .
However , this is an issue that is still pending .
I would very much like Croatia to finally affirm its readiness to relaunch the Sarajevo Declaration and to bring to an end a situation that I consider highly sensitive , and this at least before its accession .
I welcome very much the commitment of the Commission to relaunch this spring the negotiations and I reiterate in front of you that this problem should be solved once and for all before Croatia joins the EU .
A final remark on Turkey : when evaluating Turkey , I would invite you not to let our prejudgment based on religion , ethnicity and clichés to speak .
( SV ) Mr President , as Vice-Chair of Parliament 's Delegation to Croatia , I am looking forward to the day when we have Croatian members sitting on the benches in this Parliament .
Croatia has come a long way in its efforts to achieve membership and has taken many difficult decisions in order to deal with the European dimension .
Important pieces of the jigsaw have yet to be put in place before membership can be accomplished .
One matter that is very close to my heart is decentralisation ; in other words , political decisions being taken as close to the people as possible .
When we add a fourth level of decision making , such as in the case of EU membership , it is incredibly important that people are aware of which decisions are to be taken at local , regional , national and EU level .
On this matter , the progress report indicates that there is still much to do .
Other outstanding weak points are legal certainty , the fight against corruption and the position of women in the labour market - areas in which Croatia must make greater efforts .
However , I can see that a huge amount of progress is being made and that the new Croatian Government also attaches great importance to these issues .
I really hope that it will not be long before we have our Croatian colleagues with us in this Parliament .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to point out that the Balkans are trying today , as they did for the whole of the 20th century , to strike a balance between the difficult heritage of nationalism and the need for common European prospects in the immediate future .
Today 's motion for a resolution on FYROM tries to mirror this delicate balance .
However , it does not succeed adequately .
The pressure for negotiations to commence immediately is creating fears of sending the wrong signal to the talks on the name issue .
Indefinite postponement , on the other hand , might encourage equally unproductive behaviour once again .
Some of the amendments are positive .
However , I would point out that any form of nationalism damages its own country first .
Greece must strike its own balance .
As a Greek Macedonian , I call for greater composure ; what we need in the dispute over the name is for the two different self-determinations which both use the name Macedonia to coexist .
This sort of compromise would be a catalyst for building the mutual trust which is vitally necessary in these times of ecological crisis , when immediate neighbours must be seen as necessary collaborators in combating it .
( CS ) I would like to begin by thanking all of my fellow Members for producing the entire report .
At the same time , I would like to welcome the new Commissioner and to wish him every success with his highly interesting portfolio .
I have only three comments , since much has been said here already in the debate .
In my opinion , we should also emphasise the fact that expansion itself must be understood as one of the possible solutions for restoring economic growth in the European Union and we should not lose sight of that .
My second comment relates to the word ' comprehensiveness ' .
In my opinion , we must take a comprehensive view of the Balkan issue and we cannot focus on just one specific country , be it Croatia or Macedonia , but we should be dealing with the issue of a comprehensive approach involving countries , for example , such as Serbia .
In the case of Turkey , too , we must give a clear ' yes ' or ' no ' as it is not possible to pull the wool over Turkey 's eyes and to promise possible future membership .
We must give a clear ' yes ' or ' no ' .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , at the moment , the European Union should be closely following the negotiations that are taking place at the highest level with the leaders of the two main communities in Cyprus .
Turkey is playing a very negative role in those negotiations .
It is not backing a sensible solution and the European Union therefore has to send out a clear , unequivocal message : Turkey cannot keep the 40 000 soldiers who are occupying the northern part of Cyprus in contravention of international law .
It cannot continue to occupy the city of Famagusta in breach of the United Nations Security Council Resolution .
It cannot continue sending to the northern part of the island settlers who are stifling the Turkish Cypriot community .
That is the path Turkey is taking at the moment .
The European Union , the Commission , the Council and Parliament need to send out an unambiguous message to Turkey : if Turkey maintains its position , it will never be able to join the European Union .
That is the message that should be conveyed at this critical point in negotiations over the reunification of Cyprus , which is a Member State of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , I do not overlook the fact that Turkey is a large country which , however , apart from the internal social problems noted in the report , acts - in my opinion - in a contradictory manner in its foreign policy .
Thus , while the Turkish Government is trying to present itself as moderate , the armed forces of the country appear to be aggressive both towards Greece , constantly violating Greek airspace in the Aegean , and constantly harassing Frontex .
It should be noted that , despite the fact that Greece and Turkey are NATO countries , and so are allies , Turkey is threatening Greece with a casus belli in terms of extending its territorial waters and by refusing to recognise the state of Cyprus , which is a member of the European Union .
Finally , the Turkish Government also appears to be unable at the moment to safeguard popular sovereignty in the country and is planning a new type of Ottoman commonwealth , as was clear from the meeting in Sarajevo at the beginning of November attended by Minister Davutoglu .
I also find strange the moves by the Turkish Government in terms of its overtures to Iran , which conflict with the accepted views of the international community and the European Union .
Moreover , we should not overlook the fact that , in contravention of the roadmap , Turkey is allowing and , perhaps , encouraging the movement of illegal immigrants through its territory to the countries of the European Union and is not complying with its obligations to grant docking and landing rights to Cypriot ships and aircraft .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Swoboda for his report on Croatia ; it recognises the efforts and achievements made by the Croatian Government .
I think it is important to say that this country is now coming closer to membership , which underlines - and I say this to the Presidency of the Council - that there is a need to finalise the negotiations with Croatia during 2010 .
But I think it is also worth underlining the message that the efforts made by Croatia have not been done for us .
They are making Croatia a better country and a better society for its citizens and by that , Croatia is becoming a better neighbour and contributing to Europe , because fights against organised crime or corruption must be made across borders , and it is an advantage for us to see the achievements made in Croatia .
The same applies to other candidate countries .
All the achievements we can see are of benefit to Europe and , I must say , given the experience we have on the enlargement process , we have very few regrets on the achievements we have made ; we should have the same perspective when we talk about Turkey , Macedonia or the other countries of the Western Balkans .
When they reform , they are becoming neighbours .
When we close the door , we are running the risk of new problems and new threats to European values ; we should underline the need to go forward together in order to achieve a better European enlargement based on the criteria we fully support .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , concluding negotiations with Croatia during 2010 is a feasible aim and the Swoboda report is a balanced examination of our progress and the steps we still need to take .
Justice is now the area in which hard-hitting reform is still required .
It is not enough to complete the necessary system reforms , adopt new laws and cooperate as required with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
I stress the need to build a true legal culture and mentality in line with European standards .
Crucial to this is the independence of the judiciary , which is a central issue , and also the training , recruitment and career of magistrates , in other words , the fact that the government must not impose conditions of any kind on judges .
I call on the Commission to consider the need for hard-hitting measures that address these issues during the final stage of the negotiations .
Mr President , greetings to Commissioner Füle .
The talks between Mr Christofias and Mr Talat are , as we know , at a critical stage .
For them to succeed , a settlement has to be carried by public opinion .
Confidence-building is sorely required .
Turkey should send signals .
Unfortunately , the trade dossier appears to be completely blocked , so starting to pull out troops is a difficult , but clever , gesture to build up public support in the south and in the north , to show that the prospect of a permanent settlement is actually genuine .
We all appreciate that , if the Cypriot problem is not solved now , the prospects for progress with Turkey 's accession are poor indeed .
The time to act is now .
I do hope that the Commission is going to respond to the several speakers who brought up the Cypriot question as part of its response to the debate .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we wish to back the membership of Croatia and this is why we call on the Croatian authorities to ensure that the assets nationalised to Italian citizens at the end of World War II , and still owned by state or municipal institutions , despite the requirements of European law , should be returned to their legitimate owners .
We wish to back the membership of the Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia and this is why we call for compliance with the method of consensus , part of the history of the European Union , and we call on the European institutions to offer their sympathetic support for the views of all of the Member States on the reasons that still block this path .
We wish to speak the language of truth with Turkey .
The Oomen-Ruijten report has this merit : it does not deny that the path is strewn with difficulties and it is unprejudiced , taking the Copenhagen criteria as its fixed point of reference .
Parliament therefore does well to forcefully denounce the human rights violations and the lack of democracy .
But those who make the path of this membership application almost paradoxical are not to be found in this Chamber .
They can be found amongst the exponents of many governments who promise at every official meeting what it is in their interests to deny in the corridors outside .
Based on the Oomen-Ruijten report , though , it is useful to keep strengthening the tools of privileged partnership as we await a development determined not by prejudice but by the full and responsible assimilation of the content of the Community acquis .
( HU ) I would like to comment on the report on Croatia and Macedonia .
I think it is important to state that the advancement of the accession process for south-eastern European countries is prominently in the interests of the European Union , as stability , prosperity and the progress of reform in the region is important not only for the candidate countries but for the entire European Union .
In the case of both countries , issues concerning neighbourly relations have stalled progress .
I believe that it is extremely important to use appropriate political wisdom , courage and mutual good will to solve these issues , not only on the part of these candidate countries , but also on the part of the Member States of the European Union .
This happened in the case of Croatia , and I truly hope that the commitment of the Spanish Presidency will also boost progress in the name issue affecting Macedonia and Greece .
As the third member of the Trio Presidency , Hungary would like to continue and assist with this process .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , congratulations to Mr Füle on his appointment as Commissioner .
I would also like to congratulate Mr Swoboda , the rapporteur , on his report .
It is a very balanced presentation of the progress made in Croatia .
At the same time , it clearly indicates the areas where Croatia still has work to do in order to be able to complete the accession process .
It is also significant that statistics taken from a Eurobarometer survey carried out in the autumn of last year show that 84 % of Croats are dissatisfied with democracy in their country .
This means that not only are reforms to the judiciary required , but also an improvement in the situation of minorities .
It is also important to ensure that the freedom of the press is guaranteed .
These reforms must be initiated and implemented and , above all , they must be supported by the population .
In formal terms , the criteria can certainly be met very quickly , but the entire population must be behind the process and must welcome Croatia 's accession to the EU .
( PL ) Madam President , the accession of Turkey to the European Union is a cause of much controversy in some circles .
For that process to take place with mutual understanding , it must be assured a high level of quality .
Fulfilment of strict but clear conditions , which are understandable and accepted by both sides , is the basis for reception of new members , and this also applies to Turkey .
I would now like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , for a comprehensive report on Turkey 's progress in 2009 .
This year , the report is more critical , and , unfortunately , rightly draws attention to the small amount of progress made by Turkey , especially on questions of citizens ' freedoms and the justice system .
However , stagnation in the process of democratisation was not all that happened last year , so it is necessary to be critical where progress was not made or where the situation became worse , but also to show that we value the changes for the better .
For , on the one hand , the need to strengthen the principles of the rule of law is being neglected , and the constitution is based on this law , so this should be made a priority .
On the other hand , Turkey is putting great effort into the negotiations which have been started , and I welcome the changes and Turkey 's desire to continue reforms in order to meet the Copenhagen criteria .
However , good intentions are not everything .
Ankara still has many challenges ahead on the road to membership of the European Union , and those challenges are not easy .
I trust that Turkey will manage to overcome all the obstacles , and I wish the country success in reforming itself .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Croatia 's membership of the European Union accentuates the gelling of a European identity that is able to express the common values of our new Europe while incorporating , rather than glossing over , the individualities of its many occupants .
The Republic of Croatia has made appreciable efforts to come up to the required standards , particularly in combating organised crime through new anti-mafia measures , but it needs to make further efforts , particularly in the judicial field , before the 2010 negotiations can conclude .
The institutions of the Republic of Croatia can make further steps forward to come into line with the requirements of the first protocol of the European Convention on Human Rights , signed in Paris in 1952 , by considering the return of nationalised assets to their rightful owners .
Madam President , first of all , I , too , would like to welcome Commissioner Füle to this House .
The rapporteur has submitted a very balanced draft resolution .
Turkey has indeed made good progress , but many points of concern must be addressed urgently .
The horrible phenomenon of honour killings must be stamped out as well as the killing of transgender persons .
Just yesterday , we learned of the umpteenth killing of a transgender woman in Antalya .
The Turkish Government must ensure , as a matter of urgency , that transgender killings no longer go unpunished .
Furthermore , I appeal once again to the Turkish Government to ensure freedom of association and put an end to the systematic attempts to close down LGTB organisations .
The resolution rightly urges freedom of religion and freedom of expression .
For a liberal , these freedoms are at the heart of our democracy and are non-negotiable preconditions for EU membership .
However , if we ask Turkey to comply with EU standards , we must make sure to meet these standards ourselves .
That is a matter of credibility and moral authority .
Homophobia , compulsory religious education and restrictions of freedom of the press must equally be fought in the current Member States .
( RO ) As is also highlighted in the Oomen-Ruijten report , in 2009 , Turkey made a clear commitment to the path of reform and good relations with its neighbours .
Furthermore , the authorities have encouraged public debate on certain areas of key importance to the reform process such as : the role of the judiciary , the rights of ethnic minorities and the role of the army in this country 's political life .
On the other hand , the signing of the Nabucco agreement has shown Turkey 's involvement in creating a secure gas supply within Europe , as is also demonstrated by Turkey 's negotiations to join the European Energy Community .
Turkey has shown the key role it plays as an actor in the region by establishing normal relations with Armenia and improving relations with Iraq and the regional Kurdish Government .
We certainly must not forget either its cooperation within the Black Sea Synergy launched three years ago with the aim of promoting stability and reforms in the countries around the Black Sea .
Finally , I would not like us to forget some of the fundamental reasons which advocate this country 's accession to the European Union .
Turkey is clearly a member of the European family and is an important partner in the dialogue between civilisations .
Bringing a secular , democratic and modern Turkey closer to the European Union is certainly an asset for our community .
( HU ) I am very glad that the enlargement portfolio will be held by Commissioner Füle who , as a Central European politician , is best placed to understand the heavy burden that south-eastern Europe and the Western Balkans carry in terms of ethnic and interethnic conflicts and bilateral neighbourly disputes .
The Western Balkans and the Balkans have never been stable except during the brief era of Tito 's Yugoslavia .
Accession to the Union is the only option to stabilise the region .
This was proved by the 2004 and 2007 accessions , as illustrated , for instance , by the significant positive effect on relations between Hungary and Romania .
At the same time , I would like to draw Commissioner Füle 's and Parliament 's attention to the fact that all interethnic problems , all important issues and neighbourly relations need to be resolved prior to accession , as the European Union will be powerless in the face of such issues after accession .
Just look at the unresolved problem of Russians in Latvia , or at Slovakia , where the policies of the Fico Government have led to a souring of relations between the Slovak majority and the Hungarian minority .
Therefore , in the case of the Western Balkans , where such problems are even more complicated , it is particularly important to settle them in relation to each country .
Croatia is a neighbour country of Hungary , so it is of the utmost importance that Croatia becomes a member of the European Union as soon as possible .
It is very important for Croatia to face its responsibilities in terms of the war , and to allow the refugees to return .
This is a very important issue .
Negotiations should be started with Macedonia as soon as possible , as also mentioned by Mr Thaler in his excellent report .
Finally , with regard to Turkey , as long as the Kurds are not granted autonomy in the broadest possible sense , as long as the rights of women and sexual minorities are not resolved and Turkey does not apologise for the Armenian genocide , Turkey cannot become a member of the European Union .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her painstaking work .
However , there seems to me to be a difference between the text adopted last year and the one that is now being proposed to us on Turkey .
Parliament , in its 2009 resolution , highlighted the negotiations in Cyprus but did not set any preconditions associated with the colonies or the Famagusta situation .
These issues are dealt with in the six negotiating chapters which are being handled under the auspices of the UN .
I therefore think that Parliament 's taking such a strong , one-sided position may harm these negotiations and render us partisan .
As the former commissioner emphasised on 16 November 2006 , the restitution of Famagusta to its legitimate inhabitants is an issue which will have to be dealt with under the auspices of the UN , as part of an overall settlement of the Cyprus issue .
I should like to quote another of the Council 's conclusions .
In 2004 , the Turkish Cypriot community clearly expressed its desire to have a future within the EU .
The Council resolved to put an end to the isolation of that community and to facilitate the reunification of Cyprus by encouraging the economic development of the Turkish Cypriot community .
( Applause )
Madam President , I should like to welcome Commissioner Füle and the Minister .
Everybody will be pleased by the progress that Croatia is making in the completion of its accession process .
Key areas of governance must be adapted to the requirements of the acquis , and some of these changes - let us be clear about this - are likely to go against the grain of tradition and expectations .
So , negotiating the transformation demands a major act of political will .
Let me add that the effort is well worthwhile , especially for a relatively small state like Croatia or , for that matter - and the same applies - for the other states of the Western Balkans .
EU membership - I think we can take this for granted - provides a set of advantages in political , economic , cultural and security terms .
The greatest problem of adaptation , though , lies elsewhere .
It is one thing to change the structures of governance but it is a very different matter to change the attitudes of society to something radically different to the forms and content that have been developed in the European Union .
The two are frequently far from each other , and there will certainly be elements in society , some quite powerful ones at that , which will see only disadvantages for themselves in the new dispensation .
Let there be no illusions about this .
The Croatian authorities have not only to complete their negotiations with the European Union but , at the same time , they must also do what they can to change social attitudes .
That may turn out to be the harder task .
( EL ) Madam President , the three reports we are debating today express the European Parliament 's firm position on the continuing enlargement process .
However , there are important differences .
May I start by congratulating Hannes Swoboda on his report on Croatia .
We are all delighted that this country will shortly be joining the European Union .
As far as Turkey is concerned , the message from the exceptionally balanced report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten remains the same as in previous years .
Turkey needs to honour all its contractual obligations , as all previous candidate countries have done .
Accession is and must be the ultimate objective .
However , we cannot have à la carte accession tailored to Turkey .
Turkey is a large country , which needs to accept that continuing reform , respect for human rights , proper help in resolving the Cyprus question , good neighbourly relations and removing the casus belli against a Member State are the steps that will bring it closer to the Union .
As far as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is concerned , the report by Mr Zoran Thaler sends the country a positive message .
Greece , for its part , calls on the leaders of FYROM to come to the negotiating table in good faith , so that a jointly acceptable solution can be found within the framework of the UN .
The Greek Government knows that the process requires new momentum and is genuinely determined that the issue be resolved .
We expect an equally honest stand from the other side .
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioner Füle , welcome to the House .
I wish you every success in your work .
I wish to thank Mr Swoboda , Mr Thaler and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for their balanced , objective reports .
The European Parliament has declared on numerous occasions its political desire for the countries of the Western Balkans to join the European Union and expressed its readiness to assist these states so that they can quickly meet the membership criteria .
Croatia is in the home straight .
I strongly hope that the Accession Treaty for this country will be signed by this year .
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made progress in meeting the criteria for initiating the pre-accession process .
The European Council is expected to reaffirm the European Commission 's decision made at the end of last year and launch the accession process .
For this to happen , I believe that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia needs to make further efforts to resolve problems with its neighbours in a European spirit .
If the authorities in Skopje have the political will not to use history , whether ancient or more recent , and to argue about current political or national intentions , a compromise can be reached .
History must bring us together and not tear us apart .
Let the historians come to their academic conclusions , but they must not stand in the way of the European destiny of any candidate country .
So-called hate talk must not be tolerated .
I want to mention in particular the schoolbooks which children use in school .
They must not contain descriptions inciting a hostile attitude towards other Member States .
The way to increase trust in the Balkans is not only through the visa liberalisation scheme , which is up and running and something I am very pleased about , but also , in my view , through the joint commemoration of historical dates and heroes which are shared by certain Balkan countries .
I hope that the recommendations made by the reports are taken into consideration by the relevant institutions in Member States .
I wish Croatia , Macedonia and Turkey every success on their European journey .
Madam President , we should continue to support the EU membership perspective for the countries of the Western Balkans .
The whole process supports stability and we should keep up the momentum .
As the rapporteur for visa facilitation in the Delegation to the European Union-Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Joint Parliamentary Committee , I think that introducing the visa-free regime in the country was a very important encouragement for its people .
The last Commission report points out that FYROM has achieved progress in many areas , and this is commendable .
I come from a neighbouring country , Bulgaria , and we , as neighbouring countries , see some worrying trends .
In my opinion , the name issue should not come first .
Macedonian nation-building started after the Second World War and now a big part of the population identify themselves as Macedonians .
However , we have to stick to our values : we cannot tolerate nation-building being confused with nationalistic rhetoric or with gross manipulation of history , going back to ancient times .
Secondly , affirming national identity should not lead to xenophobic feelings towards citizens who declare themselves to be of Bulgarian origin .
These people are subjected to verbal and physical abuse and even legally persecuted for fabricated reasons .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate the Commissioner and wish him every success in the very important sector which he has taken over .
It is a fact that Europe can and has the right to continue to enlarge .
In the Western Balkans in particular , these people have a right to a better fate and a proper share of real European values .
However , it should be noted that , for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in particular , it would be better if , in order to become a Member of the Union , a country did not use history , on a pick and mix basis , as a tool ; it must get used to contributing towards the procedures of the United Nations and to resolving its problems with diplomacy , not propaganda .
Thus , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia must be called upon to act , if it wants a future soon .
I wish to congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her excellent report on Turkey and also to congratulate Mr Swoboda and , of course , Mr Thaler , despite the fact that I disagree with certain aspects of his approach and his report .

We absolutely must understand that , with compromises which do not reflect the truth and reality , problems will reappear in future .
On the other hand , as far as Turkey is concerned , I would like to say that efforts have been made , but no major move which would allow us to say that Turkey is resolving its problems diplomatically , in other words , by withdrawing or starting to withdraw its troops from a European country , Cyprus .

( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate you , Mr Füle , on your new appointment and wish you luck in this very important task .
You have already made it clear to the committee that the negotiations with Turkey are about its accession and not about the crazy idea of a privileged partnership , which has never been adequately publicised by those in favour of it .
However , you have also made it clear - and we welcomed this very much - that both sides , Turkey and the European Union , must meet their obligations and undertakings .
In this case , Mr Posselt , the principle of pacta sunt servanda applies .
You must be familiar with this phrase which was used by your former prestigious leader .
One further point is also very important to me .
Of course , Turkey still has a great deal to do , but so does the European Union , whether it concerns the issue of Cyprus , the implementation of minority rights in Turkey or the political and military aspects .
However , one thing is clear .
The process will never be linear .
We know this from the history of the European Union .
You only need to look at the processes and procedures relating to the Treaty of Lisbon .
There will always be progress and setbacks in the process in Turkey .
Something else that is obvious is that when Turkey has fulfilled all the requirements , when it can accept the acquis communautaire , Turkey will be a different country .
However , the Treaty of Lisbon will also have brought about lasting changes to the European Union .
We should be aware of this .
As I have said , both sides must fulfil their undertakings .
( SL ) If the European Union genuinely wants to play a more powerful role on the international stage , it must ensure it strengthens its role within Europe as well .
That means completing the project of a united Europe in the south-east .
We need not only a European perspective , but dynamism and stimulation too .
I am pleased that we are able to welcome the progress of all three countries discussed here and I congratulate rapporteurs Ria Oomen-Ruijten , Zoran Thaler and Hannes Swoboda on a job well done .
I am particularly pleased that all three countries have paid particular attention to developing relations with their neighbours .
Mention has also been made of the arbitration agreement between Slovenia and Croatia .
It is a fact that the Croatian and Slovene Governments see the key issue of this agreement in a totally different light , which does not exactly inspire mutual confidence .
I call on both governments to use bilateral opportunities to agree on a uniform interpretation of the agreement and to foster an atmosphere of good neighbourly relations , and one which could bring the accession process to its successful conclusion .
I sincerely congratulate Commissioner Füle for taking on his responsible role and wish him every success in achieving these ambitious goals .
Similarly , I wish good fortune and a great deal of wisdom to the Spanish Presidency .
( NL ) Neighbours look after one another , they support each other .
When things are good in the neighbourhood , they are also good for the people who live there .
Turkey and Cyprus are neighbours .
When they look over each others ' fences , it is not each other they see , but the Turkish Cypriots , who find themselves caught between two stools .
In order to ensure that all the people who live on Cyprus are once again truly able to live together , a solution is needed that requires all the neighbours to play their part .
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon last week indicated a belief that a solution for Cyprus is possibly within reach .
This Parliament has an important job to do in making a positive contribution to the situation on Cyprus , searching constructively for solutions and clearing obstacles instead of erecting them .
Yes , Turkey must be made to make efforts to bring that solution closer .
That is what we are calling for in the report on which we are about to vote .
It is not just Turkey that has to make an effort , however .
All the affected parties must play their part in creating a positive atmosphere in which a reliable solution can be found .
Ultimately , that is , of course , what we all want : a solution .
We must also be supportive in connection with the candidate country of Macedonia , when it comes to the issue of its name , so that negotiations can begin .
As Member States , we must be careful to ensure that we are not part of the problem , but that we instead contribute to finding a solution .
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made a great deal of progress , and can act as an example for the other countries of the Balkans , whilst also offering an opportunity to increase stability in the region .
We need to make an effort , here , to see the EU 's most important export products flourish : democracy , human rights , peace and security .
( SK ) Croatia is demonstrating its determination to join the EU by taking clear steps towards fulfilling the criteria .
Political will has been reflected in reforms of the public administration and judiciary and in the fight against corruption and organised crime .
In the judiciary , there has been a growth in transparency , a reduction in the numbers of pending court proceedings and excessively long proceedings .
One significant factor is the continuing exposure of war crimes , in which Croatia is fully cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal .
Croatia is showing a good level of regulatory harmonisation with the acquis communautaire .
It is undergoing significant legislative and institutional changes with the aim of combating organised crime and the mafia and strengthening cross-border cooperation with law-enforcement authorities in neighbouring countries .
The banking sector in Croatia is sound , investors have confidence in the state of the economy , and macro-economic stability has been maintained .
There is still a need to complete the programme of small-scale privatisations and reduce state interference in the economy .
In my opinion , the reconciliation between ethnic Croats and ethnic Serbs , the improved safeguarding of minority rights and the integration of refugees , including the rebuilding of homes , are particularly deserving of praise .
I therefore urge Croatia to further the development of a culture of political responsibility and for a public debate on membership and the consequences of accession , since only a third of the population currently consider accession to the EU to be beneficial .
I would also like to congratulate the new commissioner , Mr Füle , and welcome him to the role .
Madam President , I welcome Commissioner Füle and I would like to congratulate the authors for three well-balanced reports .
There is no doubt that the prospect of EU membership has pushed Turkey to change for the better .
After all , this Muslim country is unique in that it took the first steps to adapting European values almost 100 years ago and despite the various historical winds , it did not go off the road .
Turkey is the most Western of Eastern states and the most Eastern of Western states , so its unique role is not only European but also global .
Ankara must accelerate reforms , more determinedly seek compromise on the Cyprus problem and take further steps on reconciliation with Armenia .
However , I strongly support the Socialist and Democrats Group 's position that the prospect of Turkey 's membership of the EU should not be changed by any Ersatzlösung or ersatz variants .
( ES ) Madam President , may I welcome the Commissioner .
In this decade , enlargement policy has been the European Union 's greatest success , along with the euro .
That policy should not be held back .
Furthermore , we cannot break the commitments we have made with candidate countries , although we should also respect the well-known principles of consolidation and conditionality .
We also should not forget the European Union 's integration capacity or the need to communicate with citizens on the subject of enlargement and its advantages and consequences .
Given the time restrictions , I shall just make a few brief comments .
In principle , candidate countries should resolve beforehand any territorial disputes and similar issues they might have with each other and with Member States , so as not to later slow down the operation of the Union .
In the case of Turkey , I would particularly like to highlight how important it is for the rate of reforms - which are also necessary for Turkey itself - to be maintained and even increased .
I also welcome the recent commitment Turkey has shown with regard to Nabucco , which is very important for energy diversification in Europe .
However , I must admit that I was somewhat surprised by the gesture that the Turkish Government made last autumn in support of the Iranian authorities .
Indeed , I believe that a candidate country 's foreign policy should be in line with that of the Union .
Finally , last week , I read an interview with the Turkish Minister for European Affairs which seemed to suggest that Turkey had abolished visas for countries such as Syria , Lebanon and Libya .
I was somewhat surprised by this because a candidate country should also be bringing its visa policy closer to that of the European Union , not moving in the opposite direction .
I would like confirmation of that information .
( EL ) Madam President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has made a tremendous effort to present a balanced report and we thank her .
Amendments 13 and 14 by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance upset this balance and I therefore urge you to vote against them .
In the talks being conducted on the Cyprus question , Turkey , via Mr Talat , has tabled unacceptable proposals and remains intransigent and maximalist .
That is why it is wrong to call on all the parties to support the negotiations under way .
The party on which pressure needs to be exerted is Turkey as the occupying power .
Turkey must immediately withdraw all Turkish troops , end the occupation and stop holding the Turkish-Cypriot community hostage , because it , not the Greek Cypriots , is responsible for the so-called isolation of Turkish Cypriots .
Turkey needs to return the besieged town of Varosha and to stop illegal settlements and the encroachment on to Greek Cypriot property .
Turkey holds the key to the solution to the Cyprus problem and progress with its accession .
The small country of Cyprus asks for nothing more and nothing less than a solution in keeping with the European acquis , without derogations , and with the UN resolutions .
Cypriots are not second-class citizens of some sort of Ottoman or other colony .
We are European citizens with European rights .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is high time for the EU to begin negotiations with Macedonia at last .
Macedonia has fulfilled the conditions and has been waiting for negotiations to start since 2005 .
Greece has had so much solidarity from the other 26 Member States that it should not now put a veto on starting negotiations with its neighbour Macedonia .
The name issue is a purely bilateral question , even if the UN has given its help in this respect .
On the subject of Croatia , I would like to say that this country is combating corruption to such an extent that other countries , including some within the EU , should take an example from it .
My second point is that the return of the refugees , which Mr Boştinaru has just mentioned , has , in my opinion , been handled in an exemplary way .
As Mr Swoboda said , many things cannot be resolved in the way that we imagine they will be .
My third point concerns the cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal in the Hague .
Croatia handed over all its wanted war criminals years ago .
The documents from the homeland war which have been called for are either no longer available or have never existed .
Therefore , a common sense approach is needed to these questions .
The government is searching for the documents and it has set up a task force , but it cannot do more than look .
If it does not find anything , then it is important to take a step forward , in the light of the fact that Croatia has been cooperating with the tribunal for years and , therefore , has , to a large extent , met the conditions .
I hope very much that the chapter will soon be opened , so that the negotiations with Croatia can be completed by the end of this year .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Füle , I would like to wish you every success with your work in future .
It is hard to ignore the ambivalence of the Cyprus issue .
We in the European Union must not dismiss apparently unpleasant issues or try to pretend that they do not exist .
We have not kept our promise .
That is a fact and we must resolve these double standards .
We know that the Ankara Protocol must definitely be implemented with regard to the Cyprus question .
However , it is also clear , as stated by the Council in 2004 , that the isolation of Northern Cyprus must come to an end .
I am pleased that Southern Cyprus is providing the north with the necessary support , but this was not the intention of the European Union .
Its intention was that everyone , the entire EU , should bring an end to the isolation .
In order to overcome the final obstacle in this area , we must take a step forwards and put a stop to this isolation .
Madam President , for the new Commission - and I warmly welcome Commissioner Füle - now is the time to renew the EU 's commitment to enlargement by completing accession negotiations with Croatia by the end of this year and starting negotiations with Macedonia .
The latter has made impressive progress despite manifold difficulties and should be encouraged to continue .
I would like to invite both parties to solve the name issue in an open and generous European style , as advocated yesterday by President Barroso .
Turkey , too , has made significant progress .
If we look at Ukraine , we can realise the difference that the very prospect of accession can make .
Turkey is welcome to membership on the basis of meeting the Copenhagen criteria .
With a new Commissioner , there is no time to be lost in making Turkey start pulling its troops out of Cyprus and implementing the Ankara Protocol .
I think this could be seen as a condition for proceeding with negotiations .
As for myself , I could feel comfortable with Turkish accession when it is as easy to build a Christian church in Ankara as it is to erect a mosque in Brussels .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to comment on two aspects of the Turkish issue .
It is generally the ethnic conflicts that are discussed , and rightly so .
There is still work to be done in this area and some difficulties remain .
However , what people usually overlook is the fact that there are still significant problems in Turkey with regard to trade union and employee rights .
The Turkish Government continues to oppose trade unions - in some circumstances even using the power of the police - which provide support for their members , in other words , for Turkish working people .
This has happened recently in the dispute involving the Tekel workers .
That is one of the comments that I would like to make .
A democratic society must protect the rights of employees and trade unions and it is important to fight for these rights .
The EU also supports these rights , in particular , in its role as a social European Union .
The second factor is privatisation .
Turkey is adapting to the EU and this includes the area of privatisation .
The Tekel employees , of whom 12 000 are currently on strike , are threatened with the loss of their jobs or have already lost them as a result of privatisation .
However , it is not only the Tekel employees who work in the tobacco industry .
Around 500 000 people employed in growing tobacco in south-eastern Turkey have lost their jobs in recent years , with the result that , having been one of the major producers and exporters of tobacco , Turkey has now become an importer .
A week ago , I had the chance to go to Ankara and speak with the Tekel employees .
If the process of cutting jobs and destroying whole sectors of industry continues as a result of privatisation , the people of Turkey will lose their enthusiasm for accession to the EU .
Therefore , we must put the focus on the social aspect of the EU .
I would like to emphasise that once again .

( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I welcome you warmly , Mr Füle , as we all do , and I wish you much perseverance through the next few years of your work .
I know we should not talk about the end of the new parliamentary term on the first day .
I do , of course , wish you many other terms , Mr Füle , but it is my wish for you , that when you speak here at the end of this term , you will be able to meet us in a new , enlarged European Union consisting , perhaps , of even 30 Member States .
Mr Füle , apart from your work on the important countries we are talking about here today , I would like to ask you also to give attention to other countries which are dreaming of European Union membership .
Just like myself , you come from a country which has just acceded to the European Union , and I think that you , I and all the fellow Members from all the new Member States understand how important it was to our societies when we acceded to the European Union .
We also wish this for the countries we are talking about today .
As a Pole , I have a small dream , and with this I would like to end my speech .
It is that Croatia , the country which has currently made most progress in negotiations , might manage to accede to the European Union during the not-too-distant Polish Presidency .
( DE ) Madam President , once again , the report on Turkey is not a progress report , but a report on Turkey 's failings .
The EU is calling on Turkey to do more in the area of minority rights , but instead of resolving the issue of the Kurds as it had said it would , Turkey is planning to ban the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) .
For the fourth year in a row , the government in Ankara has failed to implement the additional protocol to the association agreement , but , via its ambassadors , it is calling on the major EU Member States to resolve the Cyprus question .
In my opinion , the long-awaited negotiations on the Mediterranean island are not a cause for celebration , because the most recent Turkish Cypriot proposal goes against the existing consensus on some points , which means that it actually represents a step backwards .
So much for the positive results which the Spanish Presidency announced that we could expect .
Turkey is not a part of Europe either geopolitically or in spiritual or cultural terms .
Human rights , the rights of minorities and international law remain concepts that are foreign to Turkey .
In my view , the only honest response which is in line with the wishes of EU citizens would be to bring the accession negotiations to an end and to aim for a privileged partnership .
( EL ) Commissioner , we welcome you and wish you every success in your job .
Today , we are debating , among other things , Turkey 's progress towards Europe .
Yesterday we debated the difficult economic situation faced by certain countries in the euro area , especially the critical situation faced by Greece .
These two debates intersect at one point , they have one common ground .
That common ground is massive , inflexible defence spending by Greece , with around 5 % of its gross domestic product allocated to military expenditure - and not because it wants to .
Of course , part of this is spent honouring its obligations as a member of NATO .
However , most of it is spent because we have to address a specific policy by a neighbouring country and candidate country , namely Turkey .
There is an official Turkish policy of threatening Greece with war , known as the casus belli , and it is not simply a paper threat ; Turkey is in the habit of violating the airspace of and overflying even inhabited Greek islands in the Eastern Aegean .
This has to stop and this must be a strong message sent to Ankara by the European Parliament .
If there are improvements on this , its progress towards Europe will regain momentum , together , of course , with all the other commitments which it must honour .
Madam President , in its neighbourhood policy , the Union 's objective has always been to export stability and not to import instability .
This is why I appeal to Member States and candidate countries not to promote bilateral conflicts to the level of the Union .
Being a lawyer , I would like to recall that , through the interim accord between Greece and FYROM signed in September 1995 , Greece agreed not to object to FYROM 's application to international or regional organisations if made under the name referred by the United Nations , which is FYROM .
The Union 's institutions refer to this country as FYROM .
These provisions are legally binding in terms of international law .
Therefore , there is no legal basis for Greece to obstruct the country 's accession process .
Decisions must be taken on the performance of the applicant country .
On this note , I support the debates on the progress made and the areas in which improvement is still needed .
We need to talk about the merits and closely monitor the implementation of the reforms .
Based upon the progress made , the Commission proposed that the country be given a date to start negotiations .
I join the Commission and call on the Council to provide a starting date for accession negotiations at its summit in March 2010 .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , even if the very strong resolution in Turkey 's favour is adopted today , this country will not stop demonstrating an important democratic deficit , blatantly infringing the human rights of millions of people and occupying the Republic of Cyprus , a Member State of the European Union .
However , as far as Cyprus is concerned , there are many who insist on putting equal responsibility on the victim and the perpetrator .
We cannot accept crime and armed violence and call on all the parties involved - call on them to do what ?
We cannot listen in the sanctuary of democracy , the European Parliament , to unseemly expressions such as Northern and Southern Cyprus and talk of elections for Northern Cyprus , where 70 % of the so-called electoral body are illegal colonists .
It is clear that , if the solution does not respect the human rights of the citizens of Cyprus , then the entire system of values of the European Union is at risk .
Of course , talks are continuing , but they have become bogged down by Turkey 's maximalist claims .
As it is Turkey rather than any other country that we are evaluating , we call on Turkey to facilitate the process of talks by taking two self-evident steps : firstly , to immediately start withdrawing the occupying army and , secondly , to return the occupied town of Famagusta to its legal residents .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we acknowledge the efforts that Croatia has made in recent years to meet the requirements of European Union membership .
We support the statement that Mr López Garrido gave us this morning .
There nevertheless remains one unresolved matter that must be dealt with during the negotiations on bilateral matters between Croatia and Italy which risks casting a shadow over the accession process .
I refer to the failure to provide financial and moral compensation for damage suffered and the failure to return goods confiscated from the Italians who were forced to leave those lands as exiles following World War II .
Now that it is seeking to join the European Union , I call on Croatia to speed up the process of achieving a conciliatory , constructive and happy ending to this sad and still unresolved affair .
We call on Croatia to satisfy the rights of those people who have been waiting for this to happen for so long , in accordance with European law among other things .
Madam President , I have a brief comment on Turkey .
Turkey still has some very serious problems in the area of human rights .
One of the outstanding issues is setting the rights of ethnic and religious minorities - Kurds , Christians , Alevists and others .
These minorities are suffering from constant violations of their rights .
Cyprus and Greece are , and will remain , of the utmost importance to the European Union .
So , Commissioner , we therefore have to make it clear to our Turkish partners that it is very difficult to speak about Turkey 's European integration until problems related to Turkey 's religious and ethnic minorities are solved .
( EL ) Madam President , in today 's debate , we need to arrive at clear messages to Turkey , bearing in mind that it has not taken specific action to resolve various problems with neighbouring countries .
As regards the Cyprus question , in particular , given that we have heard proposals to include a reference to the problem of the isolation of Turkish Cypriots in the report , I think that the European Union should and must act within the framework of the UN resolutions .
That means that the illegal occupied lands cannot be recognised ; on the contrary , any aid must be granted via the legal state , as is presently the case .
At the same time , Turkey should withdraw the army , so as to remove this major obstacle to overall efforts being made to overcome the difficulty of contacting Turkish Cypriots .
( SL ) I congratulate all the rapporteurs on their balanced reports , and to you , Commissioner , I wish every possible success in taking up your important role .
I would like to point out that the Member States of the European Union are not communicating in the best possible way with the countries of the Western Balkans .
Some of them are throwing around unrealistic dates .
2014 , a date suggested by some of you today , generates false hope , unrealistic expectations and misleads the politicians and the public opinion of these countries .
We will strengthen pro-European forces only if we adopt a realistic approach and behave appropriately .
False promises are detrimental for both them and us .
Let us be fair , let us be correct and let us be credible .
( PL ) Madam President , I realise how very difficult it is , in Turkey 's social circumstances , for the government in Ankara to do anything to improve democracy and human rights .
I do appreciate this very well , but I would like to draw attention to a problem which has received too little emphasis in this debate .
I am thinking of the problem of religious freedom , which is still restricted in Turkey , particularly towards Christians .
In Turkey , we still have a problem with the obstacles faced by religious communities concerning their legal status .
Christian communities , despite the introduction of the Law on Foundations , are having serious problems with regaining confiscated property .
The Ecumenical Patriarchate has limited rights to train clergy and freely elect the Ecumenical Patriarch .
I am very grateful to the rapporteur for emphasising all these aspects in the report .
At the same time , I regret that this matter was completely ignored in Mr López Garrido 's speech .
Mr López Garrido , I have a personal comment : ideology and human rights do not mix .
Madam President , I would like to speak on the issue of Turkey .
My concern is that in 2003 , the UK Independence Party , of which I am a member , stated in this Parliament that there would be dire consequences regarding migrants from new Member States coming to our country , the United Kingdom .
My fear is that , if Turkey joins , 70 million people will be allowed to come into the UK .
The United Kingdom is full .
We have millions of people unemployed .
The pressure on our public services is incredible .
The thought of Turkey joining is not on at all .
We have been denied a choice .
The people in our country have been denied a vote on Lisbon .
We certainly need a discussion in our country about whether we should be in the European Parliament or not .
I fear that Turkey joining will be the straw that breaks the camel 's back .
I am convinced that we are now in a position where the whole European situation is about to crumble , with the euro and so forth .
The addition of Turkey joining will just make matters far , far worse .
Commissioner , it is your first day at work .
I would like to mark your card .
Take it from me , as a person from Wales in the United Kingdom : we just do not want Turkey to join .
( HU ) With regard to the accession of Turkey , there is a fundamental question to be clarified : what do we consider the European Union to be ?
Do we still consider the values , the shared European values , important ?
These values are based on the teachings of Christianity , irrespective of the proportion of actively religious people .
Do we deem the cultural heritage of Europe important as a cohesive force ?
If the answer is ' yes ' , Turkey has no place in the European Union .
Naturally , we should aim to establish the best possible partnership with them .
Another important factor is that their accession would create a precedent .
Israel 's minister for foreign affairs has stated that they are being patient , yet they definitely want to become a member of the European Union .
I would have to state that Israel does not have a place in the European Community , either .
( HU ) With regard to the protection of minorities , progress has been made by Croatia and Macedonia , but these countries are still far from being top performers in this respect .
What can we do ?
The European Union could encourage these countries through its exemplary protection of minorities , but what is actually happening in the European Union ?
It would be a positive sign if France and others were to ratify the Charter of Minority and Regional Languages , if Slovakia were to retract its measures discriminating against minorities ( see the language law ) and if Greece were to admit that minorities do live in its territory and guarantee their rights as individuals and communities .
In Romania , there will hopefully be a law on minorities , though we are still far from having members of minorities in the top command of the army , and autonomy is feared more than the 14th Transnistrian Russian army .
Parliament could encourage the existing Member States to set a good example by establishing standards for the protection of minorities that are to be mandatory for the entire territory of the Union .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the year 2009 , according to a report prepared by the International Crisis Group , was to have been decisive for Turkey 's integration with the European Union .
There was to have been either a breakthrough in accession negotiations or an end of the talks .
Today , talks are still in progress on further areas related to accession .
The Spanish Presidency , it is true , is saying it wants Ankara to join the Community as soon as possible , but indications are growing that Ankara is redefining its place in the global order , and that its membership in the Community is not a priority .
Lifting of visas for Jordan , Libya , Iran and Syria , a worsening of relations with Israel , a strengthening of relations with Sudan , the signing of an agreement to commence diplomatic relations with Armenia and blocking an understanding with Cyprus - all this shows that Ankara is increasingly orienting itself towards cooperation with its neighbours , even at the expense of weakening its position in the accession negotiations .
However , the question of energy security and Turkey 's crucial geographical location mean that it is slowly becoming indispensable for securing European interests .
It may , therefore , not be long before Turkey 's accession to the European Union is more important to us than to Turkey itself .
I appeal , therefore , to the Commission and the Council to redefine Turkey 's perspectives for membership of the European Union .
( SV ) Madam President , I believe that it is extremely important that the progress being made by the candidate countries that are involved in negotiations is also recognised and stressed .
I believe that to be very important in purely psychological terms .
Moreover , it cannot be denied that negotiations with the EU have created better conditions for the people of these countries .
The negotiations in themselves are a positive thing .
I am sure we all agree that Turkey needs to make considerable efforts and that freedom of religion , freedom of expression and freedom of the press go without saying .
However , I think it also needs to be stated that the negotiations with Turkey are not just negotiations with the state or nation of Turkey , but that Turkey also represents a kind of key or a bridge to the whole region .
We therefore need to bear in mind that the EU 's relations with the region will deteriorate considerably if the door were to be closed again .
Madam President , I wish I could be given the time to explain to the Members of this Parliament the reasons why the Greek people are so sensitive about the issue concerning the name of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Unfortunately , it needs more than a minute .
This story , going back to the late 1940s , is a sad story which ended in creating a false idea about them .
I can assure you that Greeks are neither nationalists nor expansionists .
All they do is resist the use of a name which is part of their own ancient historical and archaeological tradition .
I understand that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , as a new independent state , is undergoing a retarded ethnogenic phase .
Serious academics in Skopje do not support the nationalistic trends of their Prime Minister .
They prefer to remain silent rather than expose themselves against the trendy phrase , which the Thaler report rightly remarks , is liable to increase tensions .
I would like this Parliament and the new Commission to try and contribute with a solution to the name issue , not by stimulating the nationalistic tendencies of the FYROM Government , but by supporting the Greek view , which fights for a gentle compromise that would , finally , seem to satisfy the people of FYROM more than the people of Greece .
( LT ) Today 's debates have shown that although MEPs have differing opinions on Turkey 's progress , we probably all agree that the basic prerequisite for EU membership is the appropriate implementation of fundamental reforms .
Today , I think it is too early to set concrete dates , but we must observe and demand progress from Turkey , as recent events , where the activities of political parties were banned , cause concern and do not show Turkey 's commitment to respect civil and political freedoms and rights .
However , we must give Turkey an opportunity to review its actions and hope that in the future , Turkey will be a democratic and free country .
( RO ) Croatia continues to be at the most advanced stage among the Western Balkan states on their path to EU accession .
It may provide an example for states in the region with regard to their accession prospects in terms of meeting the accession criteria and conditions .
I welcome the progress recorded on internal reform , as is also indicated in the 2009 progress report .
The method for meeting the necessary accession criteria , especially those coming under Chapter 23 , justice and fundamental rights , marks an important milestone in this country 's progress in achieving European standards .
We support Croatia 's accession to the European Union , provided that this is based on strict compliance with the accession criteria , including full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
Croatia will conclude accession negotiations this year .
In fact , the report we are debating today is the last progress report produced by the European Parliament .
We are confident that we will be in the position next year to vote on the treaty for Croatia 's accession to the European Union , which will be a positive signal for the whole region .
( SL ) Commissioner , I congratulate you on your new post and I hope that you will be successful in this area .
I am very pleased that the three reports are positive and that the rapporteurs have found these countries to have made progress in terms of modernisation , as we see it from the European perspective .
The most important thing is that all three countries maintain high standards when it comes to respect for human rights .
Europe must be strict about this and it must also be strict in urging these countries to resolve relations with their neighbours .
I would also like to point out that I will not be giving my backing to the report on Croatia , primarily because it does not treat Slovenia fairly .
( RO ) The most effective external enlargement policy the European Union has with regard to the Western Balkans is to expand in this region .
This will guarantee peace and bring democracy to an area which , unfortunately , has only had its reputation reinforced by recent history as the ' powder keg of the European Union ' .
At the same time , the most effective foreign policy for the new Western Balkans states is to belong to the European Union 's area of stability and prosperity .
We need instruments in this process .
I therefore welcome the progress reports for Croatia and Macedonia , which are valuable instruments .
I also believe that economic instruments are needed , along with regional , economic and commercial cooperation , including with regard to investments , which have already proven to be effective .
I think that these instruments must be considered by the European Commission and the governments of Croatia and Macedonia .
( NL ) I actually wanted to ask the leader of the Turkish delegation , Mrs Flautre , a question .
I do not know if I can do that now - that is what my blue card was based on .
Can I ask Mrs Flautre a question ?
Mrs Flautre , I would like to ask you , in the light of the horrific honour killing in Turkey , whether you agree that we should submit a request for a broad investigation to be carried out into honour killings in Turkey ?
In my home country , the Netherlands , we have a shockingly high prevalence of honour killings among Turks , as there is in Germany , and I believe that this is just the tip of the iceberg and that there is an awful lot of honour killing in Turkey .
Can we ask Mr Füle to carry out an investigation into honour killings in Turkey ?
( FR ) Madam President , a question , yes , but which question ?
Addressed to whom and for what purpose ?
I believe that our delegation - of which you are a member , Mr Madlener - has committed itself and continues to firmly commit itself to human rights and gender equality and to every initiative taken to counter violence against women .
I mentioned this just now in my speech .
I believe that so-called honour crimes , which are crimes organised on a family or tribal basis , are utterly indefensible and that , today , it is very pleasing to see that no one in Turkey puts up with this type of archaic criminal practice any more .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this broad debate which has centred on some excellent resolutions tabled by the European Parliament , and may I congratulate the authors Mr Swoboda , Mr Thaler and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .


I think we can say that the large majority of you has spoken in favour of the enlargement process as an essential part of European integration .
As Mr Brok has said , enlargement has been a success for the European Union , and other Members have mentioned some of the examples of success in the enlargement process .
It is also a vital element of progress towards democratic reform and of democratic deepening in those countries that are moving closer to the European Union , those that have begun their entry into the European Union and those which have the prospect of joining .
As Mr Mauro has stressed , this always implies a commitment to meet the Copenhagen conditions , which is another element of broad consensus , and therefore to show full respect for human rights .
I entirely agree with Mr Cashman when he said that the treatment of minorities is what singles a country out , and not its treatment of the majority , although that is important as well .
This , therefore , is how we should measure respect for human rights and , as a result , compliance with the Copenhagen criteria .
Another point of general agreement was that for the Western Balkans , the European perspective is a fundamental element in their progress - as Mrs Giannakou and Mr Winkler pointed out - and this is not only in the interest of those countries but also , as Mrs Göncz has said , in the interest of the European Union .
As regards Croatia , we have also had general agreement on the need to open new chapters as soon possible , but it should be said that currently 28 out of 35 chapters have already been opened and that 17 of those have provisionally closed .
The Spanish Presidency will continue to work to achieve new progress in the negotiations , together with the European Council and the Council , in order to bring them to their final phase soon .
That is why I mentioned earlier that the accession meetings to be held with Croatia will begin immediately .
Our expectation is that the membership negotiations roadmap will be completed this year , as the report 's author , Mr Swoboda , has proposed , and as some Members have requested , including Mr Hökmark , Mr Berlinguer and Mr Lisek , who expressed the hope that the Polish Presidency might see Croatia 's accession to the European Union .



So progress has been made with regard to Croatia , as Mr Poręba has emphasised .
However , we still have work to do ; there are shortcomings in the legal area , for example , as Mrs Serracchiani pointed out .
As a result , we think we have reached an important closing stage of Croatia 's accession and we hope that the negotiations will be concluded and Croatia will join the Union as soon as possible , following the ratification process of the relevant European Union treaties .
Turning now to Macedonia , the debate centred primarily on the question of its name .
Obviously the name is not one of the Copenhagen requirements , but clearly good , neighbourly relations play a vital role in the process of shaping national policy in all the candidate countries .
Candidate countries , like Member States , must therefore show the utmost sensitivity in matters such as this .
We also have to remember that the starting point for negotiations is unanimity , in other words , a unanimous agreement between existing Member States .


The solution advocated earlier by Mr Posselt , Mr Kasoulides , Mrs Cornelissen , Mr Chatzimarkakis , Mrs Göncz and Mrs Paliadeli is rooted both in negotiations under the aegis of the United Nations and in bilateral contact between the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greece .
While this is , of course , a very important matter , the European Union itself does not actually take part in such discussions under the United Nations .
At the moment therefore , I do not think we can say precisely when this conflict will be resolved ; nevertheless , I can certainly say that the Spanish Presidency joins in congratulating Prime Minister Gruevski and Prime Minister Papandreou on renewing a direct dialogue .
This demonstrates leadership ability in both of them and will no doubt lead to an atmosphere and an attitude of openness , to which Mr Tremopoulos referred in his speech .
We believe that the government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will be able to carry these negotiations forward .
The prospect of joining the EU has always been of great importance for the whole country , that is , for its ethnic groups as well , whether large or small .
Finally , with regard to Turkey , a great many speeches have been made and I would like to begin by saying that negotiations are continuing at a reasonable pace - they have not been halted - and I say this in response to Mr Van Orden 's comment concerning the speed of those negotiations .
We hope to open other negotiation chapters during the Spanish Presidency .
I have mentioned some of them , but naturally we cannot predict the rate of these negotiations because they depend on the progress of Turkey 's reforms and on whether Turkey meets the criteria .
What is more , as you are all aware , in each case , at each stage and for each chapter of the process , there needs to be unanimous agreement .
The protection of human rights and the fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria is a subject that has been mentioned in many speeches and which is clearly referred to in Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report ; and it has to be said that Turkey must make more effort in this area .


It has to make more effort , and I say this in response to Mr Belder , Mr Salafranca , and others , and to Mr Angourakis and Mr Klute , who have spoken about promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms .
They are right , but it is also true to say that the negotiation process continues to be the European Union 's principal means of influencing the progress that is made and , while progress has indeed been made , it remains insufficient .
This has also been mentioned in speeches by other Members , such as Mr Obiols , Mrs Flautre , Mrs Lunacek , Mr Preda and Mr Balčytis .

I think we need to remain very aware of that when we make a balanced assessment of our negotiations with Turkey .
Cyprus has also been the subject of a great many speeches .
Cyprus will , of course , be a decisive issue over coming months .
It should be said that the negotiations currently under way between the leaders of the two communities on the island are positive and that a better atmosphere of trust has been established .
It goes without saying that resolving the Cyprus issue would eliminate this obstacle , or all of the obstacles , or at least some of the obstacles that might hinder Turkey 's progress towards accession and , whatever happens , it would send out an important , positive signal to the region as a whole , with reconciliation as the basic objective , as Mr Howitt so rightly put it .
We all agree , of course , that Turkey has to comply with the additional protocol .
There have been continuous calls for it to do so , and every time we have a dialogue with Turkey , the Council reminds it of that commitment , which must be honoured .
On 8 December 2009 , the Council adopted conclusions in which it was stated that if no progress were made on the issue , then the Council would maintain the measures adopted in 2006 , which would have a permanent effect on the negotiations ' overall progress .
Mrs Koppa and Mr Salavrakos have also referred to other incidents : violations of air space and incidents in the Aegean Sea .
So I repeat , neighbourly relations are an indispensable requirement for measuring Turkey 's progress in the negotiations .
The Council 's 8 December conclusions , which I have mentioned many times , sent Turkey a message on that matter .
I assure you that the Presidency is going to following the issue very closely and pursue it at all levels when appropriate .
In any case , Madam President , the Presidency 's position on negotiations with Turkey is absolutely clear .
We are in agreement with the renewed consensus on enlargement , which the Council decided in December 2006 , and this means that the objective of the negotiations is certainly Turkey 's future accession to the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very grateful that I had such an early chance to participate in this exchange of views with you on the accession countries .
I promised during my hearing that I would come to listen and to take your advice , and today 's debate was a clear proof of the richness , wisdom and insight that are assembled here in this House .
Let me make two general observations .
First , I take the promises I made during the hearings very seriously .
I am interested not in having two monologues , but in having a dialogue with this House which would reflect the true spirit of the Lisbon Treaty .
Let me also make another general observation , and I referred to this a couple of times during my hearing .
In talking to the candidate countries and the prospective candidate countries , I always underlined the following four principles .
The first is strict commitment to the Copenhagen criteria ; they are non-negotiable .
Secondly , a strict commitment to fundamental freedoms and rights , including religious and minority rights and , of course , women 's rights .
Thirdly , the process being honest and reflecting credibility on both sides and at all levels .
Fourthly , I will never underestimate the issue of integration capacity .
On Croatia , both Parliament 's resolution and the Commission 's position underline that Croatia can count on Parliament and the Commission as reliable allies .
If the country manages to deliver on all outstanding conditions , I remain confident that accession negotiations can be concluded this year .
The Commission , and I trust the current and future presidencies as well as the European Parliament , will support Croatia in reaching its goal .
On the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , let me stress once again that the country earned a Commission recommendation to start accession negotiations on the basis of its own merits .
Nonetheless , the country continues to face many pressing challenges , including the political criteria .
As was pointed out during the debate , there is now a window of opportunity to resolve the name issue , and I am fully committed to supporting the ongoing talks .
On Turkey , we are all aware that we do not have an easy way ahead of us , either for Turkey or for the European Union , as was clearly stated by many during the debate .
I know , however , that the Turkish Government is still committed to the democratic opening .
Who would have imagined only five years ago Turkish society and politicians openly and intensively discussing the Kurdish issue , civil-military relations , the reopening of the Halki seminar or relations with Romania ?
Nevertheless , I remain concerned about restrictions on press freedom and media pluralism .
Further legal amendments are needed to protect journalists , human rights activists and politicians from prosecution and conviction for the expression of non-violent opinion .
As regards the accession negotiations , the opening of the important environment chapter last December is an encouraging development , bringing the number of open chapters to 12 .
I am hopeful that we will be able to open more chapters this year .
However , Turkey will need to make additional efforts in order to be able to fulfil the demanding benchmarks .
It is therefore important that the necessary preparations are being continued with rigour .
The Commission also welcomes the reinforced dialogue with Turkey on migration , which should lead to concrete achievements , in particular , as regards readmission and border controls .
In response to a specific question from one of your colleagues , let me say that the Commission is aware of the recent developments concerning Turkish lifting of visa requirements for Lebanon and Syria .
The Commission 's Director-General responsible for these issues will be in Ankara next week for talks .
This will be one of the issues he will discuss on that occasion and I will report on these discussions .
Let me also add , having been requested , the following position of the Commission . All measures that the Commission has proposed and undertaken have always been aimed at ending the isolation of the Turkish-Cypriot community as a means of facilitating the reunification of Cyprus in line with the Council conclusions of April 2004 .
We are implementing the EUR 259 million aid package for the sustainable social and economic development of the Turkish-Cypriot community and its full participation in the European Union following a settlement and reunification .
The Green Line Regulation is facilitating economic and personal contacts between Turkish-Cypriots and Greek-Cypriots .
The Trade Regulation , on special conditions for trade for the Turkish-Cypriot community , remains with the Council for consideration .
Coming back to Turkey , the reform process is to continue and the European Union should continue to encourage the process and progress .
The Commission remains committed to the accession process with Turkey .
Our leverage and influence in Turkey will become all the more credible and stronger if our commitments remain unambiguous .
I am looking forward to a very fruitful and close cooperation over the next five years .
( Applause )
I have received three motions to wind up the debate from the Committee on Foreign Affairs in accordance with Rule 100 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during today 's vote .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( PT ) This report acknowledges certain positive steps that Turkey , a candidate country since 2005 , has made towards joining the EU , although it is being urged to speed up the pace of reforms .
I recall that in December 2006 , negotiations were partially suspended due to the country 's refusal to apply the Customs Union with the EU to Cyprus .
The conflict with Cyprus must be resolved and the country must continue to make progress in terms of democracy and the protection of human rights , combating corruption , improving freedom of the press , the need for political transparency and swifter and more effective justice , consolidating anti-discrimination laws relating to gender , sexual orientation and ethnic and religious minorities , and reforming the civil service .
The Turkish Government continues to demonstrate the political will to proceed with reforms , and it has substantially increased fundamental freedoms and democratic development within the country .
We must therefore continue to make progress in negotiations aimed at securing the accession of Turkey as a country with a crucial role as a mediator in conflicts between Israel and Palestine and as a platform for Iraq and Iran to find common ground .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report certainly contains some interesting points , even for those , like myself and many of you , who are against granting Turkey EU membership .
The content of the report illustrates Turkey 's sometimes serious failures to meet the basic conditions for joining the EU .
Certain passages of the resolution proposed by the Committee on Foreign Affairs are also quite strict .
These documents do not oppose Turkey 's theoretical future entry into the EU ; however , I am very happy to welcome the findings that Parliament intends to make known regarding Turkey 's supposed lack of progress .
Those who , like myself , are opposed to Ankara joining the EU find in them confirmation of their own traditional objections to the accession : in Turkey , there are still restrictions on fundamental freedoms , human rights violations , an aggressive attitude towards Cyprus and Greece , and discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities - all of which are problems that Europe clearly cannot ignore .
And all this compounds the usual concerns about the cultural and geographical differences between Turkey and Europe , and about the problems that would be caused by the admission of a country that shares borders with over 80 million inhabitants : factors that will continue to reinforce my unshakable conviction that it is not right for Turkey to enter a Europe whose unity depends , above all else , on the spirit of Christianity .
On the one hand , the method and extent of the democratisation process in Turkey and the process of drawing closer to the EU is pivotal .
On the other hand , discussion of Turkey 's future membership of the EU cannot be left to one side .
Every expansion involves budgetary considerations as to whether the accession of a given country to the EU will bring a contribution or whether financial losses will prevail .
I am afraid that in the current crisis situation with the Common Agricultural Policy and , by implication , the European budget , we cannot permit an expansion involving a country in which 7 million of the inhabitants rely on agriculture for their livelihood ( in the EU , the figure is 10.4 million ) .
For the purposes of comparison : under current conditions , the expenditure for Turkey up to 2025 would be around EUR 10 billion , while for all 10 of the new Member States in the ' eastern expansion ' it would be up to EUR 8 billion .
Direct payments to Turkish farmers and payments for rural development and market support would , under the current legislative arrangements , spell doom for European agriculture and farmers .
In view of the enormous size , number of inhabitants and economic situation of this candidate country , the accession of Turkey to the EU would impose an enormous burden on the budget together with a 9 % decline in per capita GDP for the EU . For these reasons , we must discuss again and in greater detail Turkey 's accession to the EU , together with related reforms to the CAP .
It is commendable that the new Macedonian democracy has made further progress in all areas of society and business .
I very much welcome the fact that the presidential and local elections in March 2009 went smoothly .
This is an indication of the growing democratisation throughout the entire region which was reflected in Macedonia .
Macedonia has met all the criteria for liberalising the visa regulations and , therefore , from 19 December 2009 onwards , its citizens have visa-free status .
This represents a major step forward .
However , Macedonia still has a number of reforms to implement .
I very much hope that we can use the experience which we gathered during the first phase of the eastern enlargement of the EU to help it in this process .
In this context , I am thinking of the implementation of institutional reforms , where political foundations and a range of different NGOs have achieved so much .
There are two areas where we should strengthen our cooperation with regard to transformation and EU standards .
These are reform in the public administration , in the judiciary and in the police .
Personally , I would like to see the name dispute between Macedonia and Greece put aside in the immediate future .
It is important that progress towards the unification of Europe is not brought to a standstill because of bilateral disagreements .
Croatia , because of its geopolitical situation and historical relations , should unquestionably accede to the European Union as quickly as possible .
Despite numerous tensions with neighbours and the ethnic conflicts which arose during the civil war , I cannot imagine a fully integrated and united Europe without Croatia .
The negotiations , which began in 2004 , were a promising development , and in the absence of disruptions , they should be completed this year , bearing in mind that there are 28 areas required for completion .
Croatia 's accession to NATO in April 2009 has definitely strengthened her claim for accession to the EU .
Stabilisation in what is known historically as the Balkan Cauldron will be guaranteed only by Croatia 's accession .
I hope that , at the beginning of 2012 , when I take my seat in the European Parliament , I will be able to shake hands with fellow Members from Croatia .
I welcome the progress made by Croatia , in particular , in combating corruption .
Measures must be taken against corruption within the institutions .
In addition , a change in basic attitude is needed and the population must be made more aware of corruption , which unfortunately is still part of everyday life in Croatia .
With regard to Croatia 's relationship with its neighbours , it is pleasing to see that a compromise on the border dispute with Slovenia is now in prospect .
I hope also that Croatia 's recognition of Kosovo will not cause an increase in tension in the Western Balkans , in particular , with Serbia , which is now , understandably , showing concern .
Given the obvious progress that Croatia has made and my conviction that Croatia is culturally , politically and historically a part of Europe , I am voting in favour of the motion for a resolution .
If Croatia meets all the conditions , I believe that it will be possible for it to join the European Union soon .
Madam President , with reference to my speech on 20 January , I am interested in what kind of measures the Turkish Government has implemented , according to the records of the Council and the Commission , to involve the population in the implementation of the democratisation process and the reforms necessary for integration with the European Union .
Turkey 's 2009 development report points out shortcomings in the fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria , with a particular emphasis on political criteria , which include the implementation of democracy and the rule of law , human rights and the protection of the rights of minorities .
In the development report , it was noted that , through the development aid instrument , EUR 567 million have been allocated to Turkey in the past year .
The allocations were , for the most part , aimed at implementing outstanding reforms in the political and justice systems , as well as the development of civil society .
At the same time , it was made clear that the use of these instruments had been decentralised , which means that the Turkish authorities administered the allocated aid , following the Commission 's accreditation .
Since they are interested in carrying out the membership negotiations for Turkey as quickly as possible , which means that the current shortcomings need to be resolved , the Council and the Commission should have an accurate synopsis of concrete actions by the Turkish Government carried out in order to achieve this objective .
On its homepage , in visual form , the Commission has indeed put some projects for ending the use of child labour , acquiring a basic education , involving people with disabilities in society , and setting up a confidential line for women in Turkey suffering from domestic violence .
However , are these actions enough to create the necessary grassroots public support for the immediate and successful implementation of the necessary reforms ?
In the light of the contents of the development report , what kind of additional urgent measures or projects have been planned to overcome the obstacles that have arisen in problematic areas ?
When a number of countries in Central and Eastern Europe acceded to the European Union on the day of its great enlargement on 1 May 2004 , the division of Europe by the Iron Curtain was finally brought to an end .
Not all the countries of Central and Eastern Europe came into the European family at that time .
It also then became clear that the ' great enlargement ' would have to be continued , with the accession of several more countries of the region .
In 2007 , Rumania and Bulgaria became Member States of the European Union .
However , the accession of these countries cannot be thought of as the end of European Union enlargement .
At the moment , the country which is closest to acceding to the EU is Croatia .
I fully support completion of negotiations by Croatia as quickly as possible in order to achieve the quickest possible accession of the country to the European Union .
I appeal to both sides of the negotiations for maximum flexibility and the will to reach agreement .
In addition , I appeal to the Croatian side to increase efforts at accommodating Community requirements in such areas as the organisation of public administration and the judiciary and for improvement of mechanisms concerned with the effective fight against organised crime and corruption .
Furthermore , I would like to add my voice to appeals calling on Croatia to show a maximum of goodwill in cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
As a prerequisite for completing the negotiation process begun with Turkey in 2005 , Turkey must fulfil all the Copenhagen criteria , and it must comply in all respects with EU integration capacity .
Indeed , Turkey has begun to implement the reforms expected on that basis , develop good neighbourly relations and gradually bring itself into line with the EU membership criteria .
I support these actions , and I support Turkey 's accession to the EU , provided , of course , that the conditions for membership are met in full .
Today , though , it worries me that recently , positive messages concerning the reforms implemented have begun to fall short , and there are still severe problems in Turkey with implementing legal norms , particularly sections that would establish women 's rights , non-discrimination , freedom of speech and belief , a zero-tolerance approach to torture , and anti-corruption measures .
I call on Turkey to continue and strengthen efforts to meet the Copenhagen criteria in full and to consolidate support in Turkish society for the necessary reforms , providing equality for all people , regardless of gender , race or ethnic origin , faith or creed , disability , age or sexual orientation .
I believe that it is in the interest of both parties , the EU and Turkey , for the enlargement process to continue .
This is why Turkey must step up the reform process in order to meet the commitments it has assumed .
Let me give you a few examples on this point .
Legislation on gender equality is harmonised , but greater effort needs to be made to implement it in order to reduce the differences between men and women in terms of their participation in the labour market , politics and the decision-making process , as well as with regard to access to education .
Progress has been made on environmental protection , especially with the signing of the Kyoto Protocol in this ' era of adapting to the effects of climate change ' .
However , a great deal still remains to be done in terms of water quality , nature conservation and GMOs ( genetically modified organisms ) .
I welcome the progress made by Turkey but , at the same time , I support the request made to Ankara to make more effort in the reform process so that it can join the European club .
One of the crucial Copenhagen criteria , which should unquestionably be met to enable a country to become one of the Member States of the European Union , is respect for human rights .
I would like to draw attention to notorious cases of violations of the rights of women .
Almost daily , the press informs us of further murders of women , which are known as ' honour killings ' .
The press is currently highlighting the case of 16-year-old Medine Memi , who was cruelly murdered by her own father and grandfather .
It is shocking that these two took the girl 's life because she had been talking to boys , but the way in which this atrocity was carried out is even more shocking .
Autopsy results show that Medine , who was buried in a chicken pen , was still alive at the time of her burial and was conscious to the very end .
The unimaginable suffering of the dying teenager was inflicted as satisfaction for ' bringing dishonour ' on the family .
It is horrifying that the case of Medine is not an isolated incident , but a widespread and barbaric phenomenon .
The girl , fearing for her life , had reported her fears to the police several times - unsuccessfully , because she was sent home each time .
Murder , which has been deeply rooted in Turkish tradition for generations , is often interpreted favourably for men , who are supposedly acting to clear the disgraced honour of their family .
A country which has not yet managed to deal with this problem continues to be separated from Europe by a broad divide , because Europe stands in defence of fundamental values .
This difference is a serious obstacle in building a common identity .
I hope that this year 's assessment report will encourage Turkey to improve the coordination of its foreign policy with that of the EU .
The Black Sea region should be a priority area where Turkey , as a key partner of the EU , will help achieve the European objectives set as part of the Black Sea Synergy .
Turkey 's involvement in guaranteeing the EU 's energy security is just as important .
Last year , I welcomed Turkey 's participation in the Nabucco project with the signing of the intergovernmental agreement .
However , I also expressed deep concern about Turkey 's intention to cooperate with Russia in the South Stream project .
Consequently , I urge Turkey to make an explicit commitment to implementing the Nabucco project .
I welcome the call made by the rapporteur to harmonise energy policies between Turkey and the EU , in particular , by opening accession negotiations on the energy chapter and by including Turkey in the European Energy Community .
1 .
Optional and temporary application of the reverse charge mechanism in relation to supplies of certain goods and services susceptible to fraud ( amendment of Directive 2006 / 112 / EC ) (
2 .
Eligibility of housing interventions in favour of marginalised communities (
After the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , I have no problem with the machine .
I simply want to make a suggestion .
Some Members have the habit of not reading out the number for roll-call votes .
As we now have a large number of roll-call votes and also the wonderful screens , I would like to suggest that you perhaps take on this job .
Very well , thank you for your courtesy .
I was doing it to ensure you had all the information , but you can read it so I will not read it out .
3 .
Administrative cooperation in the field of taxation (
Mr President , the opinion that the European Parliament will vote now on the Commission 's proposal for a directive on administrative cooperation in the field of taxation does not prejudice the final position that the Parliament will take with regard to the implementation of Article 291 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the consequences for the procedures based on Council Decision 1999 / 468 / EC of 28 June 1999 , especially as regards the regulatory procedure with scrutiny or the position that the Parliament may wish to take on delegated acts in other legislation .
4 .
Mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes , duties and other measures (
5 .
Recent earthquake in Haiti (
6 .
Situation in Iran (
- Before the vote :

( ES ) Mr President , before we vote on this draft resolution on Iran , I merely wish to inform the Chamber that there has been an attempt to storm the Italian Embassy in Tehran and that similar incidents have also taken place at the embassies of other Member States , such as Germany , France , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands .
Mr President , in Paragraph 24 , this draft resolution calls for a European Union delegation to be established in Iran ; my group would not want the adoption of this paragraph , which has been used in other European Parliament resolutions , to be taken as a sign of complacency with regard to these events .
I would therefore ask Mr Füle to tell Mrs Ashton that the circumstances I have just mentioned should be borne in mind during the application of this resolution 's mandate .
I believe Mr Gahler is going to request the addition of an oral amendment to the resolution text so that the diplomatic interests of Member States can be protected in Iran .
( DE ) Mr President , this has been discussed with the groups .
I will read the text out briefly in English :
' Is concerned about the nature of demonstrations held in front of EU embassies in Tehran on 9 February as being orchestrated by the Basij militia , and calls on the Iranian authorities to guarantee the safety of diplomatic missions ' .
Mr President , on behalf of the authors of the resolution just adopted on Iran , I would like to request that the parliamentary services translate this text into Farsi so that the Iranian regime and people can fully understand the clear message sent today by the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Thank you for this valuable suggestion which we will forward to the appropriate department .
7 .
Situation in Yemen (
8 .
Trafficking in human beings ( vote )
9 .
Outcome of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change (
- Before the vote :
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the disappointing conclusion to the climate conference in Copenhagen , Parliament is using this resolution to make it clear that there is no alternative to climate protection and that , as we move towards the next conference in Mexico , we must increase rather than decrease our efforts in this area .
I shall be brief .
Amendment 6 from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament was intended to serve this purpose .
However , as it has been worded confusingly , we are withdrawing it .
Nevertheless , we do support Amendments 1 and 9 from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , which call on the EU to do more en route to Mexico .
Climate protection must not come to a standstill .
I would ask for your support .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to Amendment 21 , which I have tabled , I should first like to thank all my fellow Members for having supported me in tabling an amendment which lays down the principle of establishing a carbon tax at the borders of the EU .
I should also like to say once again that we must not use double-speak when talking to our fellow citizens : when we are campaigning , we cannot say that Europe is protecting them , that it will protect their companies and their jobs and then , once we have been elected , forget about that commitment .
I should merely like to point out that this amendment has enabled me to stimulate debate , which is why I wish to withdraw it and thus allow debate to thrive in the Council .
The amendment is therefore withdrawn .
Before the vote on Amendment 10 :
Mr President , Amendment 10 by the Greens is not in conflict with Amendment 1 .
Amendment 1 is about raising our ambition level to more than 20 .
Amendment 10 - our amendment - is about clarifying conditions to minus 40 .
This is additional to , not in conflict with , Amendment 1 , so Amendment 10 should be voted .
The officials do not agree with your view , but I would like to ask the chair of the relevant committee for an opinion .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) I am on Mrs Hassi 's side .
This is a new idea and we should vote on it .
10 .
Promoting Good Governance in Tax Matters (
11 .
Equality between women and men in the European Union - 2009 (
12 .
Key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the CITES ( vote )
Before the vote on Amendment 12 :
( IT ) We have not voted on the original text .
We approved Amendment 7 and the paragraph falls .
So sometimes the Presidency is right .
Mr President , could we take that vote again as some people thought they were voting on the section to which the other Member referred ?
Are we here to vote as we were elected to do , or not ?
Please put it to the vote again so that people can make the right decision .
We cannot create a precedent , the voting cannot be repeated .
In any case , there is a difference of 130 votes .
It is not a small difference .
I do not think that it will be possible to overturn and change the results of the vote .
13 .
2009 progress report on Croatia (
Before the vote on Amendment 35 :
Mr President , after discussing this with Mrs Brantner from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I would like to recommend voting in favour of the first part and against the second , contrary to the list which we have drawn up .
14 .
2009 progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (
Before the vote on Amendment 18 :
, on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , this amendment refers to the fact that the government in Skopje has come forward with a draft anti-discrimination law deleting sexual orientation from that whole package .
That is simply unacceptable , but I do not want to give anybody the option to vote against this amendment on human rights because of the name issue with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , so I ask to change ' Macedonian Government ' to ' Government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' .
author . - Mr President , in Amendment 4 , contrary to the voting proposal , I suggest voting against , because of the agreement with Greek colleagues .
15 .
2009 progress report on Turkey (
Before the vote on Amendment 13 :
author . - Mr President , I would just like to draw your attention to the fact that Amendment 20 to paragraph 35 is withdrawn .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to offer my warmest congratulations to Mr van Nistelrooij on his report , which I firmly support .
In the past , through various initiatives and questions , I have asked about the possibility of using European Union funds to provide social housing for the neediest and most marginalised categories of society , which are the categories that local authorities allocate to income-based scales , as happens in major capitals and large urban areas .
Accommodation , and particularly accommodation for the weaker strata of society , has become a genuine emergency in many major European cities .
I therefore believe that Mr van Nistelrooij 's report is a step in the right direction , but I also believe we should follow it up by putting more resources into resolving emergency matters connected with social housing .
Mr President , I supported this report because I believe that it represents a step forward in combating fraud and tax evasion on a European scale .
Despite the willingness of Member States to cooperate in the field of taxation , tangible results have not been achieved , and tax fraud remains at an extremely high level in the EU and brings far too many negative implications both to our economies and our citizens .
I very much welcome the proposed new improvements , which will hopefully produce tangible results in the fight against fraud and tax evasion , especially the extension of the scope of the directive on all taxes , including social security contributions , the automatic exchange of information and improved cooperation between the Member States in matters of taxation .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to talk about the Domenici report and I would like to say it is worth noting that we have given such strong support here in Strasbourg to measures which will improve transparency and information sharing that it will enable tax administration in the Member States to be more efficient .
It is a pity that it took an economic crisis to motivate this step .
The Achilles heel is the existence of tax havens in various island states , a number of which even receive support from EU funds .
It is therefore up to us to confront this issue and to bring to bear the full weight of the EU .
Attempts by individual Member States to enter into bilateral agreements have not brought any tangible results , as can be seen from the fact that it cost the 27 Member States 2.5 % of their GDP in 2004 .
Mr President , the greatest constraint on a government is external competition .
A state can raise its taxes only up to a certain level before the money begins to go abroad and the revenues dwindle .
As Milton Friedman put it , competition between governments in their delivery of services and their levels of taxation is every bit as productive as competition between companies and individuals .
This is why it is so distressing to see the European Union going down the road towards tax harmonisation and the export of high costs from one country to another .
If there was one theme which came out of these recent Commission nomination hearings , it was the desire for a dedicated revenue stream for the European Union and for a measure of tax harmonisation .
That explains why the European Union 's share of world GDP is dwindling ; why we have fallen from 36 % 20 years ago to 25 % today and we are scheduled to fall to 15 % in 10 years ' time .
The good news is that the electorate does not like it .
Like the people of Massachusetts , the people of Europe do not want taxation without representation , and I am sure they will vote accordingly .
Mr President , most people , when looking at this title , would say that cooperation seems a reasonable thing .
Who could possibly disagree with cooperation ?
Until you look into the details of what is often meant when people discuss tax cooperation within the EU and at EU level .
Take the example of a plucky country like the Cayman Islands .
Unlike the Green and Socialist dream of keeping developing countries poor so we can send them our aid money and mitigate white middle-class guilt , this country has actually tried to pull itself out of poverty - not being dependent on bananas or sugars but dependent on high-level services like financial services .
But , when the Cayman Islands tries to do this , people right across the EU - politicians in this place - complain about it .
It does not avoid taxation .
What it tries to do is avoid double taxation .
People from EU countries still pay tax within their Member States .
It is time to stop this imperialism .
Mr President , if you were to list the countries with the wealthiest citizens , the states with the highest per capita GDP in the world , you would be struck by the fact that a lot of them are very small .
The top 10 is dominated by microstates : Liechtenstein , Luxembourg , Brunei , Jersey and so on .
The first big state to make it into the list of wealthy countries is the United States because it pulls off the extraordinary trick of governing itself like a confederation of statehoods , devolving enormous legislative and fiscal autonomy to its constituent parts .
This is why it is so tragic to hear only yesterday the new President of the European Council talking about the need for European economic governance in response to the financial crisis in Greece .
It is precisely when government becomes bigger and more remote that it becomes more inefficient and more wasteful and more corrupt .
If colleagues doubt that , then I suggest they look around them .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 200 000 dead , 250 000 severely wounded , 3 million people directly struck by the earthquake , in addition to the 2 million people needing food aid : these are the stark consequences of the dreadful catastrophe that has befallen Haiti .
The European Union has done its share and continues to do so .
It is the main international donor .
I must nevertheless stress that the High Representative responsible for the Common Foreign and Security Policy did not immediately go there to coordinate our aid .
We would have preferred her to hurry out there to do her job .
We would have liked her to be in Haiti helping others .
The Italian Foreign Minister , Mr Frattini , has suggested in particular that the debt owed by Haiti , one of the poorest countries in the world , should be cancelled .
Now I call on Parliament to support this proposal , I call on the Union to carry it out and thus call on all creditor nations to support Italy 's request to cancel Haiti 's debts .
( CS ) It may be late , but at last we have adopted a resolution on specific measures to help Haiti .
It is important that they are focused on the long-term recovery of this terribly impoverished island .
As the Vice-Chair of the ACT-EU assembly responsible for human rights , I consider it important for European assistance to be strongly geared towards securing long-term health care and education for the thousands of orphaned children directly in Haiti .
We must also prevent the risk of child trafficking .
I am disturbed , however , about the media reports today that Haitians are protesting because , despite all efforts , they still have no tents over their heads or enough food and water .
I am also outraged that the High Representative for Foreign Affairs , Baroness Ashton , did not sacrifice her weekend to arrive early on the island .
It is not a good beginning for the improved foreign policy of the EU following ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
( FI ) Mr President , it is very important that the European Union , as the world 's largest economy , is robustly involved in helping Haiti 's disaster area following the earthquake .
Only rarely can earthquakes such as this be predicted .
They happen unexpectedly .
Consequently , we , the members of the global community , are actually being asked to show our solidarity and how we concern ourselves with our fellow human beings .
As the old saying goes , we are as strong as our weakest link .
Now the solidarity of the European Union is also being gauged .
We must be robustly involved in taking care of our weakest link , our fellow human beings in Haiti , and ensure that the aid given by the European Union reaches its destination and is effective .
How successful the aid and cash effort is will be assessed with reference to these criteria .
Obviously , the Member States also have to be involved in this , and they are too , in the same way as many Christian communities with direct contacts at grassroots level .
In this way , we can ensure that the aid gets to those who need it .
Mr President , Friday will mark one month since the devastating earthquake in Haiti .
The death toll is now believed to be 230 000 , with 300 000 injured .
This should cause us to do all that we can to ensure survivors are given assistance to rebuild their lives and their country .
I supported the joint resolution put forward for that reason , but want to put on record my opposition to the concept of a European civil protection force .
Mr President , during the debate on this resolution , we saw once again the way in which this House elevates the virtual over the real , the symbolic over the actual .
There was all this talk about the need to put an EU flag on aid to Haiti and about the need to establish the principle of a European civil protection force .
Baroness Ashton came in for a lot of criticism for not having been there to put a European face on things .
Meanwhile , of course , the Americans were delivering real aid in the most extraordinarily swift manner .
And what thanks did they get ?
They were accused by a French Minister of having occupied the country .
Neatly , we see how the American 's place is always in the wrong in this House .
If he intervenes , he is imperialist .
If he does not , he is isolationist .
I would just stand back and ask whether the European Union does not have rather more pressing concerns closer to home than whether it puts flags on things in the Caribbean .
Greece is on the verge of fiscal collapse .
We are about to mandate a bail-out in plain violation of Article 125 of the treaties .
When we have put our own House in order , then perhaps we will be in a position to lecture others .
( SK ) The human rights situation in Iran continues to deteriorate , despite the European Parliament resolution of 22 October on Iran which , in my opinion , has not brought the expected moral pressure .
Particularly shocking and regrettable in my view is the execution of underage criminals , of whom about 140 have been executed up to now in Iran .
One recent case , for example , was that of 17-year-old Mosleh Zamani in December 2009 .
Unfortunately it seems that prohibiting the execution of children is not a political priority in the international arena .
Iran bears no consequences for continuing this appalling practice , despite the fact that the Islamic Republic of Iran is a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
I would therefore like to call on the EU to take specific and resolute steps and to make full use of the new options provided by the Lisbon Treaty .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say something because , as was mentioned previously , the Italian Embassy and other embassies were attacked yesterday in Tehran .
Because of this , Parliament and the Union should also consider expressing their solidarity , formally if possible , with our country and all the countries involved in this attack .
We should also send out clear signals , though , and I therefore officially request that Europe should not be present at the celebrations for the anniversary of the Islamic Revolution in Iran and that this should be a clear signal sent by us to the Iranian authorities .
I am also saying this on a special day for Italians , because today is the Day of Remembrance .
This is the reason I , like many Italians - including you I hope , Mr President - wear this tricolour rosette in memory of the many Italians who were cast out on this day and forced to leave their own lands .
Through this act of remembrance , I would like to express our solidarity for those who are struggling for democracy and freedom in Iran .
For this reason , I call on our authorities not to go to the celebrations for the anniversary of the Islamic Republic .
( CS ) It is important that we have declared clearly through our vote today that we insist on the Iranian nuclear programme being brought under international control , even though the Iranian Parliament is blocking ratification of the protocol on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons .
The Presidency of the Council must ensure that this question is included on the agenda of the next meeting of the Security Council .
I welcome the agreement that Baroness Ashton must protest against the incident at the Italian embassy , because this involves not just Italy but the entire European Union .
Our declaration today also shows that the Commission , the Council and Parliament are speaking with one voice .
I am pleased we agree that the trade agreement with Iran must be made conditional on security and human rights commitments .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the attack on the European embassies , the Italian Embassy in particular , and the threats made against the Italian Prime Minister , constitute an extremely severe event deserving of reprimand .
The systematic repression of any opposition within Iran seems to us even more serious and the Islamic Republic of Iran 's nuclear project even more so .
All this has been possible partly due to the wait-and-see , over-tolerant attitude of the West .
Now that President Obama 's outstretched hand has also been spurned , the West has no alternative except to threaten and immediately implement a system of sanctions that are effective and severe yet selective so that they do not affect the people .
I am well aware that Russia and China are opposed to sanctions , but the European Union must make every effort to persuade these powers to agree to sanctions , which are an alternative to sending in the army .
( FI ) Mr President , it is very obvious that the situation in Iran has reached crisis point .
Since the presidential elections , there have been demonstrations in which the opposition was treated very harshly , human rights violations and , in addition , the threat of nuclear weapons , which poses a huge threat in the Middle East , above all to Israel , but also to the whole of Europe .
It would seem that we in the EU are incapable of talking to Iran .
Perhaps it is because of cultural differences , as Shiite theology and European humanism , PostEnlightenment thinking , are pretty much at odds with one another .
This being so , we need to find a new path .
In any case , we must be clear and defend European values even in our relations with the Iranians .
We must furthermore try very hard to let Iran know what the rules of the game that we play by are : democracy , human rights and freedom of speech .
As we have now voted on this resolution , it is very important that it is also translated into Farsi and Arabic , the main languages spoken there , so that everyone can be made aware of the sort of regime and guidelines the European Union wants to see established in that region .
( PL ) Mr President , I endorsed the resolution on Iran , conscious of the fact that it is one of the world 's , and Europe 's , greatest problems and challenges .
At the same time , I did not endorse the amendments proposed by some of our fellow Members , who wanted to identify Iran as an enemy of the West .
We should take note of the great culture and history of this country .
The current authorities in Iran are , perhaps , denying that great history and culture .
We should see the future authorities of Iran as a partner .
We continue to receive information about further executions and more death sentences .
We must have a fundamental human solidarity with those who want a better Iran , an Iran which will be a partner of the West , and not an enemy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to state that I abstained from voting on the resolution on Iran for two main reasons .
The first reason is specific .
In the resolution , it is taken for granted that the elections that brought victory to President Ahmadinejad were fraudulent .
None of this has been proven in any way and , moreover , a man of the standing of President Lula recently stated that he found these claims to be ridiculous .
The second reason is that Iran is under the continuous threat of military intervention by the United States and Israel and we are not taking this into account either .
I feel that a balanced resolution in favour of peace in the region should not adopt the tone of condoning an imminent war before it happens .
( ET ) I supported the resolution under discussion , because I also believe that the European Union 's current legislative framework on human trafficking has not been very efficient , and it has not been implemented sufficiently .
We have to deal with this subject again and again .
It is regrettable that the importance of human trafficking has not been understood by 16 Member States ' parliaments , including , I have to say , my own country , and that they have not considered it necessary to ratify and adopt the Council 's 2005 convention on human trafficking .
I hope that the resolution that we have adopted today will give a signal and remind them how important it is to concentrate on fighting human trafficking as well as to avoid any further victims .
( CS ) I would like to take this opportunity to applaud the work of Edit Bauer and Simon Busuttil , who negotiated hard over the compromises , enabling me to vote in favour of the report and I am delighted that even the socialists kept their word .
The report also now resolves the sensitive issues from the programme of the European People 's Party , such as support for those that provide assistance to people on the border concerning their exploitation for trade and also a definition of the conditions for providing residence permits , access to the labour market and family reunifications .
( PL ) Mr President , we are living in the 21st century and consider ourselves to be civilised nations , but the problem of human trafficking remains unresolved and , on the contrary , is growing .
The victims of human trafficking are mostly women and children , and the punishment which threatens the criminals is not sufficiently severe to deter them from this kind of activity .
Europe must take more decisive action to restrict this shameful procedure .
Therefore , I endorsed the resolution , which calls for development of effective tools for the fight against this phenomenon and for better coordination of action between Member States and the appropriate operational bodies of the European Union , in hope of achieving salutary effects .
( FI ) Mr President , human trafficking is always an act against humanity .
It is very important for us in Europe ultimately to take tangible steps to counter it .
I naturally voted in favour of this resolution , but I am worried about what it will mean in practice .
Is it the case that we are appeasing our conscience by having formulated such a resolution ?
That must not be so : we need concrete action .
Human trafficking is also still a serious problem within the European Union .
We need to make every possible effort to fight human trafficking , which mainly affects children and women .
In this respect , I hope that the European Union and the Member States , too , will implement concrete measures and start to take action .
As I said , human trafficking is always against humanity and human dignity is a value that cannot be compromised .
We , as Europeans , must always defend it , and in all circumstances .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to say that we would very much have liked to have adopted a stronger resolution on Copenhagen than the one on which we have voted here today .
However , we voted in favour , because we believe that it is vital that Parliament express its strong disappointment with the agreement that came out of Copenhagen .
That agreement is not binding , although there is an implicit or stated commitment for us to reach a binding agreement within the current year .
Yet the problem is getting worse , time is slipping away and we have to take up this stated commitment .
For this reason , I would like to appeal to the European Union to stop using others as an excuse .
It is very easy to refrain from acting because others are doing nothing .
We have taken a strong stance , however , and we have to proceed from that .
This making of excuses is irresponsible and indefensible .
There are many things we can do to maintain our strong stance .
One of these steps might be the redefinition of the EU budget to ensure our own funds to combat climate change .
This has not been done so far .
Another step would be to allocate additional funds to help developing countries , rather than removing or cutting the existing humanitarian aid .
Otherwise , there is a cynical attempt to resolve the problems of climate change while simultaneously unleashing and ignoring other problems that will jeopardise their survival .
We cannot resolve additional problems without additional resources .
We therefore need to make a commitment , and we cannot afford to wait any longer to do so .
We took a firm stance at Copenhagen .
Let us be able to live up to it , because these are real problems and real people , and we have to deal with them now .
That is why we are taking on this responsibility here today .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to support this resolution .
The Copenhagen Summit was a disappointment in many respects .
The EU failed especially in demonstrating a unified and efficient approach to climate change treatment , as well as in strengthening its leading political position in this agenda .
I consider , therefore , taking this resolution , an act of utmost importance , in order to demonstrate the unbroken spirit and determination of the EU as the leading force in the world in combating climate change .
We have to enhance and promote further activities aimed at climate change treatment .
( DE ) Mr President , personally , I feel that it is completely wrong to focus only on reducing CO2 emissions when combating climate change .
Firstly , many people forget that the research into the causes of climate change is still in its infancy and , secondly , it is totally incorrect and unscientific to define climate change as a phenomenon with a single cause .
This means that concentrating solely on CO2 will not make the world a better place .
I believe that it is more important to focus our attention on saving resources .
Cutting our consumption of fossil fuels and making greater use of renewable raw materials and energy will reduce our impact on the environment , improve efficiency and create a better world for our children and grandchildren .
A more efficient and sustainable use of resources is a far more valuable approach for us , our society and the environment than simply reducing CO2 emissions , regardless of the cost .
( DE ) Mr President , the climate negotiations in Copenhagen were disappointing for the European Union , as has already been mentioned .
The result was a long way from the EU position and from the position that we need to be in to protect the climate .
The only positive aspect is the recognition of the two-degree goal , as this could lead to the necessary reduction commitments .
We must now ask ourselves what we can learn from the failure of the negotiations and what we should do next .
It is important to have a period of reflection and to take a critical look at different points on the route that we have been following .
We have to ask ourselves how we can make progress jointly with other states .
How can we ensure that the EU is also present at the table when the US , China and India meet to negotiate a compromise ?
How can we negotiate more effectively with the developing countries and emerging economies ?
Is it essential that these negotiations take place under the aegis of the UN ?
Finally , I would like to say how pleased I am that I was able to vote for the resolution , because in my opinion , it continues to emphasise the pioneering role played by the European Union .
We must now answer these questions and continue on our current path , both from a domestic and an international perspective .
( CS ) The draft resolution on the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change was the result of the detailed work of Members from a number of committees and is linked to the long-term strategy of a genuine green policy in keeping with the economic goals of the EU in a globalised world .
I must protest , however , against the series of irresponsible amendment proposals from the Socialists and Greens , especially regarding the attempts to increase the agreed long-term targets on emission reductions to 40 % or the nuclear ban or the transitional European tax for climate change .
I also dislike the playing down of climate change on the part of the ERC Group and I am angry about the absurd criticism of the Danish Prime Minister , instead of thanks for the careful preparation of the Copenhagen Summit .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted against the motion for a resolution , because in my opinion , it is lacking some important data .
Recently , there has been an increasing number of reports of climate scientists having faked data .
It is important for us to discuss this and make our opinions known .
In order to ensure that there is no misunderstanding , I would like to explain that I have been committed for many years to reducing our use of fossil fuels and , therefore , our impact on the environment .
However , I cannot understand the scaremongering that has been associated with the phrase ' climate change ' .
I have experienced a great deal in my long career as a politician .
In the early 1980s , people said that there would be no trees left in Germany by 2000 , but Germany is greener than it has ever been .
It is true that the climate is changing , but this has been happening throughout history and will continue to do so in future .
For this reason , I have voted against this motion for a resolution .
Mr President , at his very first press conference following his appointment as President of the European Council , Herman Van Rompuy celebrated the fact that 2009 was the first year of global governance and he looked forward explicitly to the Copenhagen Summit as a step towards the economic global management of our planet .
It is a pity that a number of people have jumped onto the environmental agenda as a way of advancing a different agenda , an agenda that has at its core the desire to take power away from elected national politicians and concentrate it in the hands of international technocracies .
The tragedy is not just that we become less democratic : it is that we lose the consensus that we might have had for tackling environmental problems .
Left or Right , Conservative or Socialist , we can all agree that we want a diversity of supply for energy , and that we do not want pollutants being pumped into the atmosphere , but only one set of policies is being applied - those that involve statism and corporatism - the same policies , in fact , which have failed politically and societally are now being applied to the environment .
The environment is altogether too important to be left to the Left .
Mr President , when we listen to the discussion here in Parliament , there are many colleagues here who lament the fact that the EU was not listened to in the recent discussions in Copenhagen .
Maybe we should consider why that was .
Let us look at our own behaviour here in this European Parliament .
For a start , we have two European Parliament buildings .
We come to Strasbourg and we keep this building heated and lit when we are not here - gross hypocrisy .
Let us look at the expenses regime - an expenses regime that encourages MEPs to take taxis and chauffeured cars - but if you try to take public transport , you are not allowed to claim that back : hypocrisy .
If you look at Parliament buildings at night , you see that they keep their lights on and are well lit .
Look at the common agricultural policy , which many MEPs in this place support , that not only damages developing countries ' economies but damages the environment .
So , before we preach to the rest of the world , it is time we got our own house in order .
( FI ) Mr President , I supported Amendment 43 , which urged everyone to take notice of the recent climate scandals .
These scandals are a lot more serious in terms of their consequences than this House would like to believe .
We need to be able to trust in independent scientific research ; otherwise , there will be no basis for our policy making .
I have been concerned about climate change throughout my 10year career as an MEP .
I have actively sought a climate policy for Europe through emissions trading legislation , one that would not only be ambitious , but also rational , so that we would not simply be moving emissions from one place to another .
Our strategy now is bureaucratic and ineffectual : we are not acting like pioneers and we should not be continuing along the former path .
The worst of it is that the EU does not follow what is happening in climate research right now .
We have come up with panic solutions based on distorted information .
The false statements in the report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change are such a serious problem that we should demand Rajendra Pachauri 's resignation as head of the IPCC and reassess what we know about the progress of climate change due to human activity and how effective our policy actions have been with regard to it .
( FR ) Mr President , Parliament 's resolution shows that , in this field as in so many others , our institution possesses absolutely no powers of judgment with regard to the dogmas that assail us .
Indeed , many experts believe that the notorious hockey stick-shaped exponential global warming curve is , in reality , a graphic fabrication .
Glaciers are not melting everywhere .
In any event , contrary to what the IPCC announced , they are not melting in the Himalayas .
Water levels are not about to rise and cover Bangladesh , quite the contrary .
The Ganges delta is rising as a result of alluvial deposits .
White bears , which are said to be disappearing , have never been as prolific as they are today .
The alternation of hot and cold periods has occurred several times in our history , including quite recently , independently of any human activity .
It is probably astronomic in origin and not caused by the alleged greenhouse gases .
Until these questions have been answered , we can only believe that this is a magnificent ideological dogma designed to justify the introduction of a world government .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to explain my reasons for voting on Amendment 12 by clearly stating that l 'Italia dei Valori is against the production of nuclear energy .
We already opposed this difficult topic during the electoral campaign and included it in our manifesto .
We are now pursuing this goal with determination through a significant action that we affirmed during our recent congress in Italy .
We have embarked on a major crusade to promote a people 's referendum against an Italian Government law that overturns a majority vote that the Italians have already expressed during a people 's referendum .
We are doing this because we want a clean future , with renewable energies , based on solar and wind energy .
We are doing this , above all , because , as I was saying before , we want the will of the Italian people to be expressed and not that of the tiny majority that is now sitting in the Italian Parliament .
Mr President , at the very moment when the good people of Massachusetts were voting against excessive taxation and excessive government , our own Commission nominees were boasting of their plans to harmonise taxation in the European Union and create a separate revenue stream for Brussels .
How are we to explain this difference between the two Unions ?
It seems to be that you have to look for an explanation in the foundational DNA of the two polities .
The US was founded out of a popular revolt against a remote and autocratic government and against high taxation , whereas , of course , the European Union - in line 1 of Article 1 of its foundational treaty - commits itself to ever-closer union .
In doing so , it sets its face against the competition , the external curve , which is the main constraint on government .
That is why we now see - acting according to its foundational doctrines - this intolerance for tax competition masquerading as an attack on tax havens , by which it in fact means jurisdictions which have run a more efficient system and kept their taxes lower .
The reality is that tax competition - tax havens , if you insist on calling them that - is the major way to keep the government small and the citizen large and free .
Mr President , at this time , one has to ask : why all this focus on tax issues , tax cooperation and tax governance ?
You only have to look at the evidence in a number of Member States to consider the answer .
We have countries that have run up big debts .
In my own country , the British Government has been spending money it does not have and now has to plug a massive gap in the budget .
Even before the financial crisis , we had countries that are known not to be collecting sufficient taxes to cover the public services that are needed by the citizens of those countries .
We are also spending taxpayers ' monies on propping up companies that have failed and are being badly governed , as well as badly run banks .
So , really , what should we be doing ?
We should be encouraging a solution in the first place to all the problems I have outlined , but we should also never forget that tax competition is a very good thing to have because it encourages governments to take less of our money and to provide services more efficiently for its citizens .
Mr President , today this Parliament has voted on a document relating to tax fraud and evasion ; that document did not have the support of my group .
Whilst I fully support many measures which have been suggested to stop tax fraud and evasion , this document went far further , and there were three major concerns .
Firstly , taking action against those who commit fraud should not be used as a backdoor way by those who want to increase tax harmonisation across Europe for those of us who honestly pay our taxes .
This Parliament has , for a long time , defended the right of Member States to have their own say over corporate tax rates and we should continue to do so .
Secondly , it suggests an EU-level levy on taxation areas .
We have resisted plans for this Parliament to have Europe-wide taxes .
The third point is on sharing information .
Yes , we should share some information , but we should always think how much , for what purpose and for what benefit , and we should not consider that all circumstances are identical .
Mr President , it is a pity that an enthusiastic majority in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is trying hard to overload our position on the Committee 's annual report on equality between men and women in the European Union with considerations and claims that are counterproductive for women and which harm , among other things , their chances of employment .
Although some considerations may be well-intentioned , let us not forget that too much protection destroys all protection .
However , the stumbling block for my group has once again been the right to free social abortion , which is presented as an easy birth control method .
Our group does not disagree with the observation that women must have control over their sexual and reproductive rights .
We also believe that young girls in particular must be better informed in the area of sexual and productive health .
However , to demand in the same sentence ' easy access to contraception and free abortion ' proves that the authors of this text are not making the essential distinction between these two services and are putting them on the same footing as far as birth control is concerned .
We do not agree with this .
Furthermore , under the principle of subsidiarity , legislation in the field of legal abortion is the responsibility of the Member States .
It is therefore not our responsibility in the EU to interfere in this issue .
We have gone to great lengths to reach a consensus with the author of the report , Mr Tarabella , and we have done so in the interests of combating all forms of discrimination that have not yet been eliminated .
I am sorry that a majority in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - and also unfortunately in Parliament - has sought to instigate political and ideological disputes instead of concentrating on what should have been the main objective of our activities : to strive to achieve equal treatment and opportunities for men and women .
I am sorry that , for these reasons , my group has not been able to vote in favour of the report .
( PL ) Mr President , I , too , voted against this report .
I did so despite being a supporter of gender equality .
I cannot , however , accept that abortion is treated in the report as a specifically understood entitlement , and - as Mrs Lulling said - a method of birth control .
In my country , abortion is not understood in this way .
I am persuaded that how we view abortion is our own internal matter .
It is also dangerous that the report violates the subsidiarity principle , and does so on an ill matter .
( PL ) Mr President , equality between women and men is an important subject .
Much has been achieved in this matter , but there are still areas where women are treated worse than men .
We still earn less , women are at greater risk of poverty and it is more difficult for women to develop an academic or business career .
Parliament 's report takes note of these problems , and stresses the necessity of introducing specific measures which will ensure equal participation of men and women in the job market and in education .
Unfortunately , I regret that I could not support this proposal .
I voted against the report , because it includes provisions designed to make abortion generally available in the European Union .
Firstly , these matters are among those which are exclusively for Member States to decide .
Secondly , the question of unwanted pregnancies is a huge problem , but we cannot bring in legislation which is going to treat abortion as a free means of contraception .
Neither can I agree that abortion should exempt people from thinking about the consequences and responsibilities associated with becoming sexually active .
I think human life deserves better .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we set out to reinforce the role of women in the Union .
This resolution has many points with which I agree of course , and I must say that many of them relate to my personal political activity , especially when it comes to access to the world of work and protecting women from all forms of violence .
However , I must point out that this resolution has also become a soup , to which a skilled cook has attempted to add - or rather , has added - very different ingredients .
Let me explain myself better : it talks about violence , about protection against violence .
This is followed by a single line about contraception and the termination of pregnancy , abortion , two topics which are actually very different , and which need to be considered very differently .
In the case of abortion , for example , we need to focus our attention and our thoughts on the sanctity of life .
This choice has meant that I have been unable to vote in favour of the resolution and I have had to abstain .
I think that this carefully worked-out strategy , which seeks to obtain the consensus of politicians and the media , does not really serve the interests of European women .
( ET ) Mr President , in contrast to the previous speakers , I was among the 381 members of the parliament who supported the adoption of this bill - and this is 10 times bigger than the number of members on our women 's rights committee .
Equal rights , equal opportunities and equality between the genders in everyday life is definitely in all our interests .
Equal rights for women and men is not an aim in itself , but a precondition for achieving the general goals of the European Union , and the rational use of our own potential .
The fact that today we have been talking about this for 40 years definitely gives an indication of how complex and multifaceted this subject is , and how an integrated policy is needed to solve these questions .
And I hope this is not just another strategy on paper , and therefore I want to stress what was stressed in the report too - the importance of implementation and supervision .

( CS ) I did not vote for the controversial and imbalanced report of Mr Tarabella on gender equality either and I am sorry that , with the exception of the European People 's Party MEPs , 381 Members did vote in favour of the report .
Perhaps they have not read it .
In a number of the proposals , it interferes with the exclusive powers of the Member States , especially concerning their pro-family policies and ethically sensitive areas .
Moreover , do they really want to set up and finance some form of new institution for monitoring violence against women in the EU ?
Do they really not know that the Union has instruments , an office and legislation for monitoring adherence to the human rights both of men and women ?
Do they really believe that we need a charter of women 's rights alongside the already existing and binding Charter of Fundamental Rights of all European Citizens ?
The report also refers to the so-called Barcelona targets , although these are contrary to the recommendations of experts , because infants and toddlers need to have full-time family care at that age , not to be dumped in nurseries on the basis of recommendations from Barcelona .
Nurseries should only be the last resort .
The recommendations in the report may not be binding , but human stupidity is contagious and Parliament should therefore not support such things .
There were only 75 abstentions and I applaud the fact that 253 People 's Party members voted against the report .
Mr President , the Treaty of Rome contains one sentence on this subject .
It says , ' men and women shall be given equal pay for equal work ' .
Now , that sounds pretty straightforward .
We all think we understand what that means .
But what has happened in the subsequent decades is that , through a process of judicial activism , the European Court has progressively extended the meaning of that phrase beyond anything that a reasonable person would assume .
First , it defined ' equal pay ' as meaning equal pension rights and equal holidays and so on .
Then it defined ' equal work ' as being work of equivalent value .
How is an employer supposed to judge that ?
Is it a question of how hard it looks like someone is working ?
Do they have to factor in the availability of suitably qualified applicants ?
Then , in the South-West Trains case in Britain , it was extended to look at the rights of spouses of same-sex unions .
Now we are talking about reproductive rights .
There is an argument for all of these things .
You can take the view that the state ought not to regulate contracts between employers and employees or you can take the view that we need this legislation .
But , whichever side you are on , surely that is an argument that ought to be had by elected representatives who we can vote for and vote against .
It is outrageous for them to be imposed on us by a court .
A court with a mission is a menace ; a supreme court with a mission is a tyranny .
( PL ) Mr President , my surname is very difficult , too - Skrzydlewska - but I am used to the fact that not many people can say it properly .
During today 's voting , we voted on the report on equality between women and men in the European Union in 2009 .
However , among the provisions relating to problems associated with discrimination against women and their more difficult situation in the labour market , there were provisions calling on Member States to facilitate universal access to abortion and services related to reproductive and sexual health .
I would like to point out that matters related to abortion are something to be decided by individual Member States .
Therefore , in the final vote I was against the report , because I think that , when fighting for the right to equal treatment for women and men , we should not make this right dependent on choices related to sexual matters .
( DE ) Mr President , I am very pleased that we Christian Democrats from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have voted against this dreadful ideological report put forward by the Socialists , Communists , Greens and , in particular , the Liberals .
It is an attack on the right to life of unborn children and an attack on the principle of subsidiarity .
In particular , I am horrified by the way in which the Liberals have become the dogsbodies of those on the left and have acted contrary to the principle of subsidiarity .
This type of report damages our acceptance among the population and among the candidate countries .
Some of the ideological elements relating to Croatia and Macedonia in the progress reports are also doing us harm .
This is why we must explain clearly to people about the acquis communautaire , which I am fully in favour of , about the responsibilities of the EU and about dangerous ideological nonsense .
To continue the metaphor started by my Italian colleague : we are , of course , in favour of the soup , but against putting cyanide in it .
Mr President , let me tell you the story of two African countries .
In 1978 , Kenya banned the hunting of elephants and that decision was followed by an almost total destruction of elephant herds in Kenya .
Round about the same time - in 1979 - Rhodesia , as it was still called , made elephants the property of whoever 's land they were roaming on .
Result - explosion of elephant numbers .
We in this House do not think of the elephant in the way that the African does .
We are not threatened by it ; it does not trample our crops ; it does not destroy our villages ; and it does not damage human health .
The only way to prevent local populations from doing the logical thing , which is to eliminate a dangerous menace , is by giving them an incentive in treating it as a renewable resource .
This , of course , is what Rhodesia - now Zimbabwe - successfully did .
Environmental policy should recognise the basic Aristotelian wisdom that that which nobody owns , nobody will care for .
( SL ) I am in favour of Croatia 's membership of the European Union , but it should not be at the expense of Slovenia 's national interests .
I am talking , of course , about the border dispute between Slovenia and Croatia .
This is not merely an abstract concept ; it is one that affects people 's lives .
Here in Strasbourg , the European Parliament has called on the Slovene Parliament to ratify the arbitration agreement as soon as possible .
That of course constitutes interference with the competence of the Slovene Parliament .
Secondly , I wonder if anyone has asked themselves the question as to why it is that Slovenia has not ratified this agreement already .
What I would say on that point is that , in August 2007 , all the parliamentary groups said that any solution must be in line with the principle of equity .
Naturally , I also wonder why it is that anyone at all should have any objections to this principle .
And yet , this principle has not been enshrined in the arbitration agreement .
I have therefore voted against the motion for a resolution because it does not reflect this principle .
( CS ) I was delighted today to support the report on the key progress of Croatia in preparing for accession to the EU .
There are long-term links between Czech citizens and Croatians with tens of thousands of families visiting the country every year and having friends there .
This is therefore an excellent report for us , because it proves that Croatia will be ready for membership next year .
I believe that the ratification process for the accession agreement will not be disrupted by any of the internal politicking within the Twenty Seven , which accompanied the Lisbon Treaty , and I also believe that the parliaments of Slovenia and Croatia will find a fair solution to their border disputes .
( CS ) Mr President , I , too , will be brief .
It is another good report for the Balkans , with Macedonia also progressing successfully on the path to fulfilment of the political criteria that are a precondition for the start of accession talks and also for a visa-free regime with the EU .
The recent elections have helped in this .
They have shown clearly that the citizens of this country want to share international standards and peaceful coexistence .
I also believe that democratic institutions will manage to strengthen negotiations with Greece concerning amicable solutions to problem areas .
( CS ) I will be very brief again .
I would like to say that we have adopted a very frank report on how Turkey can responsibly amend its legislation in accordance with the EU model and also concerning the fact that the political criteria in the area of human rights , especially in relation to women and religious minorities , have not yet been fulfilled , just as the Cyprus issue remains open .
Despite this , a majority of MEPs supported the start of accession talks some years ago .
I welcome the fact that Turkey is moving towards democracy and towards Europe , but I would like to say once again that a better solution to economic relations would have been to set up a privileged partnership rather than to promise accession to Turkey with its 70 million-strong population .
It would also be more frank in view of the fact that , as I fear , an accession agreement would not be approved in a future referendum anyhow .
( DE ) Mr President , I am pleased that this House has rejected by a large and clear majority the attempt by the Socialists and the Greens to set the goal of full membership for Turkey .
The process must remain open and , to put it even more clearly , it must be diverted immediately towards a tailor-made special status or a privileged partnership .
Turkey is not a European country , but it is our most important partner on the margins of Europe .
This is why we want close cooperation , but , in response to Mr Kreissl-Dörfler who brought this up earlier , without Turkey becoming a member of the European institutions and without full freedom of movement .
However , we do want close economic and political cooperation .
This is a very precise concept and I believe that it has a chance of being implemented , because the majority of the people of Turkey and of the European Union are not in favour of full membership .
Therefore , it would be more sensible not to waste any more of our effort , but instead to focus solely on the goal of partnership .
( SK ) Any country that is making efforts towards joining the European Union must not only formally complete but also internally identify with minimum requirements in the area of democracy and respect for human rights .
According to the Progress Report for 2009 , Turkey still has a long way to go .
It may have committed itself to reforms , good neighbourly relations and gradual progress towards the standards and values of the EU , but this is the fourth year that it has failed to implement provisions arising from the association agreement between the European Union and Turkey .
In my view , it is it unacceptable to consider membership for a country in which women 's rights and freedom of religion , thought and expression are violated , where torture , discrimination and corruption are tolerated and where the army continues to interfere in political life and foreign policy .
The reforms should also include reform of the electoral system through a reduction in the ten percent threshold , in order to secure a better pluralistic democracy .
Written explanations of vote
The report by Mr Casa on the common system of value added tax with regard to invoicing rules has been adopted by a very large majority of Members , including myself .
Under this system , VAT invoicing rules will be simplified thanks to the increased harmonisation of European requirements and the widespread use of electronic invoicing .
The entry into force of this directive will therefore serve to reduce the administrative burdens weighing down companies and to increase the efforts to combat VAT fraud .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal relates to the creation of a self-assessment system in relation to the supply or provision of certain goods or services susceptible to fraud , on an optional trial basis .
According to the European Commission , this is required because there are still a substantial number of cases of VAT fraud , and the Commission also has information about alleged cases of fraud related to the trading of greenhouse gas emission licences .
Based on this information , the report by Parliament proposes that the Member States that vote in favour of this system should be obliged to do the same for the greenhouse gas emission allowance trading scheme .
We believe that the experimental nature of the proposal may have some merit , so we support the amendments made by Parliament , particularly the proposal on a report that assesses ' the overall effectiveness and efficiency of the measure , applying the mechanism and the cost-benefit ratio of the measure in order to re-evaluate whether an extension or a widening of its scope would be appropriate . '
in writing . - This report deals with important issues relating to fraud , including in the field of greenhouse gas emissions .
The Commission must report on the effectiveness of the reverse charge mechanism with a view to establishing whether it would be appropriate to extend the mechanism elsewhere .
in writing . - ( PT ) The adoption of Directive 2006 / 112 / EC was an important step in combating tax evasion .
For all its good points , however , it was not effective enough to tackle so-called ' carousel fraud ' in VAT .
This type of tax fraud is to blame for much of the loss of tax revenue in the Member States , and it has been one of the most widespread methods .
At this time of economic crisis , when the fight against tax fraud is all the more important given the seriousness of loss of revenue , we must make every effort to combat it , as this will have an important impact not only on our response to the current international crisis , but also on the possibility of pursuing the appropriate social policies .
I was among the first supporters of the idea behind the European Commission 's proposal .
We in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have analysed and somewhat improved the Commission 's document .
I agree with the rapporteur , in particular , on the clarifications regarding the optional application of the reverse charge mechanism and reporting obligations .
In fact , Member States should have the option either to require transaction-by-transaction reporting or global transaction reporting .
The proposal under examination reinforces the safety of the ETS allowances vis-à-vis fraudsters whilst , at the same time , reducing the administrative burden on honest businesses .
Lastly , I believe that Parliament should be fully informed of the outcome of this temporary implementation of the reverse charge mechanism .
It is with great conviction that I voted in favour of Mr Casa 's report .
As first vice-chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control , and as rapporteur of a report adopted in September 2008 on VAT fraud , I have repeatedly argued the case for effective combating of VAT fraud , as this constitutes a major issue in terms of the income of the Member States and the proper functioning of the internal market .
A common and particularly serious form of this fraud is known as carousel VAT fraud .
The total amount of uncollected income is estimated at between EUR 20 and 100 billion per annum .
That is a huge sum , and one that could certainly be put to good use in times of economic crisis .
Criminals active in this area are particularly inventive .
It has recently come to light that they are also pursuing their criminal activities within the emissions trading scheme ( ETS ) .
The transfers of emission rights between taxable parties within the ETS , which takes place entirely electronically , are regarded as services and are taxable in the country in which the recipient is established .
Traders purchase carbon credits from VAT-free sources in other Member States and then sell them on to companies in their own Member State at a price including VAT .
Missing traders then fail to remit the VAT to the national exchequer .
It is crucial that we tackle this kind of crime .
I welcome the application of the reverse charge VAT system . However , I discern an error in it .
For example , subject A sold something to subject B. Subject B sold it to subject C. Subject C sold it to the end consumer or non-payer of VAT .
Meanwhile , subject A does not pay VAT , as he is not the end-seller .
Only subject C selling the final goods to the consumer pays VAT .
The crux of this is that subject B is not taxed at all although the basis of his business is to buy low and sell high .
Therefore , it is being proposed that subject B should pay VAT on the price difference to the state 's treasury .
This scheme has many positive points , with one exception : no one will apply to the treasury for a VAT refund , but if subject C is a fraudster , then he simply will not pay VAT as the final seller .
In other words , by applying the reverse charge VAT system , there will not be a negative balance , as no one will apply for a VAT refund and I feel that it will be very easy to administer this scheme , as state tax inspectorates will very easily be able to reveal the difference in the prices of goods .
If I am mistaken , I would be very grateful for a written reply on the suitability or inadequacy of the scheme I have proposed .
The resolution is designed to amend the Council VAT Directive 2006 / 112 / EC in order to allow for temporary application of the reverse charge mechanism so as to combat fraud relating to the trade in emission certificates and transactions on certain goods susceptible to fraud .
Tax fraud is an important problem in terms of the smooth operation of the internal market and puts the Member States ' tax revenues at risk .
That is why several of them have asked to be allowed to combat fraudulent mechanisms using a reverse charge mechanism targeted at certain sectors susceptible to fraud and certain goods .
The most common form of fraud is where a VAT-registered supplier invoices supplies of goods and then disappears without paying the VAT owing on them , while leaving buyers ( also VAT-registered ) with valid invoices which allow them to deduct their VAT .
The national Ministers of Finance do not therefore collect the VAT owing on the goods in question and have to reimburse the next trader upstream in the VAT chain for the VAT paid by them .
Thus , the Member States loses twice .
That is why I voted in favour of this legislative resolution .
Providing access to housing for citizens , especially vulnerable people , from communities facing dire poverty and marginalisation must be a fundamental concern of our society .
The financial support from the Structural Funds can make a considerable contribution to the efforts made by national authorities to resolve this problem .
Both the European Parliament and the Council have asked the European Commission on repeated occasions to take action in favour of promoting the inclusion of these communities .
As a result of today 's vote , we have received a new , amended regulation , which will enable all 27 Member States to use money from the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) to renovate or replace housing in marginalised communities , thereby supporting the most disadvantaged groups in society .
I must point out that the report fails to give a general indication as to who is to be on the receiving end of the measures if they are introduced : reference is made to the concept of ' marginalised communities ' , but the substance of this expression , which can mean many different things in sociological terms alone , is not specified .
The only references - which anyhow are already in the Commission 's proposal - concern the Roma population .
The report 's request that the reference to the Roma should not preclude interventions to help other socially marginalised groups offers no guarantee that other individuals who are ' socially marginalised ' , because of particularly difficult economic , work-related or family situations , can benefit from the portion of ERDF that is to go towards housing policies .
Lastly , according to the report presented to Parliament , the power to determine the criteria applied to establish which part of the ERDF can be assigned to helping marginalised communities should lie with the European Commission : this provision seems to allow the Commission alone broad discretionary powers in determining the aforementioned criteria ; criteria on which the extent and the scale of the measure will effectively depend , at a time when Parliament will have no foreseeable way of acting and expressing its views .
In anticipation of the future parliamentary follow-up of the report , and since this is the first reading , I will abstain from voting .
I support this Framework Agreement , since cooperation between the European Parliament and the European Commission is particularly important in strengthening the stability of the European Union and the effectiveness of its work .
According to this agreement , once a legislative initiative request has been submitted to the European Parliament , the European Commission must answer within a month , and prepare a suitable piece of European Union legislation within a year .
If the European Union refuses to prepare the act requested , it will have to justify its decision in detail .
Until now , only the European Commission was able to initiate European Union legislation , but in the Treaty of Lisbon , it is provided that a majority of the European Parliament has the right to create European Union legislation .
Parliament and the Commission will cooperate closely at an early stage on any legislative initiative requests emanating from citizens ' initiatives .
When signing international treaties , European Parliament experts will also be included in the discussions .
In the agreement , Parliament will be granted the right to participate as an observer in certain European Union international talks , as well as the right to obtain more information about international treaties .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am happy to vote in favour of this amendment to the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) in order to extend the scope of its interventions in the housing sector so as to help marginalised communities in all the Member States .
Up until now , interventions in the housing sector could only take place within the scope of urban-development projects relating to the renovation of housing .
In my view , this criterion is unreasonable and discriminatory given that , as is the case in Portugal , the majority of these families live in shelters in rural areas .
These are the people most in need , and they should not be excluded by reason of their location .
I welcome the amendment made by Parliament , which supports territorial cohesion .
Moreover , unlike the European Commission 's initial proposal , which restricted its implementation to the new Member States , these new regulations widen the scope of implementation to all Member States , thus avoiding senseless discrimination between marginalised European families .
This is a global problem , and it affects thousands of families all over Europe !
This situation is particularly severe in Portugal due to the economic crisis that it is experiencing , and the extreme poverty of many families .
in writing . - I support this report which extends eligibility of housing interventions in marginalised communities to the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) .
Under the new rules , all Member States will be able to avail of such EU funding to improve the conditions of marginalised households previously unavailable to Member States which joined since 2004 .
Physical degradation of housing stock denies its occupants the right to decent living conditions and is a major obstacle to integration and social cohesion .
This regulation will allow for housing renovation projects to draw on the ERDF but , in order to counter segregation risks , these initiatives must be part of a wider social integration framework in the fields of health , education and social affairs .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Commission is attempting to alter the provisions of the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) regulations to allow the new Member States to use these funds to intervene in the housing sector in favour of marginalised communities living in rural areas .
This amendment applies only to the new Member States which , let us not forget , have large marginalised migrant communities living in rural areas .
This justifies the adoption of a special rule within the ERDF regulations .
in writing . - ( PT ) In working to tackle poverty and improve living conditions for the most disadvantaged sectors of the population , where deprivation has been exacerbated by the severe crisis of the last few years , the European Union has a duty to safeguard and promote sustained policies for social inclusion .
Apart from hygiene issues , the deterioration of housing conditions exacerbates and often causes the risk of segregation and marginalisation .
Living conditions are crucial for every citizen 's self-esteem and sense of social worth .
Alongside education , health and employment , they play a pivotal role in the construction , development and consolidation of any attempt at sustainable living , be it at individual or family level .
It is important , however , that we make sure that intervention strategies within the European Union do not make any distinctions on the basis of gender , race or ethnicity .
If Europe is to have a more balanced society , it is just as vital that we avoid the emergence and expansion of ghettos or zones that are easily associated with a particular disadvantaged or marginalised community .
Policies on social inclusion also need to be aimed at those who are most in need of them without making any kind of distinction between European citizens .
in writing . - This regulation allows Member States to use the European Regional Development Fund in an integrated and sensible way .
By making existing money available for marginalised communities , many of whom are in rural areas and shelters and could not benefit under previous rules , this new regulation will contribute significantly towards the Economic Recovery Plan for Europe .
These are the reasons that led me to vote in favour of the following amendments .
First of all , I believed it necessary to widen the geographical perimeter of the motion to all 27 EU Member States , since the problems we intend to combat with this regulation arise throughout the European Union .
Therefore it makes no sense to limit the regulation to only the new EU-12 Member States .
Secondly , I believed it was right to restore the previous version of the final part of Article 7 ( ' the Commission shall adopt ' , instead of ' may adopt ' ) , so that the Commission can continue to fulfil its original regulatory brief of evaluating and deciding upon the criteria for interventions , in order to guarantee the policy 's effectiveness and added value , also taking its cost into account .
The housing situation in the EU is critical .
What we need is a European policy of decent housing for all , a binding and ambitious EU social housing policy .
Of course , it was essential for Parliament to adopt a position on the renovation of insalubrious housing and the replacement of slums with decent accommodation , but it is just as essential and just as urgent for the EU to make the availability of decent accommodation a fundamental human right .
It has a duty and the means to ensure this .
The EU cannot allow itself to become a socially underdeveloped region .
in writing . - ( PT ) The adoption of this report is very important , because it makes an amendment to the European Regional Development Fund that will help marginalised members of the public , whether or not they live in urban areas .
I voted for this report and I want to emphasise that such regular reviews of the texts regulating the use of European funds are welcome .
Many of the restrictions stipulated by these regulations are no longer suited to the current economic and social situation , thereby necessitating new forms of intervention .
Another example in this regard is the relaxation of the conditions for using ERDF funds to improve energy efficiency in housing , approved by Parliament last spring .
The current worldwide economic crisis represents a difficult challenge for the European Union , which is in need of policies offering rapid , flexible and efficient responses .
With its total financial resources of EUR 347 billion for the programming period 2007-2013 , the European Cohesion Policy is the greatest source of investment in the real economy , able to help Europe and its regions to recover from the crisis and to regain confidence and optimism .
I agree with the need to deal with the question of housing for marginalised communities , in the context of a change in the ERDF regulation .
Since the current laws cannot be applied to marginalised communities , the proposed change would fill a gap in the legislation , in order to cope with the problem of these people 's precarious conditions of life in a more appropriate way .
This measure respects the principle of subsidiarity , increasing the ability of Member States to provide support and housing aid for marginalised communities , in whatever way they judge to be most appropriate , and , at the same time , maintaining the integrated approach as a minimum condition for implementing the aid .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mr van Nistelrooij on the excellent text he proposed , which has been further improved by numerous amendments tabled within the Committee on Regional Development , allowing this measure to be extended to all the European Union Member States .
Today 's text will enable us to make the dreams of many people who wish to own their own homes come true .
I am certain that , in doing this , we will show our citizens that Parliament is capable of finding solutions to the challenges posed by opening up borders and by the free movement of people .
And for this reason , I will vote in favour of the report .
I welcome the adoption , today , by a large majority ( 558 votes to 57 ) , of the report by Mr van Nistelrooij .
By adopting this report , Parliament is sending out a strong message to citizens and is responding to the social concerns relayed in particular by Eurocities .
The report provides for the possibility of using the ERDF for the renovation and replacement of existing buildings and for new structures designed to help marginalised communities in rural or urban environments in each of the 27 Member States .
This extension from the 12 States that joined in 2000 and 2007 to all the Member States offers solutions to the problems that insalubrious housing poses for certain marginalised communities throughout the EU .
It will thus be possible to establish an integrated and sustainable approach at EU level .
Furthermore , this extension dovetails perfectly with the aim of the 2010 European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
I am pleased that Parliament has voted for these amendments and I hope that the regions concerned will find it a useful tool for solving what is an urgent and fundamental problem for these communities .
I have supported this report from the outset , especially in terms of enlarging the scope of intervention to all EU Member States .
It allows the 27 to use the ERDF to finance the construction of new dwellings for marginalised communities and for the renovation and replacement of existing buildings .
During this serious economic crisis which has hit Europe and affected all the Member States , housing problems are now even worse .
The European Union had to intervene and use all the instruments at its disposal to come to the aid of badly-housed people , especially marginalised communities who were previously unable to benefit from ERDF resources .
Thanks to the amendments which the members of the presidential majority tabled in the Committee on Regional Development , eligibility for the fund is vested not only in the new Member States of the EU , but in all 27 , all of which face the same difficulties .
The regions concerned will be able to replace unhealthy housing in socially excluded communities and develop global , integrated and lasting solutions to their housing problems .
This report gives the EU concrete means for helping its citizens .
Let us hope that it will be a step towards a social Europe close to the people .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report that we approved today alters the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) regulations , extending its scope in the housing sector in favour of marginalised communities , since currently , the fund can only be used within the context of urban development initiatives .
The amendments that I and my fellow Members proposed , and which were confirmed today in Parliament , mean that the older Member States , not only the new ones , as suggested in the original proposal by the Commission , can also benefit from this new source of funding from the ERDF .
I have also tried to prevent what I see as a precedent which would exclude the older Member States , particularly Portugal , from this funding , and possibly from using other additional sources of Community aid .
I would like to reiterate that the length of time for which a country has been a member of the European Union should not be a criterion for the allocation of structural funds , and that the post-2013 Cohesion Policy should continue to focus on the principle of solidarity , aimed at territorial cohesion , something which is crucial for the outermost regions , such as Madeira .
It must also be aimed at greater flexibility , transparency and a results-oriented approach that rewards the regions that have demonstrated an exemplary use of Community aid , rather than punishing them .
In order to improve the assimilation of European Union funds for the renovation of buildings and homes , and given the practice of the Member States and difficulty of cofinancing , it should be proposed that national governments create a common fund , in which they could save money , covering cofinancing with state money .
In other words , until cofinancing is covered by the state , the proprietors of buildings and home owners have to pay the same absolute amount they paid until renovation .
The reason is that often , the proprietors of premises and home owners can neither cover cofinancing with their own money nor obtain a bank loan for this .
I welcome the second point of this initiative - to direct funds earmarked for renovation to rural areas .
Most private houses in villages are heated autonomously , meaning that heating is not paid for in a centralised way and therefore it is proposed that an absolute monthly amount should be set , which in time , could cover the cofinancing of these homes .
This would make it easier for the Member States to legally implement the cofinancing for rural home renovation .
This rule allows for financial support from the ERDF for interventions in the housing sector for the benefit of marginalised communities in the new Member States .
A large majority of these communities live in rural areas and in shelters ( in both rural and urban areas ) .
They are unable to benefit from ERDF support .
Intervention in the housing sector is possible during urban development operations and by renovating existing houses .
Support for intervention in the housing sector in rural areas or to replace mediocre housing in urban or rural areas is not eligible for ERDF support .
In order to prevent unwarranted discrimination , intervention targeted at the Roma should not exclude other groups in similar social and economic circumstances .
In addition , as intervention is just one part of a complex problem , it should be addressed within the framework of an integrated , multi-dimensional approach at national level , with strong partnerships and taking account of aspects relating to education , social affairs , integration , culture , health , employment , security and so forth .
The objective of the proposal is to provide acceptable housing conditions within the framework of an integrated approach .
in writing . - ( PT ) Fraud and tax evasion are an attack on the construction of a fairer , stronger and more equal Europe in terms of social and economic development .
The consequences of this have become all the more apparent and serious in this time of severe economic and financial crisis , as the budgets of the Member States have been particularly weakened and strained by the need for public investment and expenditure on social policy .
It is worth noting that tax fraud in the European Union stands at more than EUR 200 billion per year , which amounts to more than 2 % of GDP .
Within the context of the open market and the free circulation of goods and people , the control and surveillance mechanisms have become ever more complex due to the inalienable rights of sovereignty of each Member State .
To make matters worse , unscrupulous economic operators , mostly motivated by opportunities to make easy money from the economic crisis , are resorting to ever more sophisticated and ingenious methods of tax avoidance .
This proposal strengthens administrative cooperation between the EU Member States in the field of taxation , as the process of European integration shows a clear imbalance between the legislation produced and the mechanisms of control and surveillance .
in writing . - ( PT ) We have some doubts as to the formulation of the proposal which seeks to widen the scope of the directive , extending ' cooperation between Member States to cover taxes of any kind ' , and the fact that it ' shall also apply to compulsory social security contributions payable to the Member State or a subdivision of the Member State or to social security institutions established under public law ' .
We disagree that the officials of a Member State should be given the authority to act within the territory of other Member States , so we believe that Parliament 's proposal to limit the issue to cases where there is agreement between the Member States is the correct approach , at the very least .
We also have our doubts about the requirement for the automatic exchange of information about the tax habits of individuals , although there are some references to data protection , particularly in the report by Parliament .
We will be carefully watching the treatment of these issues as they progress .
in writing . - Whilst I believe that the EU 's Member States should retain control over their own taxation systems , it is clear that there must be cooperation across the EU and indeed with third countries in order to counter tax evasion .
I believe that the compromise agreed today will be a useful tool in combating fraud and evasion .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted resolutely against the Alvarez report on administrative cooperation in the field of taxation , as I am sorry that the fight for citizens ' freedoms , which Parliament is supposed to spearhead , is changeable and inconsistent .
When the introduction of body scanners or the SWIFT agreement with the United States is on the agenda , the staunch defenders of individual freedoms make their voices heard , even if it means creating diplomatic tension .
But when the protection of banking data is at issue , the good suddenly turns into the evil .
Wholesale automatic exchange , which forms the basis of the Alvarez and Dominici reports , is the scanner that strips you at every turn ; it is the SWIFT agreement on an even larger scale .
This inconsistency cannot even be justified in the name of efficiency .
The automatic exchange of all data on every non-resident in Europe will lead to an unmanageable flood of data .
The precedent in the field of taxation of savings should set alarm bells ringing .
And to those friends of mine who are concerned about the excessive bureaucracy that this construct might entail , I say that the only solution is to oppose it on principle rather than be surprised at its disastrous consequences .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since previous legislation , which made fraud and tax evasion a priority for the European Union , a series of legislative proposals have been adopted relating to this area .
Administrative cooperation in the field of taxation is a fundamental part of the common strategy to combat fraud and tax evasion .
Effective combating of tax evasion and fraud has a significant impact on national budgets and the loss of substantial revenue for general public expenditure , especially in health , education and research .
Tax evasion and fraud violate the principle of equal fiscal treatment , to the detriment of citizens and businesses that meet their tax obligations , and it leads to the distortion of competition , which affects the proper functioning of the markets .
At this time of crisis , it is all the more important for us to use all the methods at our disposal to combat tax evasion and fraud in order to meet the exceptional costs that are necessary to remedy the effects of the crisis and to reduce the high budget deficits as much as possible .
The importance of the proposal lies in the serious consequences that tax fraud in the EU ( estimated to exceed 2 % of GDP ) has on Member States ' budgets , on the principle of fair taxation , which is weakened as a result of it , and on the operation of markets , because competition is distorted .
The proposal presented by the Commission is a step forward in meeting the need for more effective cooperation measures to combat fraud and tax evasion on a European scale .
The proposed directive involves both a quantitative and qualitative leap : quantitative because it establishes new obligations ; qualitative because it broadens and specifies the existing obligations .
It agrees to include all types of direct or indirect tax , except VAT and excise duties , introducing the automatic exchange of information between tax administrations , instead of exchange on request .
The proposal will mean we can call on more effective cooperation measures to combat fraud and tax evasion , creating a reliable , easy-to-use and effective system .
This will help us achieve appropriate tax integration , an essential part of the European project and a further step towards the genuine harmonisation of tax policies .
Like the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I voted in favour of this report , which aims to step up the fight against fraud and tax evasion , since this fight is important in the context of the economic crisis that our Member States are experiencing .
Taking up these matters seems to us to be a priority in the light of the economic crisis that the Member States are experiencing and at a time when budgetary rigour places an increasingly heavy burden on the smallest States .
According to some estimates , tax fraud amounts to EUR 200 billion , or 2 % of GDP , and double the sums allotted by the European Union to the so-called European Economic Recovery Plan .
Furthermore , the European Parliament 's report introduces the need to improve data protection , an important principle since we are talking here about information and data exchange .
Like the report , we shall press the Commission and the Council to explain to the European Parliament how its position has been taken into account and what progress has been made with regard to cooperation between the Member States in combating tax fraud and evasion .
The aim of the directive is to improve administrative cooperation in the field of taxation .
Now more than ever , we need to help each other in this field .
The mobility of taxpayers , the number of cross-border transactions and the globalisation of financial instruments have evolved considerably .
It is hard for the Member States to assess the amount of taxes and duties correctly .
This increasing difficulty is having repercussions on the functioning of the tax systems and resulting in double taxation , which encourages tax fraud and evasion , while controls remain the responsibility of the national authorities .
This is putting the smooth operation of the internal market at risk .
Automatic exchange of information between the Member States would be mandatory for directors ' fees , dividends , capital gains , royalties and life assurance products not covered by other EU legal instruments relating to the exchange of information and similar measures and the resultant pensions , property ownership and revenue .
In order to improve the exchange of information between the various national authorities , it is also proposed to establish monitoring of cases in which the Member States have refused to provide information or to carry out an administrative enquiry .
All these measures help to combat tax fraud , which is why I voted in favour of this legislative resolution .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is curious that the European Commission acknowledges that ' the free movement provisions of the EU Treaty make it difficult for Member States to ask for guarantees for the payment of taxes due on their territory ' .
Could we say , then , that instead of adopting rule after rule which later prove to be ' insufficient ' , and bearing in mind the ' poor results obtained so far ' , why not simply go to the root of the problem by changing the rules that relate to freedom of movement ?
However , we have doubts about the implementation of the proposal which states : ' The scope of the mutual recovery assistance should be extended to other taxes and duties than those already covered now , as the non-payment of any kind of tax or duty affects the proper functioning of the internal market .
The scope should also be extended to compulsory social security contributions ' .
We disagree that the officials of a Member State should be given the authority to act within the territory of other Member States , so we believe that Parliament 's proposal to limit implementation to cases where there is agreement between the Member States is at least the correct approach .
in writing . - The increased mobility of both persons and capital lies at the heart of the EU and has been a great success .
However , it carries with it certain downsides and these include the increased possibilities for fraudsters to avoid paying taxes and duties .
It is apparent that the existing systems of mutual assistance has proved insufficient and today 's vote should bring about much-needed improvements in this area .
As far as the recovery of claims relating to taxes and duties is concerned , the situation in the European Union is not exactly welcome .
The statistics show us that the overall recovery rate is just 5 % .
In order to improve the effectiveness of claim recovery activities , closer cooperation is required at Member State level .
With this in mind , I voted for the proposal on mutual assistance in this area .
I hope that we will actually manage to eliminate the deficiencies of existing measures which have resulted in a lack of transparency and coordination between states and in an unjustified delay in the recovery process .
The new directive is proposing to define more clearly the norms based on which the competent authorities in Member States provide assistance , along with the rights and obligations of the parties involved .
Standard instruments will be drawn up to facilitate enforcement or precautionary measures in order to avoid the problems linked to recognising and translating instruments issued by other authorities .
The Commission will support good cooperation between Member States and will constantly monitor any complaints received in connection with the exchange of information or assistance .
in writing . - ( PT ) The increasing number of requests from Member States for assistance in the recovery of claims relating to certain taxes , along with the lack of efficiency in collecting them , at only 5 % , shows that there needs to be an amendment to Council Directive 1976 / 308 / EEC .
We need this resolution if we are to tackle the problems of slowness , disparity , lack of coordination and transparency .
The current system for the recovery of claims relating to taxes , duties and other measures is characterised by slowness , disparity and a lack of coordination and transparency .
We therefore need to take action at a Community level , to reinforce and improve recovery assistance between Member States .
To this end , the proposal offers uniform instruments permitting enforcement or precautionary measures in order to avoid problems of recognition and translation of instruments emanating from other Member States , and a standard form for the notification of documents relating to the claims on the territory of another Member State .
The introduction of a uniform standard form for notification of instruments and decisions relating to the claim will resolve the problems of recognition and translation of instruments emanating from another Member State .
This instrument will be essential for the development of trade within the Community and for strengthening the internal market .
The Council Directive aims to fundamentally revise the functioning of mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes , duties and other measures .
National provisions relating to recovery only apply within the territory of each Member State .
The administrative authorities are unable to recover taxes and duties themselves outside their own Member State .
At the same time , the mobility of people and capital is increasing , and fraudsters take advantage of the territorial limitation of the competences of the national authorities to organise their insolvency in countries in which they have tax debts .
The first provisions concerning mutual assistance for recovery were established in Directive 76 / 308 / EEC ( consolidated in Directive 2008 / 55 / EC ) on mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to certain levies , duties , taxes and other measures .
However , this instrument proved to be inadequate in terms of responding to changes in the internal market over the last 30 years .
It is therefore necessary to repeal the current directive and make provision for an improved system of assistance for recovery within the internal market that will guarantee fast , effective and uniform procedures throughout the European Union .
That is why I voted in favour of this resolution .
in writing . - UKIP fully supports the relief efforts and is horrified at the loss of life and those affected by the disaster , but we cannot support legitimising the EU in spending hundreds of millions of taxpayers ' money , along with its militaristic and diplomatic ambition to circumvent democratic and accountable nation states intervening in the crisis .
Of course , we encourage government and individuals to give relief and money to help those affected and rebuild the country .
However , this must be done transparently with the public and not by secretive , unelected bureaucrats with international ambitions of grandeur .
I voted in favour of this resolution and in favour of the financial aid the European Union will provide for long-term support , which will be managed in partnership with local authorities and the people of Haiti .
This money must be used to address the fundamental reasons for poverty in Haiti , to help the country strengthen its democratic structure and to build a sustainable economy .
Conditions in Haiti have improved recently , thank God , and humanitarian aid is being distributed effectively and in order of priority ; this is thanks to the cooperation and the coordination of international organisations , non-governmental organisations and the people of Haiti who have all been working together .
The European Union , like the entire international community , is facing an important test of solidarity with regard to the situation in Haiti .
The forthcoming EU summit must present a decisive , well-coordinated solution , with a single voice , to meet the needs for reconstruction and aid which Haiti is experiencing as a consequence of one of the greatest natural disasters in modern history .
The call from the European Parliament and request submitted to the European Commission to come up with a specific proposal to set up a Civil Protection Force which can respond quickly in the event of a natural disaster anywhere in the world must be answered .
The ' Haiti Lesson ' must not be forgotten and the European Union must show , in this case , not only that it knows what solidarity means , but also that it is an adaptable and flexible institution which is learning from the current painful events .
The European Union has all the data and instruments for getting involved in the long-term reconstruction of Haiti .
Coordination is required with the United States and Canada so that the whole international community can speak with a single voice .
The Haitian people , sorely tried by history and nature , must receive from the international community the necessary instruments to learn to help themselves .
I welcome the commitment that the EU has made to provide aid to the people of Haiti following the earthquake that hit the country in January .
Before the earthquake , more than 70 % of people in Haiti were living below the poverty line , and the country 's foreign debt amounted to USD 890 million .
The international community now has a duty to contribute to drawing up a strategy of reconstruction for the country which will be sustainable in the short , medium and long terms .
This is a critical time in the coordination of reconstruction efforts between international aid donors , the Haitian authorities and civil society , and I welcome the recent decision by the G7 to write off Haiti 's debts , including debts to multilateral credit institutions .
It is vital that we help this country to recover from the earthquake , but the international community must also take advantage of this opportunity to help to resolve the economic , social and political inequalities within Haiti .
in writing . - ( PT ) The earthquake which struck the island of Haiti on 12 January 2010 , killing thousands of people and causing terrible devastation and chaos , calls for our firm solidarity with the people of Haiti .
I had the pleasure and honour of contributing to the drafting of this resolution by Parliament .
First and foremost , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the professionals whose generous and prompt work , through the Mobile Intervention Centre , helped to save lives and alleviate the urgent needs on the ground for health care , water , hygiene , clothing , etc .
This proved that the investment demanded by Parliament over the years can have a practical and positive impact .
On the other hand , as after the Asian tsunami , we need to draw lessons from what happened .
Following the Barnier report in 2006 , the European Commission should submit legislative measures as soon as possible for the creation of a single , independent and permanent EU Civil Protection Force capable of carrying out rescue missions and ensuring an integrated approach to aid , rehabilitation and development .
I would also like to thank the Member States , NGOs and civil society for all the humanitarian aid that they have provided .
The earthquake which devastated Haiti on 12 January , leaving 200 000 dead and approximately 250 000 injured , has prompted the European Union Member States and the entire international community to engage in a tangible and shared commitment to reconstruct the country .
Such coordination has shown itself to be effective in the short term , and has seen an initial pledging of considerable sums by the European Commission and by individual Member States .
I believe it is essential to direct this joint effort so that the reconstruction is sustainable in the medium and long term , and so that the population of Haiti is the main beneficiary of this commitment .
I add my voice to the appeal by international humanitarian organisations to prevent the enormous number of children orphaned as a result of the earthquake becoming victims of human traffickers .
I therefore believe that we need a plan to supervise such an emergency , ensuring that the primary needs of the weakest groups in the community take first place amongst the priorities of Europe and the United States .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the earthquake in Haiti , which caused 200 000 deaths and 250 000 casualties .
I would like to express my heartfelt condolences and solidarity with the people of Haiti and other nations , the staff of international organisations , including the UN and the European Commission , and the families of the victims of this tragedy .
I would like to emphasise the hard work of some EU Member States through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism , coordinated by the Monitoring and Information Centre .
I also welcome the proposal to undertake an assessment of the European response to the humanitarian crisis in Haiti , so that the European Commission can present proposals for improving the capability of the EU to respond rapidly to future disasters .
in writing . - ( PT ) 12 January 2010 will go down in Haitian history as one of the most terrible days that the country has ever experienced .
A people and a country already plagued by poverty and underdevelopment were suddenly devastated by a merciless and murderous natural disaster of massive proportions .
The tens of thousands of fatalities recorded in statistics that were already outdated by the time they were issued and the anguish and despair in the eyes of those who have lost everything more than justified the mobilisation of the international community and civil society throughout the world , and I must commend these efforts .
Despite this surge of solidarity that only sheds a good light on those who have been playing a part , this aid will need to be maintained even when the focus of global attention shifts to another country .
In spite of international efforts , the reconstruction of the country can only take place if those in charge and the citizens themselves are capable of taking the lead in the process and assuming their respective responsibilities .
in writing . - ( PT ) The calamity that hit Haiti , following a violent earthquake on 12 January this year , presented a new challenge to solidarity between people and nations .
By virtue of its history and cultural identity , not to mention its importance in the global economy , the European Union must act as an example and encourage aid for the Haitians and the reconstruction of one of the poorest countries on earth .
We must clear the way for financial and logistical tools that will minimise the suffering of those affected by the tragedy , as a matter of urgency , and ensure the rapid restoration of basic living conditions for the people .
However , the conditions for the promotion of sustainable development within the country must already have been assessed and ensured so that we can counter the situation of extreme poverty which affects a huge number of people within the country .
Beyond incentives for profitable farming , industrialisation and the sustainable cycle of development for the marketing of products , I believe that support for the implementation of a robust strategy for environmental improvement is crucial , since Haiti is a blatant and dramatic example of the devastating impact that climate change can have on humanity .
I therefore voted in favour .
in writing . - ( PT ) In the face of the dramatic scenes of complete destruction in Haiti , we need prompt , effective and genuine solidarity that will help to mitigate the suffering of the Haitian people .
There also needs to be rejection and condemnation of any attempt to exploit the tragedy of the Haitian people by military occupation of their country , along with the unequivocal defence of Haiti 's sovereignty and independence - something that is missing from the document in question .
It is regrettable that the resolution has come much later than the statements by certain Heads of State and UN officials about the deployment of tens of thousands of US troops in the country .
Haiti and its people need fire-fighters , doctors , hospitals and basic necessities .
The response of the EU on welcoming the resolution was ' the Council 's decision to send 350 military police officers ' .
It is worth recalling the rapid assistance provided to Haiti by countries such as Cuba , which promptly sent 400 doctors , saving lives and preventing epidemics , building medical infrastructure and distributing basic necessities , or Venezuela , which offered debt relief and supplied fuel .
in writing . - ( PT ) We believe that this is a time for giving all the humanitarian aid , cooperation and support for reconstruction that the people of Haiti deserve , given their dignity and courage .
Unfortunately , too much time was wasted on protection , and not everything has gone smoothly .
We have already denounced the way in which certain parties , particularly the US , have been more concerned with bolstering their military presence within the country with their troops than with the people of Haiti .
We regret that the resolution passed does not go far enough in defending Haiti and its people .
It would have been a good start to denounce anyone or any country that seeks to profit from this catastrophe by returning to neocolonialism .
Such an attitude seems to be behind the deployment of thousands of armed North American troops , despite the fact that the majority of the population live in poverty and remain victims of exploitation by multinational companies and the interference of external bodies , particularly the United States .
We will continue to express our sincere solidarity with the people of Haiti .
I supported this resolution in order to highlight the major commitment to solidarity that the European Union needs to deploy in order to come to the aid of this country , which was devastated nearly a month ago .
Following the emergency , long-term assistance needs to be developed , especially for the most vulnerable persons and for the government structures , which have no alternative today but to transfer their authority to the US forces .
Finally , Europe needs to learn lessons from such incidents , so that it can respond more quickly and efficiently in future and provide optimum humanitarian aid for the people who need it most .
in writing . - Labour MEPs would like to express our deepest sympathy for all those in Haiti who have had their lives shattered by this catastrophic earthquake and we fully support international relief efforts .
We have supported this resolution with the clear aim of sending the message that the European Parliament and Labour MEPs stand side-by-side with the people of Haiti in the long-term work of rebuilding the infrastructure , communities and lives which have been torn apart .
We were particularly pleased in this resolution to highlight the decision of Britain and the other G7 countries to cancel their claims on Haiti 's international debt and to call on other nations to follow .
We do not however agree with paragraph 24 of the resolution as we believe that any proposal for improvement of EU disaster response should be made with full consultation and deliberation , and not simply in the context and immediate aftermath of one humanitarian tragedy , however appalling .
In particular , the paragraph prejudices the current voluntary arrangements for EU Member States , and we should not underplay national response capacities , particularly when the UK 's own standing response team rolled into action within one hour of the earthquake in Haiti .
in writing . - In recent weeks , we have all seen horrific footage of the situation which has hit the people of Haiti .
As is always the case in large natural disasters , the attention span of the press and media is short and the headlines soon move on elsewhere .
It would not be acceptable for political leaders to move on so quickly and it is correct that this parliament seeks to keep the disaster top of the agenda .
This resolution notes the good work done thus far both by EU institutions and bodies within Member States and it is to be hoped that the EU High Representative takes full note of the specific issues Parliament has highlighted today .
in writing . - According to the Haitian authorities , the total loss of life after the earthquake exceeds 230 000 persons .
This makes the catastrophe even bigger than the 2004 Asian tsunami .
After emergency aid , our focus should gradually turn to the long-term development of Haiti .
Being one of the poorest countries in the world , Haiti was totally unprepared to confront a catastrophe of this magnitude .
I warmly welcome the recent debt-relief pledges to Haiti and urge all the donor countries to help with long-term and sustainable reconstruction .
Finally , some colleagues have questioned Baroness Ashton 's decision not to visit Haiti immediately after the earthquake .
Their criticism is right if her visit would have resulted in something useful in helping the Haitians .
If , however , that would have just been a publicity stunt to show that the EU is present , her decision was absolutely right .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution on Haiti .
The human distress caused by the Haiti earthquake is on a massive scale : hundreds of thousands are dead or injured , and Port-au-Prince is almost completely destroyed .
The number of those in need of outside assistance is estimated at two to three million .
While the sympathies of Europeans are with the relatives of the victims , there is a need to act .
The largescale and prompt commitments in the form of assistance from the EU are obviously vital .
The tardy reaction on the part of the new foreign affairs administration has provoked amazement , with good reason .
It is obvious that the EU High Representative must be responsible in future for ensuring that the Union reacts faster and with greater coordination .
Haiti will need help for a long time .
Its wounds need tending and its homes need building one by one .
The philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein proposed the idea that no distress can be greater than what a single person can suffer .
I imagine that he meant something like this : there is no greater unit of consciousness in the world than the consciousness of a single individual .
You cannot tot up pain .
There is no aggregate consciousness that would suffer more distress than a single one .
The distress of the masses is always the distress of the single person .
Therein also lies hope .
Mother Teresa is reported to have said that if she had ever considered the masses , she would not have achieved anything .
If I succeed in helping one person , I will be helping the greatest possible unit : one person 's entire world .
I think that the EU needs to promote better coordination and a higher profile in supporting the Haitian state .
At the moment , the biggest challenge is posed by logistical bottlenecks ( restricted capacity for landing and unloading goods at Port-au-Prince airport ) , as well as the quest for a solution to help those who are still homeless , especially in light of the rainy season which is imminent .
We must think about the future and the ways in which we can act more quickly and efficiently in such situations .
I supported this resolution because it asks the Commissioner for International Cooperation , Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response to ensure that the European Union plays a leading role in crisis situations , coordinating more efficiently the European Union 's response to future crises , based on the responsibilities created under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Furthermore , it is of paramount importance that the European executive tables before Parliament as soon as possible proposals for setting up a European civil protection force , based on the EU Civil Protection Mechanism .
This will enable the European Union to gather the resources required to supply emergency humanitarian aid within 24 hours of a disaster occurring .
in writing . - The devastating earthquake in Haiti last month caused catastrophic damage , and the global relief effort will need to be long-term and committed .
I am pleased that the EU has responded swiftly with EUR 196 million so far in assistance .
I support the resolution calling for effective and coordinated humanitarian efforts from the EU , to ensure Haiti receives long-term assistance and reconstruction .
in writing . - ( PT ) Besides causing many fatalities , the earthquake that struck Haiti on 12 January 2010 continues to affect the daily lives of about 3 million people who are in critical need of humanitarian aid .
The role of the EU 's foreign policy has been clarified , and the values that the EU is trying to promote are aimed at , amongst other things , contributing to world peace and security , and the protection of human rights .
Thus , we should welcome all efforts undertaken by Member States in order to help the country to emerge from this catastrophe as a fully functioning democracy , with an economy that can support its population .
We should also bear in mind that the Haitian people must always be an integral part of the whole reconstruction process , along with their government .
I have abstained from voting on Resolution regarding Haiti because I believe it is urgent for civilian professionals such as doctors , architects and fire-fighters to be sent to the region instead of troops .
Haiti will only be able to achieve the political , economic and social stability it needs if its country 's freedom is protected from foreign interference .
Financial institutions such as the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund and Haiti 's social partners should cancel Haiti 's foreign debt immediately .
Furthermore , I support the measures adopted by the countries of the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas ( financial aid through the Humanitarian Fund , energy support and promotion of farming and production initiatives ) which are proof of the brotherly solidarity that exists between the different countries .
By abstaining , I have tried to highlight that the reconstruction of Haiti cannot be undertaken through the militarisation of aid but rather by putting an end to the mechanisms that have caused the underlying poverty in Haiti , such as external debt , which I am requesting be cancelled .
Even before the earthquake , Haiti was a poor country without guaranteed local food supplies for more than two million people and with hundreds of thousands of orphans on the streets or in homes .
For the people of Haiti it is , of course , important that the infrastructure and the institutions of the state are rebuilt in the long term .
However , we must not forget that the distribution of aid is not going smoothly and that many women and children are in a very vulnerable situation .
We must act cautiously in this case .
The motion for a resolution appears to do justice to the majority of problems and for this reason , I have voted in favour of it .
The earthquake which hit Haiti in January this year is one of the greatest humanitarian catastrophes of the 21st century .
The scale of the disaster is exacerbated by the fact that the destructive action of the earthquake affected one of the poorest countries in the world .
The tragedy has turned the eyes of the entire world on Haiti .
Humanitarian aid must not stop only at reconstruction of the island , but must involve restructuring of the social relations which operate there , in a spirit of respect for human dignity and social justice .
For this to be possible , it is essential not only to give Haiti non-refundable aid , but also to make sure that the country and its society are given a fresh start .
Therefore , I support the call to cancel Haiti 's international debt .
I also oppose solutions which will bring about an increase in Haiti 's debt as a result of international ' aid ' .
Taking all these factors into account , I decided to support the joint motion for a resolution of the European Parliament on the recent earthquake in Haiti .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the recent earthquake in Haiti .
I particularly agree with the content of paragraphs 4 , 8 and 9 , especially the parts stating that EU priority should be given to assisting with the reconstruction efforts and improving the humanitarian situation , focusing on vulnerable groups , such as women and children , and on providing shelter , medical facilities , logistical assistance and food ; we call on all Member States to be prepared to meet UN requests for further assistance ; we welcome the Commission 's preliminary commitments to EUR 30 million in humanitarian assistance ; we welcome the decision by the G7 countries to cancel their claims on Haiti 's international debt , and we also call upon the International Monetary Fund to provide full relief of the country 's outstanding debt - and we stress that any emergency earthquake assistance must be provided in the form of grants , not debt-incurring loans .



In the event of a natural disaster , humanitarian aid needs to arrive without delay .
In Haiti , only the United States was able to provide effective humanitarian aid without bureaucratic delay .
It is also clear that the fastest and most efficient humanitarian agencies are those which are regularly condemned in resolutions by this illustrious House : the Catholic Church and humanitarian initiatives by Christian organisations .
In this resolution , which I support fully , Parliament calls on the international community to ensure that the Haitian people and their government are the main actors in the reconstruction process , so that they can be masters of their own destiny .
Members are also supporting EU action to re-launch local food production by restoring damaged infrastructures and providing the necessary materials ( seed , fertiliser and tools ) to small farmers , especially for spring sowing , which starts in March and represents 60 % of national food production .
At present , while the international community is investing in establishing earthquake-proof infrastructures , I should like to highlight the fact that religious buildings have also been hit and that international funds should also be allocated to the reconstruction of churches and seminaries .
in writing . - UKIP is gravely concerned with the situation in Iran and calls for governments on both sides to come to a diplomatic , but above all , peaceful solution to the ongoing political and humanitarian breakdown in the country .
The EU must not intervene in this situation as it will only exacerbate the tense situation .
Unaccountable EU bureaucrats , instead of elected politicians leading the negotiations , will end up with a bad outcome for Iran and the rest of the world .
Negotiations should be taken in cooperation with other national governments , not forced upon from above by the EU .
There are many countries wanting to stay neutral , such as Ireland , and the EU representing those countries on this issue seriously undermines their democratically-backed policy .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this document with a great sense of responsibility , hoping that this resolution can bear fruit .
I would like to commend the efforts at unity made by the various political groups in Parliament , which have allowed the home of European democracy to speak with one voice and emphasised the strong pragmatic bent of this resolution , which suggests ways , solutions and specific measures for the EU to deal with the Iranian regime .
In view of this , I would like to highlight the need : a ) to strongly condemn businesses that supply the Iranian authorities with equipment and technology which is aimed at censorship and surveillance , and which should be prohibited for European businesses ; b ) to request , or better , demand , acknowledgement of the absolute necessity of respect for the Vienna Convention and the rules of diplomacy ; c ) to introduce more sanctions for Iranian organisations or officials who are operating abroad and who are responsible for the repression and restriction of freedoms in Iran , along with those linked to the violation of Iran 's international commitments relating to the nuclear issue ; and d ) despite everything , to promote continued and deeper dialogue with Iran , especially with civil society .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the situation in Iran , as I am worried by the continual violations of human rights there , particularly with regard to freedom of association , expression and information , and because I support the democratic wishes of the Iranian people .
in writing . - ( PT ) Two pieces of news have come out of Iran in recent months , neither of which , unfortunately , is encouraging .
Firstly , the advances made in the enrichment of uranium for nuclear purposes and , secondly , the repression of the moderate faction led by Mr Moussavi , which is contesting the results of the recent presidential elections .
These two developments are worrying enough on their own , but together they are a cause for more serious concern .
What can be said about this unstable country where the increasingly radical government is killing , torturing and imprisoning the opponents who are protesting against it in the streets and which , at the same time , is involved in a tenacious programme of uranium enrichment aimed at obtaining nuclear energy ?
For all that the fundamentalist regime of the ayatollahs proclaims that its intentions are good and that it is pursuing nuclear energy for peaceful ends , the international community is not convinced and , justifiably , views Iran as a growing threat .
In addition to denouncing from the very outset the brutal repression that has fallen on Iranian moderates , the European Union and its allies and other international players must fight to strengthen and toughen the sanctions against Tehran and not rule out any concerted effort to tackle this threat .
in writing . - ( PT ) We defend freedom of expression and democracy , and we agree with the need to express our concern with the developments in Iran over recent months , particularly those relating to repression of the masses by the Iranian security forces .
However , the proposed text does not do this in the best way .
In our opinion , our necessary expression of concern with the development of the situation cannot ignore the great threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iran , including the escalation of diplomatic and military involvement led by the US administration , including the concentration of US military forces in the region .
We should not forget that these elements also threaten the rights of the Iranian people and the very forces that are continuing the struggle for democracy , progress and social justice in Iran .
The adopted text does not make any mention of this .
The right to determine the future course of Iran belongs exclusively to the Iranian people and their political and social action .
We would like to express our solidarity with the democratic organisations and the people of Iran who are fighting for social justice and progress in their country .
I supported the resolution condemning Iran 's attitude both from the point of view of its intentions in the nuclear sector and in the attacks on freedom of expression to which its people fall victim on a daily basis .
The recourse to violence taken by the Iranian authorities towards demonstrators is unacceptable , as are the censorship of the press and obstacles to information .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current social upheaval in Iran , the systematic repression of the people and those who oppose the regime , the restrictions on freedom of the press and freedom of expression , the failure to abolish the death penalty and the continued pursuit of a nuclear programme against the international community are reasons for massive concern .
Even more worrying is the news that last month , Iran successfully tested a new long-range missile , thus jeopardising regional and global security .
The recent cancellation of the planned visit by Parliament 's delegation is another clear signal that this country is not willing to cooperate .
This leads us to condemn the policies pursued by the Iranian regime .
There are many countries where democracy and human rights are in a precarious position .
The EU must continue its attempts to change this situation by means of appeals and similar methods .
We should not be surprised by the actions of Iran and its attempts to become a nuclear power .
This is a result , among other things , of misguided US policy .
The situation can only be defused by the use of diplomacy , but the EU must not let itself be taken advantage of by the US in this respect .
The motion for a resolution states that no significant progress has been made and that dialogue is the only solution .
I am in agreement with this .
I would like to express my support for the resolution , whose objective is to state clearly the position of the European Union on respect for fundamental human rights in Iran .
I am outraged , as most of us are , by the way in which the Iranian opposition has been treated .
The sentencing of Mohammed Reza Alizamani and Arash Rahmani to death for political activity is , in my opinion , a contravention of all standards held in the modern world .
I am glad the EU is taking a very clear position on this matter .
At the same time , I would like to express my regret that an equally strong reaction was not expressed when a demonstration organised by the Russian opposition on 31 January 2010 in Moscow and Saint Petersburg was prevented and its organisers arrested , including Oleg Orlov , Chair of Memorial , the organisation which was awarded the Sakharov Prize last year .
I think the reaction of the EU High Representative on this matter should be as dynamic as it was in the case of Iran , and that it should also accord with the firm criticism of the Russian authorities expressed by the President of the European Parliament , Mr Buzek .
It is extremely important for us to reopen the dialogue with Iran .
Therefore , I very much regret the postponement of the EU delegation 's visit to Iran and I hope that it can be rearranged as soon as possible .
There is definitely a lack of respect for human rights and democracy in Iran in its current situation .
However , tightening sanctions against Iran is not the right approach to take .
The opponents of the Iranian Government are also against the imposition of more stringent sanctions , because their main impact would be on the people of the country .
Apart from this , the EU is once again applying double standards .
In the case of important economic partners such as China or India , it is happy to turn a blind eye .
For these reasons , I have abstained .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on Iran , particularly following the recent attacks , including yesterday 's attacks against the Italian and French embassies .
In fact , the European Union must make itself the spokesperson for a clear stance on the regime in Tehran .
The Iranian authorities play a part in stirring up this dangerous climate of intolerance and intimidation towards certain European Union countries .
The attack on the embassies was perpetrated by those who want to clip the wings of democracy and who are against freedom .
I hope that the European institutions will adopt a clear stance condemning what has happened as soon as possible , and that they will decide on diplomatic measures to be undertaken regarding Iran .
in writing . - The ECR supported a strong resolution on Iran .
We are in favour of robust international action to deal with Iran 's growing nuclear capability .
It is most regrettable , therefore , that the opportunity was not taken by the European Parliament to support international calls for additional sanctions .
It should also be clarified that fortunately there are no ' EU embassies ' in Tehran .
There are national embassies .
The Islamic Republic of Iran is unstinting in condemning poor treatment of Muslims throughout the world .
However , the mullahs will not stop persecuting Christians and will not condemn the conditions which are reserved for Christians .
Conversion to Christianity is considered as a form of apostasy and is punished by the death penalty .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament does not have the courage to condemn the situation of the Christian martyrs in Iran .
Pope Jean-Paul II said : ' Persecution includes various types of discrimination against believers and against the whole community of the Church .
Such forms of discrimination are often practised at the same time as is recognised the right to religious liberty and to freedom of conscience , and this in the law of individual countries as well as in declarations of an international nature ...
Today , besides prison , concentration camps , forced labour camps , and expulsion from one 's country , there are other punishments less known but more subtle : not violent death but a kind of civil death , not only isolation in prisons or in camps , but social discrimination or permanent restriction of personal liberty . '
If Parliament wants to take its call for respect for human rights seriously , it should take a clearer stand in favour of Christians persecuted in Iran .
in writing . - ( PT ) Yemen is threatening to become the new Afghanistan : al-Qaeda 's favourite training camp and a hotbed for the spread of fundamentalists and terrorists throughout the Islamic world .
The situation of social , political and economic degradation , if not complete breakdown , which is marked by civil war and the absence of any government that might effectively control its whole territory , have turned the country into a place without the law or order that might halt the emergence and growth of these outbreaks of violence and radicalism .
This means that there needs to be more focus and firmness from the international community in dealing with the Yemen issue , and that aid given to this country should be carefully aimed at the effective improvement of living conditions for its people .
in writing . - ( PT ) The overall situation in Yemen is of serious concern worldwide , and in the light of the recent terrorist threats , the EU must play an increasingly active role in preventing Yemen from becoming another failed state within the international community .
in writing . - ( DE ) The spotlight of the fight against terrorism has fallen on Yemen , which is a hotbed of Islamic extremists .
Combating poverty and increasing military aid will not make Yemen 's problems disappear .
The solution is to provide more development aid in order to pull the rug from under the feet of some of the jihadist recruits .
Ultimately , the EU must not allow itself to be forced into the role of paymaster for the US .
Instead , it must take the position of an impartial broker , in order to bring about dialogue and pave the way for a long-term political solution .
This motion for a resolution takes a similar approach , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
in writing . - Whilst I agree with the thrust of , and was involved in the drafting of , this resolution on the current situation in Yemen , I cannot agree with the reference it makes to the coordinating role that the future EU External Action Service will play with regard to Yemen .
I asked to have references to the EAS removed during the drafting stage , but other political groups refused .
The EAS is a direct product of the Treaty of Lisbon , a treaty I do not approve of and one which has no democratic legitimacy .
The EAS is to have a network of ' EU embassies ' and , under the watchful eye of the new EU High Representative / Vice-President of the Commission , is to be responsible for creating and implementing EU military and foreign policy .
I have been a long-time opponent of the EU having a role in these two policy fields , which I sincerely believe must remain the sole prerogative of the sovereign Member States .
in writing . - UKIP is totally opposed to people-trafficking as it is a modern day version of slavery .
We call for the highest penalties in the land for those criminals perpetrating such a crime and for serious measures to wipe out such activity .
However , we cannot support the EU using people-trafficking as a pretext to harmonise immigration and border policies over the heads of elected governments .
It must be up to electorates through the ballot box , and elected politicians , to decide national policy on these matters , not for the EU to make yet another policy grab that will take away democratic accountability .
If there were not open borders within the EU , and each country had its own immigration policy , serious organised crime and people-trafficking would be much easier to stamp out .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because we must ensure that both practical and moral priority be given to tackling the issue of human trafficking and the way in which this trafficking is used as a resource in the labour market .
Under the Lisbon Treaty , the European Union has both the power and the opportunity to strengthen European policy in relation to human trafficking .
As I said during the debate on this resolution , this issue must be given an important place on the agenda .
As a result of its important role in global trade matters and its commitment to protecting human rights , the European Union has a responsibility to combat human trafficking , and child labour in particular .
in writing . - Trafficking in human beings is one of the most horrific and serious crimes .
The fight cannot be effective without a coherent policy approach focusing on prevention , protection of victims and effective sanctions for traffickers .
Free movement within the EU has brought substantial benefits to our citizens but , at the same time , has opened many ways for traffickers .
Tens of thousands of young women and children from new Member States become victims of human trafficking every year .
The European Parliament will have a crucial role to play in combating trafficking in human beings .
It will be for us to ensure that prevention , protection and support for victims are put high on the political agenda .
We must demand that Member States fully implement current EU policies and other instruments on trafficking in human beings and ensure that tougher penalties and sanctions are put into place .
I voted for this resolution because the European Union must combat illegal immigration and human trafficking .
With growing unemployment , there will be an increase in the number of people who may become victims of human trafficking or may be exploited for forced labour .
Above all , people who have lost their jobs in their own country , who have lost hope for a better life , will seek success elsewhere .
Such a situation can be exploited by criminal gangs .
The main area of trafficking involving children , in particular , girls and women , has not changed for many years .
Sexual exploitation in conditions akin to slavery is particularly prevalent in Eastern Europe , which is like a transit route for trafficking human beings to the west .
We must prepare a strategy of measures to combat trafficking in human beings , in which most attention is devoted to fighting human trafficking , to prevention and to the protection of victims and penalties .
All Member States must take severe measures to fight against human trafficking , ensuring the coordination of national legislation .
We must strive for closer cooperation among all the interested parties on the question of human trafficking .
in writing . - ( PT ) This modern form of slavery has seen an alarming increase in recent years , and has become organised crime 's third most lucrative activity .
In 2009 , the UN estimated that there were 270 000 victims and Europol recorded no decrease in the trafficking of women for sexual exploitation , noting an increase in the number trafficked for forced labour .
This is unacceptable , and legal loopholes must not be allowed to facilitate it .
We need a rapid , global , comprehensive and coordinated response , whether it be legislative or operational .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , I urge the Commission to present a new proposal as soon as possible , making the creation of a coherent European policy on effectively fighting the trafficking in human beings one of its main priorities .
This proposal should cover all aspects of the issue , including questions relating to countries of origin , transit and destination , people who recruit , transport and exploit and other middlemen , customers and beneficiaries .
At the same time , we must ensure that there is adequate protection for victims and witnesses through immediate assistance .
Efforts must also be made to make the most of instruments that , unfortunately , continue to be underused in this field by bodies including Europol , Eurojust and Frontex .
I firmly believe in and support the setting up of a permanent platform at European Union level , which will guarantee that human trafficking policies cover aspects linked to both social matters and social integration , as well as the adoption of suitable and effective programmes to support the social reintegration of victims , including measures relating to the labour market and social insurance system .
We feel that the original wording of paragraphs 13 and 15 regarding the distinction between victims of human trafficking and irregular immigrants and concerning residence permits for people who have been exposed to trafficking is preferable , but we are voting in favour of the amendments to these paragraphs in order to achieve a compromise .
As a result of this compromise , victims of human trafficking will be granted temporary residence permits and the border-control agencies will become more aware of the issues of human trafficking .
This is a first step .
We prefer to see the resolution being adopted now and will continue to work towards victims of human trafficking being granted permanent residency .
I voted for the European Parliament resolution on preventing trafficking in human beings as I believe that it is extremely important to step up the battle against human trafficking , which has assumed alarming proportions and constitutes a serious violation of fundamental human rights .
The draft directive which is due to be tabled shortly before Parliament for consideration must stipulate tough penalty measures at European level against any person involved in this kind of trafficking .
An amendment needs to be made to the Member States ' legislation with regard to harmonising sanctions in order to ensure that the maximum penalties are imposed on traffickers , as they currently vary considerably from one state to another .
From this perspective , a cross-border approach is also required to tackle this scourge by stepping up cooperation with countries of origin and transit , in some of which human traffickers have only negligible fines imposed on them .
At the same time , protection and assistance must be provided to victims of human trafficking , primarily women and children , who , according to the data , account for approximately 80 % of all victims .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the prevention of trafficking in human beings by supporting the need for the Commission and the Council to ensure that the fight against this scourge will continue to have a prominent place among their priorities , even in times of economic and financial crisis .
Member States that have not yet done so should fully implement all the EU policies on trafficking in human beings at national level and ratify other legal instruments in this field as soon as possible in order to ensure greater protection and assistance for victims of trafficking .
in writing . - ( PT ) The trafficking of human beings today is , for its victims , an inhumane present-day form of slavery .
For its perpetrators , criminal organisations involved in prostitution and sexual exploitation , illegal adoption , forced labour , illegal immigration and illegal trafficking of organs , it is an extremely lucrative activity .
Sadly , this terrible reality also takes place within the European Union .
I therefore urge the European Commission to take strict and robust measures to combat trafficking in people .
There must be a three-pronged approach : ( i ) sufficient protection for the victims , who are mostly women and children , safeguarding their most fundamental rights , such as life , freedom , physical and moral integrity and sexual self-determination ; ( ii ) preventative measures in the investigation and dismantling of networks that promote and profit from human trafficking ; and , finally , ( iii ) severe punishment for trafficking and exploiting human beings for whatever nefarious purposes , and penalties commensurate with the crimes committed .
in writing . - ( PT ) As stated in the adopted resolution , urgent measures need to be taken ' against trafficking in human beings on the basis of a holistic approach centred on human rights and focusing on combating trafficking , prevention and protection of victims ' .
' To adopt a victim-focused approach , meaning that all potential categories of victim must be identified , targeted and protected , with special attention being given to children and other at-risk groups . '
We regret , however , that the amendments that we put forward for this resolution have been rejected , although they focused on the causes behind trafficking in human beings and ways of combating it , particularly the following :
Combating unemployment , marginalisation and poverty as fundamental causes of trafficking in human beings , emphasising the urgent need for a change in economic and social policy in order to prioritise the strengthening of social and employment rights , jobs with rights , good public services and economic and social progress .
Strengthening of cooperation and solidarity with the migrants ' countries of origin , especially by contributing to the development of their economy , greater access to knowledge , cancellation of their debt and the taxation of financial transactions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have voted against this resolution on trafficking in human beings , even though it is one of the most despicable crimes there is .
We have done so , firstly , because you are exploiting it politically in order to further increase the powers of the Europe of Brussels , of its institutions and of its numerous agencies , which nonetheless continue to demonstrate their inefficiency .
We have done so , secondly , and above all , because you are using the attention that would normally be paid to the victims in order to create a new suction pump effect where immigration is concerned : social and legal assistance , an automatic residence card , access to the job market , simplified access to family reunification and social welfare .
All this would be granted irrespective of whether the victim cooperates with the authorities to help them catch the traffickers and dismantle the networks .
Thus , all any illegal immigrant will have to do to get into Europe is to say that he is the victim of a network that is extorting thousands of euros from him .
Consequently , whatever you may think about it , illegal immigrants will claim this status and this welfare , and you will grant these to them !
You are irresponsible !
I voted in favour of the resolution on the prevention of trafficking in human beings tabled by the left-wing and centre groups in the European Parliament , because we need to affirm loudly and clearly that the victims of trafficking , most of whom are women and children , should benefit from unconditional protection and assistance .
These victims should have a priority right to free legal aid , penalties against traffickers should be more severe and ways should be found of discouraging the demand for services by clients .
This is a form of unacceptable violence against women , and joint action should be taken to prevent such trafficking , to protect the victims of trafficking and to prosecute the perpetrators of such violence .
in writing . - Whilst many people within the EU live reasonably comfortable lives , the reality is that across the EU , and including within the very richest areas , numerous people are living in slavery .
The very cross border nature of human trafficking means that this is an issue where the EU 's institutions have a key role to play and I therefore welcome today 's resolution .
Human trafficking is one of the gravest violations of human rights , and it can take a number of forms , from sexual exploitation and forced work through the organ trade , to domestic enslavement , with the victims primarily being women and children .
The current legal framework within the Union for combating human trafficking is insufficient , so it is essential that the European Union , drawing upon the mandate provided by the Treaty of Lisbon , undertake much more vigorous action against this phenomenon , with particular regard for the protection of , and assistance to , groups at risk , especially children .
In this sense , the initiative to establish an EU Anti-Trafficking Coordinator is welcome , and the fact that the motion calls for Member States to impose deterrent sentences reflecting the severity of the crime is also positive .
As a very important development , the motion for a resolution stipulates that the victim 's consent to exploitation is irrelevant in terms of a prosecution , and that assistance is to be provided to the victim irrespective of his or her willingness to take part in the procedure .
It is also important to involve civil society as much as possible in institutional action to eliminate human trafficking , and to initiate information and awareness campaigns for the groups most at risk .
Hopefully , Member States will soon implement this integrated approach covering prevention , sanctions and victim protection in their own legislation , and by ratifying the appropriate legal instruments , they will take a major step towards the elimination of modern-age slavery .
Mr President , I endorsed adoption of the resolution on human trafficking .
Human trafficking is one of the worst wrongs which people can inflict on others .
It is horrifying how common this terrible phenomenon is .
I cannot find any justification , or any mitigating circumstances , for those who , in this way , trample underfoot all those values which are so important to us .
Human trafficking is a negation of liberty , dignity and equality .
I hope the European Parliament will contribute to the restriction and , in the future , complete elimination of human trafficking .
in writing . - The ECR Group are united in the view that the trade in human beings is intolerable and should be stopped .
However , we have grave reservations about the adequacy of this resolution in tackling the root causes that lead to human trafficking and hence we have chosen to vote against .
The ECR Group feel that this resolution takes a ' victim-centred approach ' which prescribes how Member States should look after victims once they have been trafficked , thus assuming that the incidence of human trafficking is inevitable .
The ECR Group have , however , along with the EPP , signed a resolution calling for enhanced cooperation between Member States , police and border control agencies where personal data can be safeguarded and where the care of a victim can be decided by individual Member States .
All forms of slavery , ' modern ' or otherwise , are utterly reprehensible .
This resolution therefore deserves credit for trying to protect victims of violence from the dehumanised appetites for profit and from the social and psychological misery they create .
Still , it is regrettable that it confines itself to dealing with the victims of criminal networks in the underground economy , because trafficking in human beings also has its legal counterpart , which is no less despicable .
Neoliberalism , with its obsession with profit , its continual pitting of workers against one another , and its relocations also inflicts both symbolic and physical violence on citizens .
It forces them to migrate against their will and plunges them into such difficulties that work-related suicides are on the increase .
To subjugate citizens in this way , to make them mere balancing items in an inefficient , unhealthy system , tools used to serve the interests of the financial elites , without showing any consideration for , and by endangering , their lives , what is that if not the equivalent of the ownership of human beings that is slavery ?
While crime must indeed be combated , it is just as necessary to combat institutionalised wrongdoing and to make the European Union a union for the emancipation of citizens .
in writing . - ( PT ) Trafficking in people violates the most basic human rights and is a form of slavery based on sexual and labour exploitation .
International estimates state that trafficking in people is the third most lucrative illegal trade .
Now that the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , European Union action on judicial and police cooperation has clearly been strengthened .
The fight against trafficking in human beings must be one of the main aims of the European Union and Parliament 's role as colegislator means that it will have to play a central role in this .
The fight against trafficking in human beings should therefore continue be one of the EU 's top priorities , even in times of economic and financial crisis .
Human trafficking is one of the greatest plagues of the beginning of this century .
Those who call it a modern form of slavery cannot be accused of exaggeration .
It is an activity which is exceptionally profitable , and is controlled by dangerous , organised criminal gangs .
I fully endorse the motion for a resolution on preventing trafficking in human beings , which was submitted by a broad coalition of the European Parliament 's political groups .
It is my opinion that the European Commission is obliged to develop a plan of action to eliminate human trafficking effectively .
At the same time , I fully support the appeal of the authors of the resolution on the appointment of an EU anti-trafficking coordinator under the Commissioner for Justice , Fundamental Rights and Citizenship .
I hope this will provide a new stimulus to intensify action against human trafficking .
Human trafficking is a growing market , comparable nowadays to drug or arms trafficking , and is a phenomenon which has spread all over the world , but is more acute in underdeveloped countries .
According to the report from the UN Working group , victims of trafficking come from different social backgrounds , from the most well-off to the poorest , from the best-educated to totally illiterate , from an early age to older women .
We need to coordinate information better in order to combat this growing phenomenon more effectively .
In this respect , it would be useful if Eurojust , Europol and Frontex could publish a joint report every year on human trafficking .
If the European Union wants to take the lead on respecting human rights , it should be more actively involved in cooperating with third countries in order to help put a stop to this phenomenon .
Furthermore , there is also a need for better funding for the programmes aimed at combating human trafficking and for more effective coordination between the institutions in Member States involved in the fight against trafficking in human beings .
Human trafficking is the most flagrant form of human rights violation .
The number of victims of this modern form of slavery rises from year to year .
The detection rate for this type of crime is very low .
Therefore , I endorse the resolution of the European Parliament on preventing trafficking in human beings .
Human trafficking must be fought using all possible means , beginning with a thorough and comprehensive information campaign to show the scale of the phenomenon and make society sensitive to the issue .
Giving incidental , individual items of information about cases of human trafficking which have been uncovered is not sufficient .
Every time , it is also essential to give the addresses of institutions involved in the fight against this practice .
A report presented in January 2010 by the Legal Aid Centre and the La Strada Foundation entitled ' Preventing Trafficking in Women from Central and Eastern Europe .
Information - Prevention - Identification - Intervention ' points out that , in Poland , procedures to guarantee the victims of human trafficking their rights are not being applied .
One of the biggest problems is the protracted work on adding a modern definition of human trafficking to the Penal Code .
In 2005 , the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings was signed in Warsaw .
It took lawyers as long as three years to ratify it .
Today , we still do not have a binding definition of human trafficking , which hinders preparatory and judicial proceedings , and so hinders the observance of human rights in Poland .
My vote in favour should not , however , be seen as support for the amendments in the resolution which involve the transfer of more power from the Member States to the EU , such as :
allowing the EU to set tougher sanctions in this area ,
references to the Treaty of Lisbon strengthening EU action in criminal matters ,
and the establishment of a superordinate legislative framework in this area .
I voted in favour of resolution , Trafficking in human beings , because it concerns a very important matter and points out a long list of things that need to be done in the fight against human trafficking .
However , my support for the resolution is not to be seen as support for the proposals in the resolution that involve more power being transferred from the Member States to the EU , such as allowing the EU to set tougher sanctions in this area , the reference to the Treaty of Lisbon strengthening EU action in criminal matters and the establishment of superordinate legislation in this area .
I voted in favour of the resolution because I personally am involved in the fight against trafficking in human beings in Slovakia .
It was I who launched the campaign ' Do you know where your child is now ? '
Also , the committee of women adopted an amendment during the debate on the budgetary procedure to launch a multiannual media campaign entitled ' Do you know where your child is now ' , in close cooperation with civil society organisations , in order to increase awareness in terms of parental responsibility , improve protection for children against all forms of violence and fight trafficking in children more effectively .
This new resolution , which I welcome with all my heart , is broken down along five major lines : general , information gathering , prevention , prosecution and protection , support and assistance for victims .
The Commission is called upon to take initiatives , especially on information and prevention , in order to identify the root causes of trafficking and the factors in countries of origin and destination that facilitate trafficking in human beings .
I am relying on parents being made aware of their serious parental responsibility towards their children , in order to prevent children and adolescents from falling victim to trafficking in human beings .
in writing . - UKIP believes that environmental protection is important .
Whilst we dispute the scientific premise the Copenhagen talks were based on , we have no objection to measures taken at nation state level to protect the environment .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the EU needs to create a new development paradigm in order to tackle climate change .
The next revised version of the budget must provide sufficient resources for measures that can meet this important challenge .
We cannot lose sight of our commitment to combating climate change .
As Europeans , we must commit to a target reduction in CO2 of more than 20 % by 2010 .
The cooperation of other world partners would also be important in order to achieve an ambitious , comprehensive and legally binding agreement in accordance with the aim of avoiding warming of more than 2 ° C. I also believe that the initiatives being devised within the EU to promote and encourage the green economy , energy security and reducing dependence must remain a priority .
The EU could draw inspiration for its policies from my region , the Azores , about 30 % of whose energy already comes from renewable sources .
Both Europe and the rest of the world invested much hope in the Copenhagen conference .
The EU was ready to become the leader of this meeting and return with a legally binding treaty , but the meeting ended with very little clarity on how the fight against climate change should develop further .
The Copenhagen agreement , which provides neither ambitious objectives nor commitments , is an unsatisfactory result .
The EU 's ambitious 20-20-20 may simply remain a distant dream if this matter is not resolved at global level .
The EU , with its External Action Service , must begin to lead the strategy on diplomacy in the area of climate change as soon as possible and ensure that , above all , Europe speaks with one voice in talks with other countries and maintains the principled position , so that there can be a compulsory international climate change agreement as quickly as possible .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the adoption of the motion for a resolution on the results of the 15th Conference of the Parties ( COP 15 ) , which I co-authored , and the results of the negotiations between the various political groups , as they are representative of the increasingly generalised interest in this area , with a sustainable future as its objective .
Once again , I would like to voice my disappointment with the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit , and I call upon the EU to resume its leading role in the fight against climate change and contribute to bringing about a legally binding agreement with measurable , communicable and verifiable reduction aims at COP 16 , to take place this year in Mexico .
If European industry is to be more competitive and create more jobs , it is essential to invest in a sustainable future that will encompass climate protection , energy security , a reduction in energy independence and the efficient use of resources .
In view of this , I call upon industrialised countries to invest more in research into new technologies , with the aim of both reducing CO2 and bringing about a more efficient and sustainable use of natural resources .
The motion contains positive elements , such as acknowledging the lack of medium- and long-term objectives and the vague and poor funding for developing countries .
However , I abstained from voting , because all the amendments by my group , seeking further measures to reduce CO2 emissions by at least 40 % by 2020 on the basis of a legally binding agreement , the rejection of nuclear energy as a ' clean ' energy , more financial aid for poor and developing countries for development and transfer of technology and a socially viable green economy which can strengthen investments and employment and improve quality of life were voted down , and also because the important amendment proposing a 0.01 % tax on financial transactions , which could bring in EUR 20 000 million a year to help developing countries combat climate change and adapt to it , was not approved .
We cannot be driven to Mexico by the vague and disheartening Copenhagen agreement .
We need to radically review the policy on climate change so that there is a proper agreement at the forthcoming negotiations .
This can only be achieved by recognising and correcting the mistakes in Copenhagen , which the European Parliament resolution fails to do .
The fact that the summit in Copenhagen is generally described as a ' deplorable failure ' of an attempt to reach a global agreement on limiting the greenhouse emissions which are heating up the Earth 's climate only serves to highlight the total lack of coordination among EU Member States with regard to the US and the emerging countries .
The Copenhagen agreement does not even set a target in terms of an acceptable limit for the global temperature increase .
However , I am hoping for a positive outcome and a strong European voice on limiting the effects of climate change at the meeting which will take place in February of next year , when the world 's nations are called to present their plans on how they intend to cut emissions by 2020 .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the joint resolution on the results of the Copenhagen conference as I broadly agree with the content of the proposed measures , and two in particular .
The first of these is the absolute necessity for the EU to speak with one voice in international negotiations , as only then can we secure world leadership in dealing with this important issue .
This matter will have repercussions for generations to come and so requires firm , guiding , immediate and sensible action such as the EU has taken with other issues , for example , the financial crisis .
A new ' climate diplomacy ' is required to achieve this purpose .
The efforts of not only the EU , but also of China and the US , are essential to this , as explained in points 5 and 15 of the document .
The second point I wish to emphasise is the need for developing countries / emerging economies to adopt the rules on climate change that apply to EU Member States .
In the light of this , I and some of my colleagues have advocated the introduction of a carbon tax on the import of products from third countries so that this idea can progress towards being considered in future , which I think is a particularly important step .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the results of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change .
The outcome of the 15th Conference of the Parties ( COP 15 ) was disappointing .
The European Union therefore needs to make every effort in foreign diplomacy and speak with one voice so as to secure a legally binding international agreement on climate change which will allow a maximum increase in global temperature of 2 ° C.
in writing . - ( PT ) Following the stalemate of the Copenhagen conference on climate change , it is important that the European Union persists along the route it has taken up to this point in terms of making a serious commitment to sustainable development and trying to reduce carbon emissions without jeopardising European industry .
New climate policies , particularly within the context of the general crisis , must not lose sight of economic efficiency and must not in any way call into question the economic sustainability of European nations .
For this reason , I urge a new approach to energy policy , one which is based on clean energy , more efficient use of the natural resources at our disposal and strong investment in research and more environmentally friendly technologies so that we can maintain European competitiveness and allow job creation within a framework of sustainable development .
in writing . - ( PT ) The EU has always acted as a leader in international negotiations on climate change .
However , despite its ambition , the last climate conference in Copenhagen was a failure for all those who were determined to reach a binding agreement .
This result is far from the EU 's position on the matter , and it is also far from what is needed to protect the climate .
Given the disappointing outcome of the Copenhagen Summit , Parliament wants to send a clear signal to the European public and the world that it remains committed to fighting climate change .
We are now preparing the way for the next conference in Mexico , where there should be a greater effort towards commitment from all parties .
We cannot repeat the same errors that occurred in Copenhagen .
We must ask ourselves what went wrong during those negotiations and think about how to proceed if we are to include the US , China and India .
in writing . - ( PT ) The resolution under discussion does not go on to critically assess the reasons for the failure of Copenhagen , which is necessary .
Instead of seriously analysing the part that the EU itself played in this failure , the majority of this House persists in picking scapegoats such as China ( whose per capita atmospheric emissions of carbon dioxide are less than half those of the EU ) , and now the countries of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America .
This position is based solely on the blindness and partisanship of the most prominent politicians , and it undermines and subverts what actually happened in Copenhagen .
Importantly , it insists on the effectiveness of market instruments such as trading in emission licences , while ignoring their ineffectiveness and the perversity that has already been shown in their use .
Once again , necessary discussion about the so-called flexible mechanisms such as the Clean Development Mechanism goes by the wayside .
At the same time , the need to respect the sovereignty of developing countries in defining and implementing the so-called adaptation strategies is rejected .
No fair and sustainable solution to the problem of climate change or other environmental problems can come out of the irrational system that caused them in the first place .
What we need is another economic and social model that opposes capitalism .
This resolution testifies to the fact that ' believers ' in the IPCC 's views have not understood anything .
The main weakness of COP 15 was a failure to appreciate : the sensitivity of third countries and developing countries , and also some EU countries , to ' climate justice ' ; the fact that the two greatest superpowers , the USA and China , are competing with each other both economically and militarily ; and the fact that the ' ambitious ' plans to limit CO2 emissions were based on the paradigm of anthropogenic climate warming , which does not have a great deal of scientific credibility .
The alarmist statements of the IPCC should be regarded as highly irresponsible , because political and economic decisions which are based on them will affect many future generations .
These decisions must not , therefore , be based on the opinions of people who are putting into practice a thesis which has been established in advance - the theory that it is mankind which is causing global warming .
The scientific credibility of the IPCC is undermined by such things as the Climategate affair , the falsification of global temperature trends ( Russia and Australia ) and the Glaciergate affair .
Therefore , all legal regulations which are unfavourable to development of the European economy and are based on statements of the IPCC should be reviewed immediately .
On the matter of climate change , which is so important for the whole of civilisation , the time has come for the European Commission to base its actions on its own meta-analysis of climate research , which should be carried out by a team of climatologists which is independent of the opinions of the Commission and free from all political pressure .
These last two stipulations are missing from the resolution , and I therefore voted against its adoption .
I voted against the resolution because it contains too much wishful thinking .
We saw in Copenhagen how the rest of the world regards the Union 's ' leadership ' where climate change is concerned .
The so-called Copenhagen Accord was negotiated by President Obama with China , India , Brazil , South Africa and a few others , the Barrosos , Sarkozys and Co. not even having been invited .
Instead of imposing new burdens on our economies and our citizens , let us invest in the technologies of the future .
Last year , China became the world 's leading exporter of wind turbine equipment and photovoltaic cells .
Europe must join in this technological battle instead of inflicting on itself a sort of collective punishment , which does not impress anyone outside Europe and which will not attract any followers .
My vote on this resolution expressed my disappointment with the agreement finally reached in Copenhagen at the end of 2009 , an agreement which I consider to be inadequate , unambitious and lacking in any quantified commitment .
I also regret that the amendment tabled by my group to create a tax of 0.01 % per annum on financial transactions in order to finance efforts to combat climate change in the poorest and most directly affected countries to the tune of EUR 20 billion per annum was not adopted .
Finally , if the EU is to have any weight in international negotiations such as these , it needs to learn to speak with one voice , so as not to miss opportunities to play a key role in global climate change .
This is done by setting ambitious objectives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by over 20 % by 2020 .
in writing . - The Copenhagen Summit was very much a missed opportunity in efforts to tackle climate change .
My own country , Scotland , has adopted the most ambitious climate change legislation in the world whilst the Scottish Government 's recent collaboration with the government of the Maldives serves as a model for international agreement .
Today 's resolution calls for ' bilateral meetings between the European Parliament and the national parliaments ' in order to facilitate understanding ; I expect the national parliament of Scotland to be included in any such meetings given its world-leading stance .
This resolution includes some not insignificant advances on the part of the groups on the right that signed it : mention of the IPCC 's work , which refers to climate change , a call for greater involvement by civil society in the work of the Mexico conference , a call to the EU to push its targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions beyond the 20 % proposed for 2020 .
They are not enough , however , and the praise for the carbon market means that they lose all plausibility .
The aid offered to the countries of the South , to which we owe a climate debt , is not enough .
Similarly , the proposed aim of moving towards a 30 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 is a long way from the 40 % recommended by the IPCC .
Moreover , no reference is made to the initiative of the Bolivian President Evo Morales Ayma 's People 's World Conference on Climate Change .
To date , however , it alone proposes to the peoples of the world that they recognise their rights to the ecosystem and establish a court of climate justice .
in writing . - ( PT ) The great hopes surrounding the much-vaunted Copenhagen Summit have been dashed .
The countries with the greatest responsibility in this matter did not reach a consensus on reductions in greenhouse gas emissions .
This problem , which is a matter of concern all over the world , needs a fast solution .
There needs to be more transparency and a greater input from civil society at the 16th Conference of the Parties ( COP 16 ) in Mexico .
The EU must be capable of taking a leading role in the fight against climate change .
All countries , from the USA to the so-called emerging countries , including China , which are heavy polluters , must also accept their responsibilities in a fight that is leaving less and less room for new opportunities .
The sustainable future of humanity is at issue here .
If nothing is done in time , we could reach the point of no return .
I have abstained in the vote on Resolution concerning the results of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change because I believe it was a failure , given that the Copenhagen Accord is not legally binding and does not establish global emissions reduction targets .
At the summit , developed countries did not recognise the climate debt they owe to developing countries , nor did they show regret for the harmful consequences of the market mechanisms in place ( carbon trading ) .
By abstaining , I wish to express my deepest disappointment with the result of the summit , which was well below our citizens ' expectations .
The European Union must , for once and for all , take responsibility and do everything possible so that CO2 emissions are reduced by 40 % by 2020 .
I therefore believe we need to propose a new economic and social model to challenge capitalism .
I welcome the decision made by the President of Bolivia , Evo Morales , to hold the Peoples ' World Conference on Climate Change and Mother Earth 's Rights .
The Copenhagen climate summit was rightly considered by most observers to be a failure .
It is difficult to resist the impression that in Copenhagen , world leaders were playing a risky game , and were not trying to work out the best agreement , but to blame the other side for the lack of an agreement .
It is worrying that the EU , despite having worked out a common position , was not able to use it as a platform for an agreement with other countries .
The European Union must begin efforts to ensure that the COP 16 conference in Mexico will end with success .
The climate agreement which the EU should promote must have three basic features : it should be legally binding , should show solidarity and should be ambitious .
The decision made during the EU summit in Seville , according to which the EU will not limit its emissions in 2020 by more than 20 % in comparison with 1990 , should be viewed with alarm .
The condition for increasing the reduction goal to 30 % , which is that other countries must first make such a declaration , has been repeated .
At the moment , however , the international situation looks as if only the EU can provide the impetus for more significant reductions .
No one will take the EU 's place , here , and the EU must not give up the role of global promoter of radical means in the fight against global warming .
The EU must make EUR 7.2 billion available and undertake to use it for countries which are the most underdeveloped and most under threat from climate change .
To draw lessons from the failure of the Copenhagen Summit : that is the priority of the European Parliament with this resolution that I have voted for .
We know what is wrong : the UN method no longer works , the United States and China have behaved like adversaries in the fight against climate deregulation and the European Union has been unable to speak with one voice .
While we know what is wrong , we still need to come up with the remedies so that we may reach an agreement in Cancún in November 2010 .
In order to retain its leadership , Europe will have to demonstrate an innovative approach to the climate issue and offer something other than the sole target of a global reduction in emissions via the highly speculative system of a market for greenhouse gas emissions , a tool that the US Government has , moreover , just rejected .
It is time to change to a different method and to propose a ' technological ' bridge between industrialised countries and regions and micro-States chiefly exposed to climate change .
It is the addition of ambitious measures relating to clean technologies , to energy efficiency in buildings and transport systems , and to the promotion of green jobs that will give rise to the hopes of tomorrow , hopes of an agreement at the forthcoming Cancún Summit , greater hopes of a common world vision .
The Copenhagen conference on climate change did not produce a solution and did not manage to agree any final resolutions or decisions concerning the scope and scale of restrictions on emissions or the financial means which will be used for this purpose .
However , I do not think it was a defeat , although it certainly did not meet the EU 's expectations .
Those expectations were irrational , both in terms of the sizes of proposed greenhouse gas reductions and in terms of the financial expectations related to combating climate change .
On top of this , there was also a little arrogance in claiming a leading role in the process of the fight against climate change .
In my opinion , we are still at a stage when making binding and final decisions is inadvisable .
This is because , among other reasons , we still do not have reliable scientific data on climate change and the role of mankind in the process .
Recently , we have been witnesses of disputes among experts and scientists on the subject , which confirms that they do not all have the same views on the effects of global warming .
An additional argument in favour of deferring a final decision is the economic crisis , which is forcing countries to make savings and cut expenditure .
In the difficult times of an economic recession , priority treatment is demanded by social matters such as the fight against unemployment and the impoverishment of society , support for entrepreneurship and other measures to accelerate economic growth .
in writing . - Clearly , while the summit in Copenhagen was seen as disappointing in its final outcomes , there is much to commend further efforts .
There is simply no alternative to collective action on this issue .
As the European Union will continue to play a pivotal role along the road towards the next conference in Mexico , every effort has to be ensured to gain political acceptance at a global level .
It is on the issues outlined by many scientists and other observers that citizens are making up their minds to support climate change proposals .
Those who merely rely on creating an atmosphere of fear and hostility do little to elaborate the arguments in their favour .
The line adopted by EU governments , led by Minister Ed Miliband , have won support and offer real hope of a deal .
This Parliament must continue to support this approach .
I voted in favour of this resolution as it calls for a firmer line to be taken in the negotiations about a global climate policy .
Furthermore , the lack of an international agreement is no reason to postpone further EU policy measures to implement previous EU pledges to cut our emissions by 20 % by 2020 .
Parliament reiterates its aim of increasing this reduction to 30 % .
It is good that this House is expressly stating that the initiatives taken in order to promote and incentivise the green economy , energy security and the limiting of energy dependence will make it easier and easier to obtain an undertaking to achieve a reduction of 30 % .
It is important that lessons should be drawn from the failure in Copenhagen .
Thus , we need to face the important self-criticism that the EU was unable to build confidence , during the negotiations , through specific prior pledges of international government financing for climate measures in developing countries .
Thus , also , it is important to recognise that the EU 's collective contribution to the efforts to achieve a reduction and to fund the adaptation needs of the developing countries for 2020 cannot be below an amount of EUR 30 billion per annum .
I hope that Mexico will have a successful outcome .
I have voted against the resolution .
Unfortunately , a number of good amendments were rejected .
People 's sense of reality with regard to climate protection seems to have gone out of the window .
Critical comments and correct scientific work on climate protection have been rejected , while approval has been given to Europe going it alone .
This is not what I understand to be a responsible policy for our citizens .
I abstained on the European Parliament 's resolution on the Copenhagen Summit because it does not prove a match for the failure of that summit , even if the European Parliament has clearly condemned the European Union 's shortcomings on that occasion .
Admittedly , some positive measures have been adopted , such as those calling on the Commission to be more ambitious with regard to greenhouse gas emissions and to grant adequate funding to eliminate these gases .
Other amendments are unacceptable , as they leave it up to the market to regulate by means of emission permits , clean development mechanisms , and so on .
Furthermore , a request is made for the European Union to enter into negotiations with the United States with the aim of creating a transatlantic carbon market .
Finally , I regret the rejection of the call for the creation of a green Tobin tax , the income from which would have helped developing countries to combat climate change .
No lasting , serious or coherent solution to climate change can be found in the rationale behind the system that created it .
The European Union is duty bound to move forward and to set an example , no matter what the attitude of the other states .
It can do so if it is able to provide itself with the necessary resources .
The Copenhagen conference was a failure .
However , this agreement incarnates a first step which brings most of the parties together and provides a basis for commitments to reducing , financing , measuring , notifying and verifying actions to mitigate climate change and combating deforestation .
In supporting the resolution , I expressed my wish for ' climate diplomacy ' to be established at international level , with the primary objective of protecting Creation .
Parliament has also announced that the collective contribution by the Union towards efforts to reduce climate change and to help developing countries adapt should be no less than EUR 30 000 million per annum between now and 2020 , knowing that this figure may increase as new knowledge comes to light on the seriousness of climate change and the costs involved .
Apart from any environmental romanticism , we must not forget European industry .
That is why I consider it essential to the competitiveness of European industry for similar efforts to be made by other industrialised nations outside the EU and for developing countries and emerging economies to commit to reasonable reductions .
Reduction targets must be measurable , significant and verifiable for everyone if there is to be climate justice .
I voted in favour of the motions for a resolution on the outcome of the Copenhagen conference on climate change , albeit with some confusion .
In Copenhagen , where I was present as a delegate of the European Parliament , a non-legally binding accord was reached .
Not only does this accord fail to offer a suitable response in the international struggle against climate change , but it also fails to resolve the problem of the distorted conditions of international competition .
These work to the detriment of European companies which , unlike their main competitors from other countries , such as the United States and China , must already comply with ambitious emission-reduction goals .
I believe that the European Union must work to define an effective strategy with a view to the upcoming international meetings ; a strategy that aims to promote green technologies , energy efficiency and renewable sources ; a strategy that introduces a truly effective global system of combating climate change - and one that gives no succour to distortions in international competition .
in writing . - I abstained on the vote on the Domenici report despite the vast majority of sensible proposals contained in it .
There is a need for continued detailed debate on the various issues it raises .
It is , on the one hand , necessary to ensure that different corporate tax regimes do not enable companies to evade their responsibilities to support society by a share of their profits through a fair corporate tax regime .
However , particular attention needs to be given to the negative impact that a CCCTB could have on small countries such as Ireland , whose prosperity and employment levels depend to a large extent on its capacity to attract foreign investment .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this Report on Promoting Good Governance in Tax Matters , which is key to rebuilding the global economy .
It requires transparency , exchange of information , cross-border cooperation and fair tax competition .
It would discourage tax fraud and evasion to the competitive advantage of tax compliant businesses and reduce pressure on governments to lower corporate tax rates which shifts the tax burden onto workers and low-income households while forcing cutbacks in public services Any European agreement on Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base has to have regard to the needs of geographically marginal regions of the EU such as Ireland and their capacity to attract FDI .
A CCCTB is not about a common tax rate .
Taxation of companies is the exclusive responsibility of each Member State .
The idea of CCCTB is to establish a common legal basis for the computation of profits of companies with establishments in at least two Member States .
On CCCTB , this report says ; ' Recalls that the introduction of a CCCTB would help to tackle - within the EU - double taxation and transfer price issues within consolidated groups ' I welcome the Irish Government 's proposal in this year 's Irish Finance Bill to regulate transfer pricing by transnational corporations .
in writing . - ( PT ) We welcome the explicit statement in the report that it : ' Strongly condemns the role played by tax havens in encouraging and profiteering from tax avoidance , tax evasion and capital flight ; urges the Member States , therefore , to make the fight against the tax havens , tax evasion and illicit capital flight a priority ' .
We also support the statement that with ' the efforts made as part of OECD-led initiatives ' the ' results remain insufficient to cope with the challenges presented by tax havens and offshore centres and must be followed by decisive , effective and consistent action ' and even that ' the commitments made by the G20 to date are not sufficient to address the challenges posed by tax evasion , tax havens and off-shore centres ' .
The most important thing , however , was not to reduce this to mere good intentions , but rather to combat and eliminate tax havens and offshore centres effectively , especially when , as in certain cases , there is a certain amount of drama surrounding the public deficit , aimed at pursuing and even enhancing the same neoliberal policies that once again leave the workers and the people with the bill for the crisis .
For you , good governance in tax matters is not about the fight against fraud , bearable taxation or good use of public funds .
It is about the systematic hounding of the taxpayer , mainly the European taxpayer , and the automatic exchange of information on his bank accounts without him having committed any offence .
What is more , I am not talking here about big companies or very wealthy individuals , who will always have the means to slip through the net , but about the average European .
Your speech on tax havens is hypocritical : you rail against Liechtenstein and the Caribbean , but you do not say a word about Europe 's biggest tax haven , the City , or about those in the United States .
Nor do you say a word about that which enables those havens to exist : the tax hells that now characterise the majority of the European Member States , which are crippled by debt and deficits .
Because public expenditure has exploded in order to bear the social consequences of your economic policies and the exorbitant costs of mass immigration .
Because the Member States can no longer fund their debt unless they resort to the markets and abide by their conditions , which means that , today , 15 to 20 % of the budgetary expenditure of a State such as France covers only its interest payments .
We will not be used as a moral alibi for such a policy .
in writing . - Using CCCTB to combat double taxation is like using a sledgehammer to crack a nut .
There are much more efficient ways of combating the issue of double taxation .
That is why I voted against recital 25 .
in writing . - The current economic crisis has highlighted a number of vital areas in which reform must be made within Europe and across the wider world .
Good governance in tax matters is very much an important element in a healthy economy and the EU has a key role to play in promoting international good governance in these matters .
in writing . - Tax fraud and tax evasion result in an estimated EUR 200 billion being lost each year - money stolen from taxpayers in the rich world and the neediest in the developing world .
This scourge must be tackled , and my delegation supports this report which sends a strong message that the European Parliament will not tolerate fraud , evasion or tax havens operating with impunity .
In particular , I welcome the clear statement that we must aim for automatic exchange of information to become the general rule .
Studies show this is the most effective way to tackle tax evasion and protect revenues .
Those who oppose these calls are acting in the interests of a tiny elite of wealthy individuals and corporations who make use of tax havens , and against the many who pay tax and rely on the services it pays for .
The report refers to the forthcoming impact assessment on the proposed Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base .
While we have no objections to further analysis , my delegation would require strong supporting evidence before being able to consider backing such a proposal .
The report also asks for an analysis of possible options for sanctions against tax havens , which we support without prejudice to a final position .
in writing . - ( PT ) Good tax governance is essential to provide guarantees in extremely important areas such as the principles of transparency , exchange of information and fair tax competition .
The financial crisis has exerted ever more pressure on everything relating to combating tax evasion and fraud , along with the fight against tax havens .
At a time when millions of people all over the world are suffering from the effects of the crisis , it would be pointless to fight those who do not meet their responsibilities .
This initiative marks an important signal from the EU to third countries , sending out the message that it is effectively combating everything about tax havens .
Fighting tax havens all over the world is not solely a matter of justice in tax but , above all , one of social justice .
We must implement a policy of good governance , both within and outside the European Union , not least to oppose unfair tax competition , particularly with those countries that represent tax havens .
Transparency and the physical exchange of information are the foundations of fair competition and of a fair distribution of the tax burden .
Moreover , good tax governance is an important pre-condition for preserving the integrity of financial markets .
The motions on administrative cooperation and on mutual assistance for recovery , which we are adopting in this plenary session , are taking us in this direction .
At the international level , one of the instruments that the EU can use to promote good governance in tax matters in third countries is to negotiate tax fraud agreements with them , which include a clause on an exchange of information .
The statements of the five countries with which the EU has a savings agreement ( Monaco , Switzerland , Liechtenstein , Andorra and San Marino ) are an important step towards the end of a situation of complete imbalance .
Such statements must , however , be followed by the conclusion of legally binding agreements .
The EU must also act as a driving force in this sector , setting a good example and following through what the G20 summit has already set in motion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the theme of good tax governance has always been very important but has become even more relevant since the great economic and financial crisis that struck our continent about two years ago .
In recent years , the subject has been discussed during European and international summits , with particular regard to combating tax evasion and tax havens .
There is certainly evidence of commitment and will by the Commission , but we must undoubtedly implement a serious policy to prevent tax evasion by front companies that evade tax laws with a simple click of a mouse through the Internet .
I am sure that the principle of good governance , based on the principle of transparency and exchange of information , can constitute the basis for pursuing the European Union 's priority aim of combating tax havens , tax evasion and illicit capital flight .
The European Union must also speak with a single voice internationally , and fight for the improvement of OECD standards to achieve the automatic exchange of information , instead of exchange on request .
And for this reason , I will vote in favour of the report .
I have voted in favour of the report promoting good governance in tax matters , because I am of the opinion that combating tax fraud and tax evasion effectively is of the greatest importance .
Furthermore , we must overcome the blockade on tax issues in the Council of Ministers and reinforce good governance in the area of taxation .
I am in favour of international cooperation on tax evasion , but I doubt that administrative cooperation leading to the automatic exchange of all data concerning the assets of European citizens is the best way of achieving fair taxation .
A deduction at source on all financial transactions would be a far more effective method .
Such a deduction at source should be a final tax .
It could become a European resource .
The so-called ' good governance ' recommended by the European Parliament lays bare every aspect of citizens ' privacy .
It destroys the protection of individual data which , paradoxically , the European Parliament wishes to safeguard in the SWIFT dossier .
It is for these reasons that I have not voted in favour of these reports .
While tax fraud must be combated , it must not make us forget that fraud alone would never have led to the economic crisis we are going through today .
This crisis is a structural crisis of capitalism and originates in the very logic of that system , the virtues of which the European elites blindly extol .
I am voting for this text because I condemn the pursuit of personal profit to the detriment of the common good .
This logic is just as much a part of tax fraud as it is of European neoliberalism , which is much more responsible than fraud for the failure of the Millennium Development Goals , however timorous .
VAT , which this text also supports , is one of the aberrations of this system .
It is the most unjust tax in the world , as it subjects all citizens to the same rate of taxation in spite of the huge differences in income that are the mark of neoliberalism .
It is a pity the text does not tackle the basic problem or attempt finally to put the fair distribution of the wealth produced for the common good on the European policy agenda .
in writing . - Whilst UKIP believes in the equality of men and women , we reject any attempt by the EU to legislate in this area .
We believe that measures at national level are more appropriate in this domain .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Mr Tarabella 's report because I believe that equality between men and women in the European Union , as recognised in the Treaty on European Union and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , is a fundamental principle which is still not being implemented in a uniform way .
Notwithstanding the pay gap between men and women , occupational segregation and sexist stereotypes , the report aims to emphasise the principle of the same pay for the same work , as set out in Community treaties since 1957 .
It stresses that the economic , financial and social crisis which has the European Union and the rest of the world in its grip has a real impact on women , their working conditions , their place in society and equality between women and men in the European Union .
in writing . - I would like to explain my voting pattern in relation to the Tarabella report entitled ' Equality between women and men in the European Union - 2009 ' .
There were a number of amendments which directly or indirectly made a reference to abortion .
Malta is against abortion .
The main political parties are in complete agreement on this issue .
The greater part of society also concurs with this view .
In addition , the religious and moral aspects are an important element .
in writing . - ( PT ) In its report on equality between men and women in the EU in 2009 , the European Commission points out that reconciling family and professional life , gender segregation by occupation and sector , differences in salary and the low female employment rate are the main differences between the sexes .
These differences between men and women have been particularly exacerbated by the current economic , financial and social crisis .
I voted against the report as I believe that it was distorted by bringing in issues such as access to abortion and free access to advice on abortion .
These are very sensitive topics and , according to the subsidiarity principle , they are a matter for the individual Member States .
I voted for this report , because with the complicated economic , financial and social situation , it is more important than ever to implement one of the most important fundamental principles of the European Union - equality between men and women .
Every Member State must ensure that workers of both genders receive equal pay for work of equal value .
In order to promote equality between men and women , we must ensure that men and women share family and household responsibilities .
It is very important that paternity leave is enshrined in the directive sooner to create conditions for fathers to contribute to child care .
The victims of human trafficking are mostly women .
Therefore , I call on those Member States which have yet to ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings to do so without delay .
I voted against the resolution on equality between women and men in the European Union ( 2009 ) , even though I agree with a great deal of its content , because we cannot call for equality for a certain category of people without denying it to another category of human beings .
I refer to paragraph 38 , which claims to guarantee women 's rights by ensuring them easy access to abortion .
The destruction of the smallest and most defenceless individuals in the shape of unborn children cannot be considered a way of confirming women 's dignity and freedom .
An anti-life conspiracy is at work , which uses tried and tested ways of deceiving us .
We must reveal it for what it is .
Putting together extremely fair requests with extremely unfair claims and twisting the meanings of words are stratagems that have proved effective during European Parliament votes , but I will have nothing to do with it .
We cannot talk about the drama of abortion , which deserves the attention of politicians as well as moralists , without also recognising the rights of newborns or at least calling for proper education as far as respect for life is concerned and organising forms of support for difficult or unwanted pregnancies so that they can be allowed to reach their natural conclusions .
I welcome the adoption of this report on equality between men and women in the EU .
This report underlines the urgent need for a Community initiative to effectively combat violence against women .
Also , the adoption of this resolution integrates two dimensions , which I consider to be fundamental .
Firstly , the recommendation for paternity leave at European level .
If there is to be equality in employment , there also needs to be equality in society and family life .
This resolution highlights the Commission 's responsibility to legislate in this area .
However , the real major victory of this vote is that it reaffirms the right to abortion .
No European text has reaffirmed this right since 2002 , due to the reticence of one right-wing European party .
Women must have control over their sexual and reproductive rights .
There is certainly much more to be done in terms of real access to information , contraception and abortion , but the Tarabella report must be used as a basic point of support for bringing European law forward in this sector .
in writing . - I voted today in favour of this report , which is progressive in nature as it aims to promote equality between men and women including in areas of parental leave , child care , domestic violence and the pay gap .
It also promotes a much wider awareness of sexual health matters for both women and men .
However , this is not a legislative proposal .
This is primarily a statement of principles which I am comfortable in supporting .
It is consistent with the principles espoused by Labour and social democratic parties across Europe .
It must be noted that the provision of abortion services is entirely and exclusively a matter for individual Member States .
This report does not and cannot change that position .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted against the report on equality between men and women in the EU in 2009 as I believe that it was distorted by bringing in issues such as access to induced abortion and free access to advice on induced abortion .
These are very sensitive topics and , according to the subsidiarity principle , they are a matter for the individual Member States alone .
in writing . - I strongly support this report .
Equality between women and men has long been a fundamental principle of the European Union .
However , despite the progress made in this field , many inequalities between remain .
The gap in employment rates between women and men is narrowing but women are still more likely to be in part-time jobs and / or on fixed-term contracts and , for the most part , to remain stuck in poorly paid posts .
Four times more women than men across Europe work part-time .
The gender pay gap - 17.4 % - has barely narrowed since 2000 .
To earn the same as a man would earn on average for a calendar year , a woman on average must work until the end of the following February , a total of 418 days .
The global economic , financial and social crisis is causing women to suffer a ' double blow ' .
The sectors where they constitute the majority of the workforce are in the public sector ( e.g. education , health and social welfare ) which is being specifically targeted for shedding of jobs .
In addition , because of service cutbacks , women who availed of child care and elder-care , learning support , etc . , are being forced to quit employment to assume those tasks themselves .
The report of Marc Tarabella clearly emphasises the greatest barrier to gender equality .
I know that some Members do not take the issue of gender inequality and related discrimination against women seriously .
However , I am aware of these complications .
The global economic crisis has exacerbated the situation and it looks as if women will be ' sacrificed ' as a result of cost-cutting fiscal policies through reductions in maternity benefits and expenditure on social services .
As women are traditionally more at risk of poverty and low incomes because they interrupt or end their professional careers in order to start a family , give precedence to their husbands ' careers or care for children and the elderly , the rapporteur is proposing an adequate means of enhancement .
Mr Tarabella states correctly that the principle of ' the same pay for the same work ' , valid in the treaties since 1957 , has not been complied with and women in some Member States are still not paid the same rate for the same work as men .
Apart from that , there are a number of EU policies aimed at assisting families with children that do not , however , mention single mothers or fathers living with children .
The demand for paid paternity leave to be legislated at the European level is also correct .
A fair division of the family and domestic responsibilities of women and men will help to resolve the situation .
For the reasons mentioned I agree with the assessments of the 2009 / 2010 report and I have therefore voted for its adoption .
I voted in favour of the Tarabella report on equality between men and women in the European Union in 2009 as it proposes specific and innovative measures and policies relating to gender equality .
The drawing up of a directive on preventing and combating all forms of violence against women and the introduction of paternity leave into European legislation are some of the proposals that I believe to be essential to promoting gender equality and guaranteeing a more equal share of family responsibilities between men and women .
in writing . - ( PT ) There is something not right when Parliament demands respect but cannot command it .
Relevant and serious issues like this deserve our attention , discussion and a search for the greatest common denominator .
I do not even think that this should be difficult to achieve .
Nevertheless , the furtive and back-handed introduction of divisive issues under cover of these very topics is turning into a regrettable habit .
Once again , Parliament has acted as a mere sounding board for the most extreme agendas .
I cannot but emphatically reject this attempt to promote the liberalisation of abortion and the disregard for human life and dignity that come with it under the pretext of supporting equality between men and women , and the illegitimate attempt to associate both these causes and manipulate the powers of the Member States in such matters .
This obsession with expanding the concept of sexual and reproductive health to include abortion , along with forcing it to be implemented everywhere , shows the kind of insidious methods employed by those who try to put a pretty face on reality .
These euphemisms designed to numb the conscience cannot make it any less brutal , violence against women less cruel or this strategy less deplorable .
in writing . - ( PT ) ' Violence against women is perhaps the most shameful human rights violation ...
It knows no boundaries of geography , culture or wealth .
As long as it continues , we cannot claim to be making any real progress towards equality , development and peace . '
These are the words of the former Secretary-General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , and unfortunately , they are as valid as ever .
Gender discrimination persists in the developed world and Europe today because it is a structural problem , and one with severe consequences in terms of inequality of opportunity .
Today , there still exist differences between men and women , in education , in language , in the allocation of domestic chores , in access to work and in carrying out professional duties .
I believe that access and progression in work and doing a job , whether in the private sector or in public service or even in politics , should be based on the merit and qualities of the individual , irrespective of gender .
However , I voted against the resolution due to the introduction of sensitive issues , such as access to abortion , which are a matter for the Member States alone .
in writing . - ( PT ) The adoption of this resolution in Parliament was crucial , despite the conservative Right 's desire to derail it , as it enshrines important rights for women .
Despite certain weaknesses , the report succeeded in highlighting important points such as the need for paternity leave that is linked to maternity leave , the issue of sexual and reproductive rights and the need to step up the fight against inequality and discrimination in the workplace , against violence and trafficking in women and girls , and denouncing the poverty and precarious , poorly paid work to which many women are subjected .
It was important to show approval , once again , for the idea that ' women must have control over their sexual and reproductive rights , through easy access to contraception and abortion ' .
This resolution has particular resonance on the eve of the centennial celebrations of International Women 's Day and 15 years of the Beijing Platform .
Let us hope that it will come to be implemented in reality .
Yes , women encounter specific difficulties .
However , as usual in this House , the initial intention was good , but it has led to a distorted analysis and wild proposals .
This report portrays a caricature of a European society marked by daily and systematic hostility towards women : recovery policies are apparently sexist because they tend to aid male labour sectors , as are strict budget policies , because they affect feminised public sectors ...
By contrast , there is absolute silence on the consequences of the massive presence in Europe of immigrant populations whose culture and practices imprison women in an inferior status , light years away from our values and our concepts .
There is also silence on the negative consequences of your talk of total egalitarianism : women are gradually losing specific and legitimate social rights acquired in recognition of their role as mothers .
Finally , there is also silence on parental salaries , which are the only way of giving women a choice between a professional and family life or of reconciling the two .
Finally , when I see many of our fellow Members getting carried away by hysteria and imposing across-the-board massive and obligatory abortion , which has been hoisted to the rank of a fundamental value for a Europe en route to collective suicide , I begin , despite myself , to regret that their mothers were not aborted .
While I strongly oppose all of the EU 's negative measures - and there are many of them - I support them when things go the right way .
Thus , in this report , strong calls are made ( especially to the European Commission ) concerning the unequal treatment suffered by women , the introduction of paternity leave , the creation of a year for combating violence against women and the right to easy access to contraception and abortion .
The report also emphasises that women must have access free of charge to consultation on abortion .
The reason for my positive vote , therefore , is the improvement achieved , but it is an improvement that needs to be more evident in practice .
All the more so since I can only regret the refusal of a majority in Parliament to support the creation of a European charter of women 's rights , a European inter-gender violence monitoring centre and an ' International Equal Pay Day ' .
Similarly , this Parliament has made no attempt to tackle the deep causes of these inequalities , which lie in the economic system of market rule alone , which Europe applies every day .
in writing . - Whilst gender equality is a fundamental right within the EU recognised in the Treaty on European Union , there remain unacceptable levels of inequality in a wide number of areas .
It is clear that huge problems remain and so it is imperative that the EU institutions work to positively identify and seek solutions to these issues wherever they exist in the Union .
Today , 10 February 2010 , the Swedish Conservatives voted against the report on equality between women and men - 2009 .
Although we share the rapporteur 's desire to improve equality between women and men in Europe , we do not feel that interference with the sovereignty of the Member States through demands for so-called gender budgeting , by urging the Member States not to cut social benefits and by imposing quotas through legislation is the right way to go .
Equality must be achieved at individual level , by expanding opportunities to influence one 's own situation - not through legislation at European level and gesture politics such as specially designated days , further EU authorities and an EU charter on women 's rights .
There is already an EU charter on civil liberties and human rights that has been strengthened by the Treaty of Lisbon , and which covers women too .
We must stand up for the principle of subsidiarity .
In the final vote , therefore , we voted against the report , even though there are naturally points with which we sympathise ; we fully support the statement that women must have control over their sexual and reproductive rights , for example .
in writing . - I voted in favour of recital X and most parts of paragraph 38 , abstaining on one part of paragraph 38 , for the following reasons :
As a main principle , women 's sexual and reproductive rights should be respected , particularly in the context of equality between men and women , which is guaranteed by the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights ( Art. 23 ) .
However , I believe women should learn to protect themselves from unwanted pregnancies ; in other words , when there is easy access to contraception and specialised advice , then abortion is more difficult to justify .
Many in my electorate in Romania would be disappointed if I voted differently .
In addition , the past is still alive in our minds - as highlighted in the 2006 report commissioned by the President of Romania - when the Communist party took draconian measures against abortion in order to ensure the control of the party over women 's private lives .
Many women died as a result of illegal abortions , performed without medical help .
I fully support the driving spirit behind the resolution which has the merit of being based on the assumption that the debate on demographic changes is connected with the debate on measures necessary to combat the impact of the economic and financial crisis on the labour market .
Considering that our analysis of progress in achieving the Lisbon objectives is not encouraging , we welcome the call expressed in the resolution to speed up legislative changes in Member States , to tighten up infringement procedures and encourage greater participation of women in key sectors of the labour market that reflects the goals they have achieved as far as training is concerned .
Having said this , I am bound to voice my absolute disapproval , already expressed at the voting stage , of this pernicious will to promote an abortion society by providing incentives for free access to termination of pregnancy .
The assumption that women must be able to achieve easier abortions in order to recover their right to sexual freedom not only runs counter to general lay morals , but also contradicts the principles enshrined in recital Z , which states that the promotion of ' higher birth rates to meet future requirements ' is central to the European action .
I remain firm in my commitment to promoting a responsible sexual culture .
Women are the main victims of the economic and social crisis that the European Union 's neoliberal policies have created .
Thanks to the crisis , the number of insecure jobs and compulsory part-time positions are increasing .
The patriarchy still completely pervades our societies .
They are now scarred by the forceful return of stigmatisation on religious grounds , and women are forever the main victims of these changes .
It is therefore gratifying to see the European Parliament place such a crucial matter as equality between women and men on the agenda .
It is a shame , however , that the text does not focus on the intrinsically unequal nature of neoliberalism .
It is neoliberalism that is responsible for many of the problems suffered by women and , in the deepening of the inequalities between the sexes , it finds yet another way to flourish .
in writing . - ( PT ) Inequalities between men and women on various levels , whether by profession , sector or different stereotypes , have become blurred over the years .
Equality between men and women in the EU is increasingly a reality , and although there are still cases of discrimination , we are beginning to see very positive developments .
Although there have been many improvements in the area of equal opportunities for women , there is still much to be done .
One of the most urgent issues is to provide greater support for reconciling professional and family life , which , for many women and , in particular , single mothers , is an insurmountable obstacle .
The fact that men are still more likely to be entrusted with positions of responsibility proves that equality at work can only be achieved by a change in attitudes and not by imposing quotas , particularly because quotas are controversial and can easily lead to conflict .
As this report fails to deal with the criticism that gender mainstreaming can also swing in the other direction , I have voted against it .
The resolution on equality between women and men in the European Union seems completely balanced to me , and I welcome the work carried out by Mr Tarabella to achieve this outcome .
Flagrant inequalities between men and women still exist today in the employment sector , particularly when it comes to differences in pay or even reconciling work and family life .
There are still efforts to be made in this area .
Moreover , with regard to the protection of sexual and reproductive rights , it is essential that women have access to contraception and abortion .
Women must be able to have full physical autonomy .
That is why I voted in favour of the measures relating to the protection of these rights .
Finally , I voted against the proposal to create a European charter of women 's rights because , since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which includes women 's rights , forms an integral part of the treaties .
This charter is legally binding and enables women to be protected in the same way as men .
A decree was passed in Romania in 1967 banning abortions , which meant that women lost the right to choose between continuing with a pregnancy and terminating it .
This ban had a deeply traumatic impact on Romanian society , making us realise how dangerous such a decision is .
Women should have control over their sexual and reproductive rights .
For this reason , I voted for all the aspects relating to easy access to contraception and abortion covered in the Tarabella report and , ultimately , for the report as a whole .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the complexity of the report under examination today was already apparent during work in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , where a risible majority of three votes and a wholesale absence of MEPs allowed the text to be adopted .
I believe that there has been effective legislation on the protection of women since 1975 .
Instead of striving to come up with new directives , I therefore believe we should be ensuring that the existing laws are applied in full by the governments .
It is for this reason that , even though I have no wish to vote against the report , which certainly has some positive aspects , I prefer to disassociate myself from other aspects to emphasise my disapproval of certain parts , particularly those concerning abortion over which we Catholics are naturally indisposed to compromise .
Although I am not against abortion , I did vote against paragraph 38 because it may be interpreted as encouraging this practice .
I am also in favour of making contraception and education on these matters more easily accessible because this is the best way to avoid unwanted pregnancies .
On the other hand , I believe that there are communities which , for a variety of reasons , want to retain power over the control of abortion at a national level , and they should be allowed to do so .
This is an area where the principle of subsidiarity should be applied .
I do not think that discussing this issue in the report on equality between men and women in the European Union is the best solution .
I have voted in favour of the report on equality between men and women in the European Union because it is in line with my fundamental conviction that women have the unrestricted right to autonomy , in particular , with regard to their sexual and reproductive rights , together with easy access to contraception and abortion .
These rights are an essential part of the concept and self-image of a modern European society .
in writing . - ( SV ) At yesterday 's vote , I voted against the report on equality between women and men .
This was mainly because , in my view , many points in the report run counter to the principle of subsidiarity , such as on the matter of quotas .
I abstained from voting on Recital X and paragraph 38 , which concern women 's access to abortion .
In my opinion , the current wording would infringe the principle of subsidiarity .
I consider it to be a general principle that we at EU level should not spend our time on matters that the individual Member States themselves have the right to decide on at national level .
Naturally , I support the Swedish position on the issue - namely that the decision on abortion is ultimately a decision for the woman concerned , not a matter for the legislators .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Union is currently undergoing a period of massive economic , financial and social crisis which is having a severe impact on the professional and private lives of women .
Gender segregation by occupation , the pay gap , and difficulties in reconciling professional and personal lives are obstacles to women 's full participation in the labour market .
Despite improvements in the workplace and growing numbers of women in positions of responsibility , there still needs to be greater awareness of equal treatment .
We should welcome this report as it gives us the opportunity to redefine guidelines on eliminating disparities between men and women in the labour market .
Only then can the EU achieve its goals of growth , employment and social cohesion .
The inclusion of provisions relating to ' sexual and reproductive rights ' is , however , unfortunate in a report which appears within a context of economic crisis and which concerns itself mainly with the impact of this crisis on working conditions for women and the place of women in society .
For the aforementioned reasons , and since the proposed amendments to paragraph 38 , which I supported and considered essential to the economy of the document , were not approved , I voted against the report on equality between men and women in the European Union .
I have voted against the report because my fundamental convictions do not allow me to accept the unrestricted right to abortion and to reproductive freedom .
For me , the right to life is a fundamental right which must be defended and respected in every case .
The other parts of the report are perfectly acceptable and demonstrate that Europe has made progress towards equality for women .
Another positive feature is the fact that much greater importance is given to the commitment to the family .
in writing . - The ECR Group are the strongest supporters of equality between men and women and especially the principle of equal pay and equal opportunity in the workplace .
The ECR have decided to vote in favour of the paragraphs which support equality in this way .
The ECR Group have nevertheless voted against this resolution for two specific reasons .
Firstly , we oppose any legislation that assumes that women 's health , education and reproductive rights are the responsibility not of Member States but of the EU .
Secondly , whilst the ECR Group fully supports the need for maternity and paternity provisions , we have chosen to abstain from such references in this report because we oppose any family policy being dictated at EU level ; this is a matter for national governments to decide upon .
I voted against this resolution .
It divides rather than unites men and women .
There is nothing innocent about the wording of paragraph 36 : ' women must have control over their sexual and reproductive rights , notably through easy access to contraception and abortion ' .
The rapporteur also insists on women having access free of charge to consultation on abortion .
However , abortion comes solely within the competence of the Member States .
As this resolution has no binding legal force , it cannot be used to exert pressure to liberalise abortion .
Then Parliament calls for sexist stereotyping , especially work carried out by men and women within the family , to be combated .
The resolution emphasises the importance of pre-school child care provision , child-minding services and the provision of assistance to elderly persons and other dependents .
Thus , Parliament is aiming to destroy the natural family as a place of socialisation and solidarity between generations .
This resolution does not offer any added value to women or to men or to the Union .
It is a pity , because respect for people who are different and the promotion of equal opportunities for men and women are a real social challenge .
I voted against the resolution .
The rapporteur , Mr Tarabella , has not taken account of the national context .
Morality is part of the worldview incorporated into the legal system of a country .
The attempt to introduce into Polish legislation the possibility of unrestricted access to abortion is something which is not natural , and it is obvious that this will provoke opposition .
Acting in accordance with my own conscience , and taking into account the legal regulations which are in force in Poland , I voted against the resolution .
In doing so , I have given a clear signal that , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , the only legislators on such sensitive matters are each of the 27 Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) Overall , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the EU 's strategic objectives for the 15th Conference of the Parties in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) .
I also endorsed the amendments to include northern bluefin tuna in Appendix II of the CITES , in accordance with the recent recommendations by the Ad Hoc Committee of the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) of the UN , which supported the announcement of the inclusion of northern bluefin tuna in Appendix II of the CITES .
Following this , the General Assembly of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) set a considerable reduction in the fishing of bluefin tuna by 13 500 tonnes and the European Commission restated its concern at the reduction in tuna stocks and committed itself to carrying out more reliable scientific studies .
I realise that the loss of biodiversity is a serious problem the world over , and I believe that other animals should be the focus of other preservation proposals .
I see this conference as crucial to the survival and sustainability of many species .
Ultimately , I believe that a total ban on international trade in tuna - its inclusion in Appendix I - would be premature , as it would spark a crisis in the sector without being based on any concrete facts .
in writing . - Regarding the resolution on the key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , I voted against the abolition of fishing of northern bluefin tuna .
The reason is that this will affect the livelihood of Maltese fishermen in a very negative way .
The vast majority of Malta 's fishermen are not in a position to fish for alternative species and in alternative fishing grounds because of the traditional way in which fishing is conducted .
Also , it is my belief that the criteria for the CITES listing are not met in the case of northern bluefin tuna .
I voted in favour of the CITES Convention report .
Animal and plant species are becoming extinct at a rate of one thousand times faster than the natural rate .
Human activities are adding to this rate of extinction and are endangering biodiversity .
CITES is a central tool in the international effort to combat the primary threats to biodiversity , to combat illegal trade , and to put in place a proper Regulation concerning the wildlife trade .
I support those who want international law enforcement bodies to have a greater involvement in stopping wildlife crime and to address the dangers which could result from electronic commerce .
As such , I also support the recommendation that the environmental crime unit be strengthened .
I would like to draw attention to the effect CITES measures will have on the occupations of poor rural communities and those who are depending on trade in certain species to make a living .
We must continue to help these countries to apply the CITES list so that we can work with those who are dependent on the wildlife in their areas .
The European Parliament is calling for a total ban on the marketing of bluefin tuna internationally .
As an elected representative for the Sète basin , I did not vote in favour of this measure : to date , there is no agreement on this ban , either among scientists or , I might add , among environmental associations .
If , however , such a radical ban were to be decided on in March at the international conference in Doha , I would call on the European Commission not to block the financial compensation that the Member States might be required to pay fishermen .
Fishermen have made considerable efforts in recent years , keeping to increasingly restrictive quotas , modernising their fleets and so on .
It would be improper to force them in the future to change their profession without granting them significant financial support .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the resolution entitled ' Key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to CITES ' , as protection of biodiversity must be strengthened within the scope of the next Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora .
Biological diversity is vital to the wellbeing and survival of humanity .
We must be ambitious and demand the protection of all species that are at risk of extinction .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) constitutes the main global agreement in existence on the conservation of wild species .
It aims to prevent the excessive exploitation of these species for international trade .
It is therefore crucial that the European Union participates constructively in the 15th Conference of the Parties next March .
I recognise the importance of preserving endangered species to the safeguarding of the planet 's biodiversity and ecological balance , and I acknowledge that sustainable development presupposes the reasonable use of natural resources without impeding activities that are necessary for development .
Therefore , at a time when changes to the appendices of the CITES are being discussed , I recognise the importance of also ensuring that there is sufficient protection for endangered wild species without jeopardising or consigning to oblivion any activities that ensure the economic and social viability of many communities .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) has acted as an important tool for conserving endangered flora and fauna species , especially those that attract commercial interest and therefore have to be protected and enriched .
We understand that decisions on alterations to this convention , including its appendices , are important , as they allow us to acknowledge and take due account of proven changes in the conservation status of species .
These must have supporting data and substantiated scientific opinions .
We do not believe that the proposal to include bluefin tuna ( Thunnus thynnus ) in Appendix I of the CITES is justified , in the light of the available data .
We should recall that at the last reunion of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) , in November 2009 , experts expressed the view that the species was being over-fished , but that this did not point towards a total ban on fishing .
The recommendations pointed to a significant decrease in catches , which were restricted to between 8 000 and 15 000 tonnes , with a fixed limit of 13 500 tonnes .
In these circumstances , we believe that we should wait for the assessment and recommendation by experts , following the situation closely in 2010 .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
One of its aims is the conservation of bluefin tuna , an essential component in the balance of the biological diversity of the marine environment .
The ban on the international trade in bluefin tuna will enable us to conserve our stocks of bluefin tuna , which are threatened by overfishing .
Nevertheless , Europe will have to check the measures taken by third countries , because how will we explain to our fishermen in Europe that Japanese , Libyan or Tunisian trawlermen are quite legally plundering our stocks of bluefin tuna ?
We will also have to focus on negotiating the organisation of an exclusive economic area that will enable small-scale fishing to continue , since it does not threaten resources .
I voted in favour of a ban on the trade in bluefin tuna and , as a corollary , compensation for the tuna industry , as provided for in an amendment which I co-signed and which was adopted in part .
Thus , bluefin tuna should be listed in Appendix I to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , subject to a general derogation for domestic trade , so that small-scale coastal fisheries can continue , and stricter controls on illegal fisheries .
We should not only address this threatened species , stocks of which have fallen by 60 % over the last 10 years , but also make provision for substantial aid for fishermen and ship-owners who will be affected by this measure .
That is indispensable .
in writing . - I voted for listing the bluefin tuna in CITES Appendix I , as a majority of the FAO Ad Hoc Expert Advisory Panel considered that the available evidence supported the proposal to include it there .
The species has suffered a marked decline , is greatly overfished and is threatened by over-exploitation for international trade .
It therefore meets the criteria for listing in CITES Appendix I.
The current situation of northern bluefin tuna is unsustainable and its survival can only be guaranteed through quota reductions ; I might add that those quotas have always been above the limits recommended by the scientific community .
The inclusion of bluefin tuna in Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , and the subsequent ban on international commercial trade in this species , is the solution that best guarantees the recovery of the species .
Nevertheless , it should be pointed out that some sectors of the fishing industry have acted responsibly , respected quotas and adapted to all the requirements that have been established in recent years .
For that reason , I voted in favour of subjecting the inclusion of the bluefin tuna in CITES Appendix I to the following conditions , as was finally approved : amendment of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 338 / 97 introducing a general derogation for domestic trade ; financial support from the European Union for the vessel owners that are affected ; and tightening of controls and penalties to combat illegal , unregulated fishing .
I also voted in favour of postponing the inclusion of bluefin tuna in Appendix I by 18 months , subject to an independent scientific report .
That proposal was not adopted .
Today , on 10 February 2010 , the European Parliament has been called on to express its views on the EU strategic objectives for the 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , to be held in Doha ( Qatar ) from 13 to 25 March 2010 .
Although Parliament 's role is merely consultative , I nonetheless thought it important to sign and vote on the amendment seeking to eliminate the inclusion of red coral in Appendix II to the Convention , which would have caused a significant reduction in red coral fishing and trade , as an endangered species .
The inclusion of Corallium spp in Appendix II indeed seems over-cautious and not properly corroborated by scientific data .
Moreover , the economic and social repercussions that its inclusion could have on Italy 's economy and , in particular , on some regions of southern Italy , caused me great concern and led me to vote in favour of this amendment .
In fact , I thought it more expedient to allow our companies in that sector more time to restructure their production and thus , to remain competitive on the market .
Bluefin tuna is threatened with extinction as a result of the failure to control the overfishing of this resource .
The ban on marketing it now seems inevitable .
It is aimed at protecting this species .
Aware of the problem , many fishermen , especially French ones , have , for years , been doing all they can to make their boats comply with the regulations and to observe the fishing quotas necessary to ensure the survival of bluefin tuna .
These fishermen , already severely affected by the crisis , will be the main victims of such a measure made necessary by illegal fishing and clandestine industrial networks .
The effort made by these fishermen cannot fall on their shoulders alone .
We cannot ask them to sacrifice themselves in the interests of the planet while the powers that be gathered in Copenhagen have shown that they sidestepped the issue .
The UN principle of joint responsibility for environmental problems must therefore apply , and the fishermen 's effort must be compensated by a contribution from the European Union .
Furthermore , the creation by France of a genuine exclusive economic area in the Mediterranean would make it possible to provide a sanctuary for resources while keeping alive small-scale fishing that is respectful of ecological balances .
The EU must be present at the 15th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) with clearly defined objectives for species in danger of extinction which need to be protected .
The CITES is crucial for the conservation of wild species , and is aimed at avoiding over-exploitation of wild species of fauna and flora for foreign trade .
I have abstained in the vote on Resolution concerning EU strategic objectives for the 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) because I believe that northern bluefin tuna should not be included in CITES Appendix 1 .
It would spell the end for traditional , sustainable fishing techniques , when it is actually the industrial purse seine fishing boats that are to blame for the exhausted stocks .
I call for acknowledgement of the part that each fishing method has played in the alarming situation regarding bluefin tuna , with a new , fairer quota distribution and stricter measures .
For that reason , traditional fishing methods should be encouraged ; these provide thousands of people with a livelihood and are much more selective .
We must be fair : there is a vast difference between industrial fishing and traditional fishing techniques .
I want to stress the importance of protecting bluefin tuna , but we also need to strike a balance that guarantees the continuation of the species without punishing Mediterranean fishing methods such as the almadraba technique .
The main consideration of this resolution on the CITES Convention focusing on species threatened with extinction is fundamental : to reach a European consensus on the ban on the international trade in bluefin tuna .
Faced with fishermen fiercely hostile to this ban , scientific and environmental experts are sounding the alarm .
At the current rate , and despite the drastic efforts made over recent years , bluefin tuna could purely and simply disappear within three years .
Italy has already made a gesture by adopting a moratorium from 2010 .
France has done so too , but much more ambiguously , because it is talking about an 18-month period to ' assess the state of resources ' .
As for Spain and Malta , their display of silence is reprehensible .
The urgency is there , however , and only radical measures can enable stocks to be replenished .
This is also the one and only way of protecting the fishermen 's livelihood in the medium and long terms .
This resolution does not come down to banning the fishing of bluefin tuna entirely , nor to letting it disappear from our plates .
Small-scale and sport fishing will still be permitted .
The measure for a ban on international trade should be enough to safeguard the species , given that 80 % of the bluefin tuna fished in the Mediterranean is exported directly to Japan .
I voted ' yes ' , despite the fact that I believe that the original text from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety was a better one , especially in terms of making reference to the northern bluefin tuna .
It is important , however , that the Council and Commission get the message from Parliament that we support the inclusion of the northern bluefin tuna in CITES Appendix I. I would have preferred it if the three conditions created by the plenary had not been included , but I did support the amendment that proposed support for the affected fishing communities .
The Commission and the Member States also have our backing in their attempts to transfer the polar bear from CITES Appendix II to Appendix I.
One very important stipulation with respect to the Commission and the Member States is that they put a stop to the moves by Tanzania and Zambia to transfer the African elephant from CITES Appendix I to Appendix II with a view to trade .
Parliament would also like to see all proposals for African elephants to be moved to a lower appendix rejected , at least until it is possible to obtain a proper evaluation of what effect the one-off sale in November 2008 by Botswana , Namibia , South Africa and Zimbabwe had , as there are more and more signs that the illegal and organised trade in these animals ' products is increasing across Africa .
The scientific reports concerning the current biomass of bluefin tuna are alarmist : uncontrolled industrial-scale fishing has severely eroded stocks .
Such industrial and international fishing threatens traditional coastal fishing in the Mediterranean .
In order to avoid an ecological disaster , made twice as bad by an economic crisis in the fishing sector , it is urgent to introduce a policy for an international ban on the industrial fishing of bluefin tuna .
My demand is to reconcile two major issues : effective protection of bluefin tuna to enable its survival and future placing on the market , and support for European coastal fishermen whose livelihood is partly dependent on this trade .
It is , for this reason , that I support the listing of bluefin tuna in Appendix I of the CITES to prevent it from being exploited and to prevent bluefin tuna from becoming extinct , but under the following conditions : that there be ongoing scientific assessments to find out the exact state of the biomass of this species , that economic and social support be given to the European players in the fishing sector and , above all , that a derogation be introduced in respect of the domestic trade in bluefin tuna so as to help small-scale industries and thus to prevent small-scale coastal fishing , which is a traditional activity in the Mediterranean , from being killed off .
The Washington Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora , known by its acronym CITES , is an international agreement between states .
All the Member States are party to it .
Its aim is to ensure that international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora does not threaten the survival of the species to which they belong .
International trade in endangered species is estimated to be worth billions of dollars a year and to involve hundreds of millions of plant and animal specimens .
Unfortunately , the EU is one of the main markets for the illegal trade in wild species .
The existence of an agreement guaranteeing sustainable trade is important if these resources are to be preserved for future generations .
Within the EU , national legislation varies from one Member State to another .
In order to provide better protection for wild species , coordination between efforts being made by the Member States and the European institutions to ensure that EU legislation on the trade in wild species is respected should be stepped up .
The Union shall also stand up to the other parties to CITES .
That is why I voted in favour of this resolution .
I voted in favour of adopting the 2009 progress report on Croatia .
I think that it is a balanced report which describes the progress made by Croatia in meeting the criteria for joining the European Union .
After a period of deadlock lasting more than nine months , accession negotiations resumed in October 2009 .
Croatia must continue the reform process and the adoption of European legislation in order to successfully conclude negotiations by the end of this year .
The report also notes a number of issues affecting the process of Croatia 's integration into the European Union .
The European Parliament is encouraging the Croatian authorities to overcome these obstacles and step up their efforts to resolve all the border disputes with neighbouring countries .
The report adopted by the European Parliament plenary includes amendments which I have tabled .
These amendments encourage Croatia to continue its efforts to promote cultural diversity .
My amendments also included one on supporting the development by Croatia of cross-border cooperation projects designed to establish social , economic and territorial cohesion and raise the standard of living of the people living in the border areas .
in writing . - ( NL ) Has this Parliament really not learnt from its past mistakes ?
The reports about Bulgaria and Romania , too , repeatedly stated that corruption was ubiquitous and that the strength of the police and the judiciary were totally inadequate .
Despite this , the accession of these countries was still voted through , and we all know the consequences .
EU membership and the associated massive streams of funding have further embedded the corruption that was already present .
For me , Croatia can be allowed to accede , but absolutely only when it is ready and when corruption no longer has society in its grip .
Once Croatia has acceded - and , as you have heard , I do not think this should be too soon - a stop must be put to enlargement .
The accession of all the Western Balkan countries , as envisaged by this report , is something that I find unacceptable .
in writing . - ( PT ) The implementation of democracy is a long process , and one which requires a strong commitment by the government and civil society .
It is a rocky road and is fraught with difficulties - we Portuguese know that only too well .
When this is combined with the breakdown of a country that , despite being federal , was fairly centralised and governed by a dictatorial regime that collapsed , leading to a horrific war which will not be easily forgotten by future generations , we can indeed be immensely glad , as I was , to vote in favour of this resolution that brings us good news of the progress made by Croatia .
I know , however , that much remains to be done , and I realise that without a free and independent justice system , neither the rule of law nor human rights can be guaranteed , as there is no foreign investment or progress .
This holds true for Croatia and any other potential candidate country .
I also appreciate that the speed at which Croatia is advancing towards the EU is set by Croatia itself , as the rules for membership are transparent and well known .
I know that Croatia can live up to its aspirations .
We hope that negotiations can be concluded within this year .
For our part , Croatia can count on our complete support .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the 2009 progress report on Croatia , as I believe that Zagreb will succeed in surpassing the challenges put before it and conclude negotiations for the country 's accession to the European Union in 2010 .
For this , it is vital to press on with reforms in different areas of the Community acquis , as well as cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
in writing . - ( PT ) Croatia has made remarkable progress in many different areas that qualify it to be not only a reliable partner of the European Union , but also a strong candidate for membership .
Despite the personal tragedies and material destruction that ravaged the country during the bloody conflict that resulted from the implosion of the former Yugoslavia , the country 's reconstruction efforts and its consistent forging of a path towards convergence with the EU have been remarkable .
While there remains much to be done , particularly in sectoral areas , it is clear that Croatia has done enough to deserve a place alongside the Member States , and I hope that it can join the EU sooner rather than later .
I am hoping that the possible entry of Croatia into the European Union will be seen in the Balkans as a sign of hope , and that the other countries in the region , particularly Serbia , will recognise the national and international advantages and benefits of opting for Europe .
I also hope that the border issues with Slovenia are promptly resolved , as these are spoiling this process , and that this can take place with the utmost seriousness , thoroughness and good faith .
in writing . - I would like to draw your attention to a seldom emphasised aspect of evaluating the progress of the countries in question : the situation of Roma .
Realising the importance of establishing the legal framework for anti-discrimination , by 2004 , the EU managed to enforce some real improvements through hardening the accession conditions for new Member States .
I am happy to see that the progress reports are rather critical about the achievements of these three countries , revealing that only Croatia was able to attain some slight improvement in fostering the social inclusion of Roma .
Candidate countries must be involved in the European-level pursuit of Roma integration before now , since accession negotiations grant an unparalleled opportunity to trigger a substantial shift in the governmental attitudes towards granting equal access to Roma in employment , education , housing and health care , promoting political participation and empowering the Romani civil movement .
All European countries - present and future members of the European Union - must engage in a concerted effort in order to overcome the historical social exclusion of the continent 's largest ethnic minority and sign up for a community action plan which provides the proper legal leverage to force the participants to comply with their own pledges .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Amendment 6 because I agree that the government of Croatia needs to make supplementary efforts to reduce prejudice and combat discrimination on any grounds , including sexual orientation ( one of the non-discrimination grounds in Art. 21 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights ) .
My approach on the issue of sexual orientation discrimination , as well as regarding discrimination against any minority , is consistent with EU legislation and other international human rights law and with the views of many of my electorate in Romania , as well as with my beliefs .
It is not Croatia that I am opposing by voting against this progress report .
The people of Croatia do not deserve to be ostracised in any way .
However , I do condemn the Euro-liberal diktat to which both the Member States of the EU and the candidate countries are subjected .
The economic aspect of the Copenhagen criteria , the liberalisation of the markets that it demands , jeopardises the social entitlements of the candidate countries .
I shall support the membership of new states only when the EU makes regional integration work to the advantage of all the citizens who make it up , and not to that of the interests of the capital that dominates it today and provides it with an integration framework over which the citizens have no control .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite the nine month-long deadlock that occurred during the negotiations , due to the border dispute with Slovenia , Croatia has made significant efforts towards EU membership .
As for the political , economic and regional cooperation criteria , it has been showing a great capacity for compliance with the required and previously stipulated conditions .
Although we have a long way to go with this difficult drive towards enlargement , I welcome the progress made in the accession of Croatia , even as a way of pacifying the Balkan region .
Croatia is undoubtedly the country among the accession candidates which has made the greatest progress until now .
Therefore , the fair approach would be to step up the pace of the negotiations , so that there is the possibility of completing them this year .
The implementation of the Community acquis is , of course , an essential requirement in this respect .
The report supports Croatia 's aims , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
Croatia has made extensive progress in many respects with regard both to its domestic and foreign policy .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution and I support Croatia 's rapid accession to the EU .
We have adopted an important resolution evaluating the state of accession negotiations with Croatia .
It is important that the resolution shows which measures should be taken to accelerate accession talks , so that the technical details can be completed in 2010 .
The authorities in Croatia should devote more attention to providing society with better information about the benefits of EU membership .
The functioning of Croatia within the framework of a single , common European market will bring about a development of commercial exchange , an influx of investment and general economic growth .
The support from EU funds for modernisation of Croatia 's economy , building of its infrastructure and restructuring of its agriculture is also not without significance .
Many examples can be given , here , of the benefits received by the countries which acceded in the last two enlargements .
The very fact of belonging to a united Europe is , certainly , not without significance .
Negotiations in the areas of fishing , the environment and the Common Foreign and Security Policy should be unblocked as soon as possible .
I expect the Presidency and the Commission to take specific measures in this area .
Up till now , we have explained that further enlargement can take place only after adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The treaty is now in force , and we should accelerate talks on Croatia 's membership , along with preparations for enlargement of the Union to include other Balkan states .
This is very important for stabilisation in the region .
I have abstained from voting on the report about Croatia , because the time pressure referred to in the report , in order to make Croatia ready for accession in the first half of 2010 is , in my opinion , not necessary .
There is no need to hurry and there is no time pressure that justifies this process .
The resolution on Croatia is a political resolution with no legal binding force .
I voted in favour of it , because Croatia should become a Member State in the near future .
Without the Balkan war , it would have joined in 2004 .
Paragraph 21 on the ' LGBT minority ' , which is as controversial as it is useless , was introduced in plenary .
I voted against this paragraph .
Croatia is party both to the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to the Council of Europe European Convention on Human Rights .
There is therefore no reason to suspect that Croatia is a nation hostile to the LGBT minority .
Despite all symbolic pressure , Croatia retains full national competence in areas linked to non-discrimination .
That is why I called on the Croatian family associations which I met recently during a visit to their country to continue their excellent work for the benefit of the common good of their nation and a better future for all in Europe .
The capacity to assume obligations resulting from accession to the Union and alignment with the Community acquis should not result in the denial of the traditional national culture of future Member States .
I voted for the 2009 progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia because I believe that it is an important report which will have a positive influence on this country 's accession process .
The prospect of joining the European Union is the main factor guaranteeing stability and the continuation of the reform process in the Western Balkans , including the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The report notes the progress made by this country in terms of adopting the legislation required for integration into the European Union .
I believe that , during this next period , the authorities in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia must focus particular attention on implementing the norms which have been adopted .
Furthermore , efforts must be made to improve interethnic relations and dialogue with neighbouring countries , as well as to bring its legislation into line on environmental protection .
The report adopted today includes amendments tabled by me , which recommend consolidating the ability to manage the pre-accession funds supplied by the European Union and support the implementation of the reforms required as part of the accession process .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted against Amendment 4 as part of a greater compromise .
For us , it was more important to demonstrate broad agreement on support for the membership of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia than to emphasise once again our position that we do not feel that disagreements between this country and its neighbours should affect the country 's opportunity to join the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is a good example of a mosaic of interests and ethnicities , not always peaceful or in agreement , that characterises the Balkan region .
All the key political players agree that moving towards the European Union is the best way forward for the country , but there are many obstacles to its membership .
Some of these are of a material nature , while others are more historical or political .
The latter kind , one of which is the actual name of the new country , have been causing tensions with the country 's neighbours , particularly Greece , so a serious and persistent collective effort is needed to overcome them .
The stabilisation of the rule of law , regular free and fair elections and the affirmation of democracy in all its aspects , including implementing the principle of subsidiarity and decentralisation , are challenges that lie ahead for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia if it wishes to persevere with trying to become part of the European Union .
I sincerely hope that it will .
I believe that the government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made significant progress in 2009 , as is also highlighted in the resolution on the 2009 activity report .
In voting in favour of this report , I particularly welcomed the following aspects : the visa waiver , participation in EU civil and military missions , the national authorities ' accreditation for the IPA components on regional and rural development , as well as the progress made in the preparations for taking over the management of the funds supplied as part of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) .
I hope that the accession negotiations will get under way in the near future and that the European Council will confirm , as part of the summit in March , that it accepts the Commission 's recommendation to initiate negotiations .
With regard to the name issue , I agree with the rapporteur 's stance , namely , that Greece and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia must step up their efforts at the highest level to find a mutually acceptable solution under the auspices of the UN .
I also believe that the European Union must provide assistance as part of the negotiation process .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Amendment 18 because the adoption of sexual orientation anti-discrimination provisions is a requirement for EU accession and because increased legal protection against discrimination is a message that the government sends to the whole of society about the value of all members of society .
Sexual orientation is one of the non-discrimination grounds in Article 21 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
My approach on the issue of sexual orientation discrimination , as well as regarding the discrimination of any minority , is consistent with EU legislation and other international human rights law , with the views of many in my electorate in Romania , as well as with my beliefs .
It is not the FYROM that I am opposing by voting against this progress report .
The people of the FYROM do not deserve to be ostracised in any way .
However , I do condemn the Euro-liberal diktat to which both the Member States of the EU and the candidate countries are subjected .
The economic aspect of the Copenhagen criteria , the liberalisation of the markets that it demands , jeopardises the social entitlements of the candidate countries .
I shall support the membership of new states only when the EU makes regional integration work to the advantage of all the citizens who make it up , and not to that of the interests of the capital that dominates it today and provides it with an integration framework over which the citizens have no control .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since the last progress report , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made significant progress .
It is important to point out that prospective EU membership was one of the driving forces behind development and reforms in countries in the Balkan region .
The membership criteria imposed by the EU and matters relating to political , economic and regional cooperation now need to be accepted and fulfilled if the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is to become a member of the EU in the near future .
In my opinion , we must support the accession aspirations of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , because the country undoubtedly belongs to the European , Western cultural background and , in recent months and years , has made progress in numerous areas .
The report gives a very good description of the next steps to be taken .
Without doubt , Macedonia needs to improve its relations with its neighbours even further and , in particular , every effort must be made to resolve the name dispute with Greece .
I have voted in favour of the report , because it provides a balanced presentation of all the factors involved .
As a result of the obvious progress made by Macedonia , I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution .
In the previous term , I worked in the Delegation for relations with Macedonia ( the former Yugoslav Republic ) , and visited this country .
Therefore , I am delighted with its achievements .
2009 was a successful year for Macedonia .
The EU introduced a visa-free regime with this state .
This in particular fosters the development of people-to-people contacts .
Last year , Macedonia demarcated the border with Kosovo and improved relations with Greece .
In the resolution on Macedonia 's progress in 2009 towards implementing the EU membership criteria , we drew attention to the fact that the country 's government should be more sensitive to matters of ethnic minorities and strive for greater media transparency .
We called on the EU institutions to help resolve the dispute between Skopje and Athens over the name of the Macedonian state .
We also invited the EU Council of Ministers to accept the beginning of accession talks with Macedonia in March .
The progress made by Macedonia in 2009 was also down to the EU 's magnetic pull .
There is no doubt that the prospect of EU membership is pushing Macedonia to change for the better .
This country is implementing significant reforms .
Therefore , I voted for the resolution , which praises these while also underlining a roadmap for further progress .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the motion for a resolution on the progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I fully agree with the approach of the resolution , which agrees with the Commission recommendation and supports the opening of negotiations with the FYROM , in the conviction that this is an essential step for the development of that country and for the stability of a region crucial to the interests of the European Union .
in writing . - I abstained in the votes on the progress reports for Croatia and Macedonia .
I did not do so because I judged either country might be unfit to be a member of the European Union .
It would be more accurate to say that I judged the EU to be an unfit organisation for either of them to join .
Membership of the European Union involves serious surrender of sovereignty and an unwelcome intrusion of its laws into everyday life .
It is increasingly destructive of freedom of speech , writing and even thought .
Both countries gained their independence from the Yugoslavian Federation and are now preparing to surrender their sovereignty to the European Union .
I voted in favour of adopting Turkey 's progress report 2009 .
Although accession negotiations with Turkey started on 3 October 2005 , they have made very little progress up until now .
The European Parliament feels that Turkey is still not meeting the Copenhagen political criteria .
Far-reaching constitutional reform is required to ensure greater respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The European Commission noted that during 2009 , Turkey made some progress , albeit limited , on political reforms .
The situation in Turkey has improved in terms of freedom of expression in minorities ' languages .
I believe that the European Union must continue dialogue with Turkey and show openness to this country .
Turkey is extremely important to Europe , both from the perspective of economic and political ties and for the European Union 's energy security .
My country wishes to develop the partnership with Turkey as part of both the Black Sea Synergy and the European Union 's neighbourhood programmes .
in writing . - ( NL ) In the end , I voted against this resolution as , following its amendment in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and in plenary , we have ended up with a text that assumes Turkish membership of the European Union .
It would have been better to emphasise that the negotiations are not open-ended , which would clear the way for more realistic alternatives such as a preferential partnership .
After all , it is as clear as day that Turkey does not meet the conditions for accession to the EU , and that this will still be the case in 10 , 15 or 20 years time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have decided to abstain from the final vote on the resolution on Turkey 's progress report 2009 .
Although the text criticises the ability of this country to shoulder the responsibilities of joining the European Union , my abstention expresses an even more prudent stance .
The current situation in Turkey with regard to democracy , the rule of law , and the protection of human rights and of minorities is still very far from European standards .
I refer , in particular , to the Turkish electoral system that does not respect pluralism , to the law on the closure of political parties , to the interference of the military in political life , to the Kurdish issue and to the continuous restrictions on minority rights , religious freedom and press freedom .
These are , for us , essential values and principles that represent the cornerstone of the European integration process .
It is true that this country 's admission to the European Union could bring major economic advantages , particularly to our companies , but I believe that compliance with the Copenhagen criteria is a priority condition that the Union must monitor rigorously .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is perfectly understandable that the political , economic and cultural elites of Turkey aspire to EU membership .
However , the values , traditions and rules by which we conduct ourselves are public knowledge , and we cannot change them so that simply anyone can join .
It is up to the candidate country to accept them , and eventually , after becoming a Member , to try to live by them , but only then .
However , during the long process of negotiations that has been ongoing with the EU , the Turkish people have felt that violations of their habits and customs - which , it should be said , are not even being observed - are being imposed , only to be denied membership in the referenda that will surely take place in the Member States , even if the politicians do end up agreeing .
Yet Turkey is a friendly nation , with a very rich history and culture .
It is our partner in NATO and deserves to be treated as such .
In view of this , I would suggest that even at this late stage , there could be a referendum in Turkey where the people are asked whether they acknowledge and want to adopt our principles and values , or whether they would now prefer negotiations to begin for a new and deeper special partnership with the EU .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the 2009 progress report on Turkey , as I think it is in the interests of both the EU and Turkey to continue with the membership progress .
I believe that the EU must meet the commitments that it has made to Turkey .
For its part , Turkey must commit further to the reform process that is under way .
in writing . - ( PT ) Turkey is still a long way from meeting the criteria it set itself at the Copenhagen Summit and seems not only less committed to them , but also less interested in fulfilling them .
In this respect , 2009 was a difficult year , in that it became clear that there is still an enormous gap which separates Turkey from the Member States of the European Union , on issues relating to politics , law , human rights , freedom of association , expression and information , and many others .
Regardless of how relations between the EU and Turkey will look in the future , I hope that they will converge and follow the route of dialogue and effective cooperation , and that , for its own good , Turkey continues in the direction of freedom and democracy along Western lines .
in writing . - ( PT ) In addition to its economic , political and social importance , Turkey 's EU membership is a challenge for both sides and has great symbolic significance as a potential bridge between East and West .
On the world stage , the European Union is seen as a paragon of economic development , a multicultural region that encourages respect for minorities and equal rights for all human beings , regardless of gender , race , ethnicity or religion .
These are inalienable values of the project of European integration , and they represent an opportunity for the Turkish people and the peaceful enhancement of their ethnic and cultural diversity .
Nevertheless , the process of applying for EU membership drags on without making any real progress , highlighting the long journey from the formal request for membership in 1987 , which led to the opening of negotiations in 2005 .
Therefore , bearing in mind the effectiveness of this process , I believe that it is crucial to give priority to promoting a referendum in Turkey , with the aim of giving the public the opportunity to express their opinions clearly on the acceptance of full EU membership , and all the implications of this on social and cultural principles and values , or whether they would prefer a deeper partnership with the EU instead .
It is not Turkey that I am opposing by voting against this progress report .
The people of Turkey do not deserve to be ostracised in any way .
However , I do condemn the Euro-liberal diktat to which both the Member States of the EU and the candidate countries are subjected .
The economic aspect of the Copenhagen criteria , the liberalisation of the markets that it demands , jeopardises the social entitlements of the candidate countries .
I shall support the membership of new states only when the EU makes regional integration work to the advantage of all the citizens who make it up , and not to that of the interests of the capital that dominates it today and provides it with an integration framework over which the citizens have no control .
in writing . - ( PT ) I have reservations about Turkey 's EU membership .
Its continuing occupation of part of Cyprus , its refusal to open ports and airports in the region , the violation of rights of political , religious and ethnic minorities , discrimination against women , the exclusion of political parties and the revocation of laws limiting the jurisdiction of military courts are some examples that demonstrate this .
There are other basic issues .
Most of Turkey is not geographically part of Europe .
Turkey has an Islamic identity that is very different from the Judaeo-Christian identity of most EU countries .
Strategically speaking , it would be problematic for the EU to have borders with Iraqi Kurdistan .
The secularity of the country is only held in place by military force .
Finally , the movement of people from what would become the country with the largest population in the EU would create great imbalances in the labour market .
None of this precludes acknowledgement of the efforts made by Turkey over recent years to meet certain criteria required by the EU , and it recognises that invaluable role that this country plays within NATO .
Perhaps it would be far better to guarantee Turkey privileged and preferential partnership status with the EU , rather than creating false expectations and hopes for membership , something that it would be difficult for the facts and circumstances to accommodate .
I have abstained in the vote on Resolution concerning Turkey 's progress report 2009 because I believe that Turkey is playing a very negative role in negotiations between the President of the Republic of Cyprus and the representative of the Turkish-Cypriot community .
Turkey is not complying with United Nations resolutions and it is violating international law : it is keeping 40 000 soldiers in the northern part of Cyprus , the city of Famagusta continues to be sealed off and occupied by troops , and Turkey is still sending settlers to the north of the island .
In my view , the European Union should monitor negotiations and send an unequivocal message to Turkey : if it maintains its current position , it will never be able to join the EU , since it continues to occupy the territory of Cyprus , a Member State of the European Union .
Therefore , the full withdrawal of Turkish troops from the Republic of Cyprus and the return of the city of Famagusta are sine qua non conditions of Turkey 's accession to the European Union .
Turkey has done a great deal in its efforts to comply with the Copenhagen criteria .
Very significant progress has been made in terms of complying with the standards of a market economy .
If , however , we are talking about changes in the areas of politics , democracy or human rights , then although there has been significant progress in creating law , its implementation has not been so successful .
This , too , needs to be understood , as it requires a change in social consciousness , which is something that happens slowly .
However , European standards in the area of human rights , women 's rights and treatment of prisoners and national and religious minorities must be met .
Some opponents of Turkish integration are guided by reasons unconnected with the substance of the matter , and others by fears that Turkey is a big country which will have a big influence on EU decisions , because , in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , the voting power of each Member State is dependent on the size of its population .
Turkey 's membership will certainly be a huge burden to the EU budget , but it should be borne in mind that it is a big market which is important for the Union .
Turkey is a significant member of NATO and is an important partner of the USA and many EU Member States .
It is also a territory which could provide routes for the transfer of energy sources to Europe .
Finally , let us remember that Turkey could become a bridge for inter-religious dialogue as well as cultural and even macro-regional dialogue .
The presence of Turkey in the Union could help stabilise this large and important region of the world .
Turkey must understand that it cannot change its past .
Mistakes have to be admitted .
Then it is easier to live and establish good relations with one 's neighbours .
In contrast to the Commission and the Council , the European Parliament has been able to describe the many problems in Turkey and those relating to Turkey very clearly .
The ban on the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) is an attack on the infant democracy in the country and , in particular , on the Kurdish minority , which represents as much as 20 % of the population .
The fact that this is the 27th party ban within 10 years gives a clear picture of the Turkish understanding of democracy .
The annulment of the legislation limiting the jurisdiction of military courts is yet another indication of the disunity within the country .
As soon as the Turkish Government plans a small concession to the EU , it is exposed by the nationalist opposition .
In almost every area , progress has come to a standstill or things are moving backwards .
The Turkish Government is attempting to nip criticism in the bud by taking reprisals against hostile journalists and media organisations .
Double standards are being applied to religious freedom .
The prime minister wants to lift the ban on wearing headscarves and the age limit for Koran schools , while at the same time discriminating against religious minorities and harassing them on an ongoing basis .
These are dreadful developments .
Against this background , it seems only logical that the Turkish chief negotiator , Mr Bagis , does not take seriously our resolution and , therefore , our democratic decision-making structures .
Turkey has shown very clearly that it is still generations away from joining the EU .
The essential prerequisites for continuing negotiations with Turkey are the full implementation of the Ankara Protocol and the recognition of the EU Member State of Cyprus .
in writing . - ( PT ) Turkey 's EU-membership application has become a long , drawn-out process , the outcome of which still remains to be seen .
Turkey has committed itself to introducing reforms , maintaining good relations with its neighbours and progressively aligning itself with the Community acquis .
However , these efforts need to be stepped up in order to fully meet the criteria set at the Copenhagen Summit and in order to implement the judicial and electoral system and legislation .
Progress towards real reforms stalled in 2009 , and issues such as the non-opening of ports and airports on Cyprus are likely to affect the negotiation process .
In the same way , the decision by the Turkish Constitutional Court to ban the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party and the revocation of the legislation limiting the jurisdiction of military courts means a delay in the process .
In fact , the reforms are necessary and urgent , as the resolution of Parliament ordains .
However , in this context , where greater efforts are required to satisfy the criteria for the membership-application process , the suggestion of a referendum is pertinent .
This referendum would ask the Turkish people whether they really acknowledge and want to adopt European principles and values , or whether they would prefer a new and deeper special partnership with the EU .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Agreement between the EU and the USA on the processing and transfer of Financial Messaging Data from the European Union to the United States for purposes of the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the recommendation on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the United States of America on the processing and transfer of Financial Messaging Data from the European Union to the United States for purposes of the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme ( 05305 / 2010 - C7-0004 / 2010 - 2009 / 0190 ( NLE ) ) .
As you know , the European Parliament has been very active in this matter .
Our Parliament is composed of Members directly elected by the citizens of Europe .
Our main responsibility is for citizens ' rights , and we must guard these rights .
We are fully aware of this .
This is our first and greatest responsibility .
At the same time , we realise how important the SWIFT agreement is - for completely different reasons .
Therefore , finding the right middle ground , here , was important .
While this was happening , in recent months , the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force .
In November of last year , I wrote to Mr Reinfeldt , who was President of the European Council at the time , with a request to postpone the decision and for the European Parliament 's decision to be taken into account , in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
As you know , this did not happen , and on 30 November , the Council made a decision on the matter and adopted the SWIFT agreement .
On 21 December , I sent another letter to Mr Reinfeldt .
Parliament expressed two expectations in this letter : inclusion of our position in the negotiation mandate for a permanent agreement , and also full information for Parliament during future negotiations .
On 21 January , I wrote a similar letter to Mr Zapatero , who currently leads the rotating Presidency , and sent the same letter again on 8 February .
I have also written a letter , saying the same things , to Mr Barroso .
I have also been in touch with representatives of the American Government and with Mrs Clinton .
I have also received a letter on this matter , which sets out the position of the United States Government on the SWIFT agreement .
Perhaps you know all this , because the documents are all available - I have sent all the documents to the political groups , so that you can use them at any time .
This is important .
We must have full information , so that we can make decisions on this matter in a responsible way .
The measures we have taken will also be helped by our discussion today .
That is why this discussion about SWIFT is so important .
I am extremely glad that we have representatives of the Council and of the European Commission with us , who will be able to speak , and then we come to our discussion and our responsibility for a decision on this matter .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I shall start by saying that I , too , support a strong , outward-looking EU that is capable of acting shoulder to shoulder as a true counterpart to the US , and in that framework , I think it is of crucial importance to be open , fair and transparent if we are to address the issue of how Europe should cooperate with the US for counter-terrorism purposes , including law-enforcement use of data collected for commercial ends .
Without a doubt , the targeted exchange and use of data for counter-terrorism purposes is , and will remain , necessary , but let me be clear : European citizens must be able to trust both security and data claims .
Getting it right first time round should be the objective and , with all due respect , the Council has been insufficiently strong to do so .
Indeed , the proposed interim agreement is a significant departure from European law in how enforcement agencies would obtain financial records of individuals , namely through court-approved warrants or subpoenas to examine specific transactions , but with the proposed interim agreement , we instead rely on broad administrative subpoenas for millions of records of European citizens .
By the very nature of SWIFT , it is not possible to refer to the so-called ' limited ' requests .
For technical reasons , SWIFT has to transfer bulk data , thereby violating the basic principles of EU data-protection law such as necessity and proportionality .
This cannot be rectified ex post by mechanisms of oversight and control .
At all times , it must be clear that Parliament is not out there to just passively take note of the actions of the Council and the Commission .
The fact is that this House is always being promised jam tomorrow if only we would be patient .
However , we cannot keep falling for fake promises of jam tomorrow .
We need clear commitments now and the ball was in the Council 's court .
I made that clear last week , but so far , it has failed to act accordingly .
The Council states that it wants to ensure the utmost respect for privacy and data , but fails to address in particular the rights of access , rectification , compensation and redress outside the EU for data subjects .
The Council states that it shares Parliament 's concerns and therefore calls on the Commission to adopt draft negotiation guidelines .
Why hide behind the Commission ?
It is Council that will adopt the negotiation directives in the end ; why have the negotiation guidelines not already been submitted ?
Council states yet again that it wants to ensure that the TFTP will continue .
However , it fails to address the fact that in this way , the EU continues to outsource its financial intelligence service to the US .
The lack of reciprocity is not being addressed .
True reciprocity would allow the EU authorities to obtain similar data stored in the US and , in the long term , consider the necessity of building up our own EU capacity .
The Council does not show any commitment to line up with existing legislation such as the data retention directive for the telecom service providers , which does deal with specific and targeted data .
The Council fails to clarify the precise role of the public authority .
A ' push ' system does not mean anything if , in actual practice , SWIFT has to transfer bulk data .
Transfer and storage are , in other words , by definition disproportionate under the terms of the interim agreement and the Council does not address a European solution for the supervision of data exchange .
President-in-Office , tell me how on earth I can tell 500 million European citizens that we are selling out on important safeguards and principles just because we are not able to put our foot down , because Council is not able to get its act together .
Tell me ; I am all ears .
( Applause )

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin my speech with an unequivocal statement : Spain has shown clear , unreserved support for the Treaty of Lisbon , and it has done so from the very beginning .
We did so in the certainty that the implementation of the new treaty was going to mean , inter alia , that the European institutions would be brought closer to our citizens .
This is an objective that the Treaty of Lisbon entrusts largely to Parliament .
Giving Parliament a bigger role and greater participation in issues such as the area of freedom , justice and security is the way in which this treaty has tried to bring the citizens and the institutions closer together .
Let me begin , then , by assuring all the honourable Members that the Council is committed to working closely and honestly with Parliament .
For the Spanish Presidency , this conclusion is the result of our firm commitment to the Treaty of Lisbon and its aims .
The Council also shares Parliament 's concern to ensure the security of all European citizens , for security means the guarantee that they can fully exercise their freedom .
That is the context in which , together , we are fighting terrorism - all forms of terrorism .
As stated in the Resolution adopted in this Chamber on 17 September , the European Parliament ' recalls its determination to fight terrorism and its firm belief in the need to strike the right balance between security measures and the protection of civil liberties and fundamental rights ' .
I agree wholeheartedly with this statement .
This is the framework within which I would like to see this debate conducted ; it is a new framework under the Treaty of Lisbon , and it is based on honest , interinstitutional collaboration and a shared desire - and this is not a new desire - to fight terrorism while respecting the principles of proportionality and necessity , which are also critical if we are to fight terrorism effectively .
Mr President , it is widely acknowledged that international terrorism has brought new challenges to our societies .
This is a relatively new form of terrorism which has no clear organisation , is extremely deadly and operates at a global level .
A global approach is therefore needed to eradicate it .
It lacks a rigid , hierarchical structure and so can only be combated with an extraordinary intelligence effort .
It is so deadly that we are having to be on maximum alert in places where large numbers of people gather .
Prevention , coordination and intelligence are the three words that sum up our strategy for tackling this huge threat .
All countries have endeavoured to improve internal and external coordination , to be better informed and , ultimately , to cooperate with those who are engaged in the same struggle .
The European Union has also increased its joint investigation bodies and teams , information exchange and shared analysis .
This is the context for the agreement we are examining today between the European Union and the United States concerning the transfer of financial messaging data .
Data exchange without an agreement has worked uninterruptedly for many years .
When I appeared before the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs two weeks ago , several Members asked me about the outcomes of that data exchange .
It is a pertinent issue which I think has been taken up and answered in the second report by Judge Bruguière , which has been referred to this House and from which I shall now quote : ' during 2009 , the TFTP has been a highly valuable tool used by intelligence and law enforcement agencies to help map out terrorist networks , to complete missing links in investigations , to confirm the identity of suspects , to locate the physical whereabouts of suspects and to identify new suspects as well as to disrupt attempted terrorist attacks ' .
I would also add that this not only applies to 2009 but earlier , in the United States , Europe and all over the world : in Barcelona in January 2008 , in Germany in the summer of 2007 , in London after the 7 July attacks and in the investigations into the 11 March attacks in Madrid , the Bangkok killings of April 2005 and the Bali bombings of 2002 .
These are just some of the examples Judge Bruguière cites in his report .
Data exchange has therefore delivered positive results .
It has allowed us to investigate and prevent attacks .
It has enabled us to arrest terrorists after they have committed attacks and , most importantly , before they have succeeded in committing them .
Even though SWIFT indicated in 2007 that it had made a decision to change its databases , it did not actually do so until just a few months ago .
This meant we had to review the protocols which , up to then , had enabled us to exchange financial data .
That had to be done in a very short space of time .
The mandate was approved by Council in the summer of 2009 when there was still uncertainty over the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The decision that was taken is well known .
We signed an interim nine-month agreement which should be ratified in this Chamber : an interim agreement lasting nine months , during which this Parliament , the Council and the Commission should establish a new negotiation process to set out a definitive agreement .
That was the decision taken .
It may not have been the best decision .
However , it is important to say clearly to this House that , in terms of privacy protection , the signed ad referendum agreement that we are debating here today is a great improvement on the protocols in place prior to this agreement .
It is an improvement because this interim agreement has additional guarantees , among other elements , that were recommended by Parliament and set out by the rapporteur in the report that has been presented to us today .
At this stage , I would like to say that the Spanish Presidency of the Council has taken full account of the resolutions adopted in Parliament and the letters sent by the President of the Parliament , as well as the report that was drawn up by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert and voted on in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on 4 February .
For this reason , the Council approved a statement that was sent to Parliament yesterday and whose key points I shall now summarise for you .
Firstly , the Council is committed to incorporating into a definitive agreement the sound guarantees that will strengthen proper protection , the deletion of data and greater precision with regard to the exchange of data obtained by the TFTP with national authorities and third countries .
We are also committed , of course , to strengthening the guarantees contained in the current agreement ; these should remain - and be strengthened - in the definitive agreement , as should a strict limitation on the end use of data and an absolute ban on extracting data and using profiles .
Finally , the Council , in response to the new context created by the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , is committed to negotiating an interinstitutional agreement in order to enable easier access to classified documents relating to international agreements .
In this regard , and I wish to reiterate this point as clearly as possible , the Spanish Presidency is totally committed to the Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , particularly Article 8 , and fully recognises the legitimate concerns expressed by Parliament .
We now know that the commitment I have just set out is possible .
In a letter sent to the President of Parliament by the Secretary of State of the United States , Hillary Clinton , and the Secretary of the Treasury , Timothy Geithner , the United States Government has expressed its commitment to incorporating the requisite guarantees in accordance with the position taken by the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is possible that in the approval process for the agreement we are debating today , the Council could have done things better .
What is certain , however , is that in this process , the Council has learned lessons and taken due note of Parliament 's concerns .
It is also certain that the agreement we are debating today has contributed - and I hope that it will continue to contribute - to improving the security of citizens all around the world and , of course , in Europe .
Thank you , Mr Rubalcaba .
I would like to remind everyone , as I said earlier , that I have received a reply from the Council to the letters which I sent .
They are available in the political groups for you to see at any time .
In its reply , the Council has responded to our expectations , the expectations of Parliament .
Thank you , Mr Rubalcaba , for making this declaration and for explaining the Council 's position on this .
It is very important to us .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by thanking everyone for yesterday giving us and me your trust and confidence by voting ' yes ' for the new Commission .
It is an interesting first day at work and I am grateful to share with you the important issue of sharing information with the US for the purpose of combating terrorism , this time in relation to the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme ( TFTP ) .
The European Parliament has , of course , shown great interest in this matter .
This is quite right , since the TFTP confronts us again with the challenge of reconciling data sharing with data protection and , if we take up this challenge , this helps us to give citizens security , privacy and data protection .
One of the aims of the interim agreement has been to ensure implementation of the conditions in the European Parliament resolution of September 2009 .
We firmly intend to strengthen further the data protection part when negotiating the long-term agreement , particularly concerning the right to receive information about whether one 's rights have been respected under the agreement , and stronger guarantees about effective redress , lawful data processing and the deletion of data .
The second Bruguière report was made available to MEPs on Monday last week , and it demonstrates the significance and the value of TFTP in the investigation and disruption of terrorism , including in the European Union .
The report confirms that TFTP has been used to identify and arrest individuals who have subsequently been convicted of terrorism within our Member States .
The report also highlights that TFTP is a valuable source of reliable information necessary in the fight against terrorism .
There are specific examples and the Council referred to a few of them .
We know that the threat of terrorism in some of our Member States remains as high as ever , and I am sure that you can see that rejection of the interim agreement by this House would represent a serious blow to EU security .
Some of our Member States have made it very clear that they want the TFTP to continue because they have benefited from it in the past and will continue to do so .
They have told us that the reliable information that the TFTP provides on known and suspected terrorism is an important source of legitimate intelligence needed to address the complex threat , notably from al-Qaeda inspired terrorism .
The interim agreement is not only a favour to the US ; it is in our common interest .
Much has been said about the level of protection of data in the interim agreement and this is , of course , a key concern .
I encourage Members - and I am sure most of you have already done so - to look closely at the interim agreement .
You will see that it contains significant and detailed legally binding commitments on the way that the US Treasury Department can process data under the agreement .
They include , for example , a strict limitation on the purpose of processing , which is limited to the investigation , detection and prosecution of terrorism .
It includes an absolute prohibition on data mining - searches of the database can only be undertaken where it is possible to show a reason to believe that the subject of the search is engaged in terrorism .
That means that the data held on the TFTP database are effectively anonymous .
Only if there is a reason to believe that one identified person is a terrorist can the data of that person be seen and extracted from the database .
This is important .
The interim agreement obliges the Treasury Department to delete data within five years of receipt - a period which is in keeping with the retention period in EU legislation on terrorist financing .
The agreement also provides for a detailed EU review in which some of our own data protection authorities will participate to ensure that these and many other data protection obligations are complied with .
The agreement does not involve the transfer of virtually all SWIFT data to the US Treasury Department .
I can assure you that only a fraction of SWIFT data will be transferred under the interim agreement .
It does not in any way affect the powers of data protection authorities with regard to processing activities performed in the EU by SWIFT or financial institutions .
Refusal of consent will bring to an end the interim agreement , including the significant data protection safeguard it contains .
If the US is able to access data by other means - for example through bilateral relations with the Netherlands - those safeguards will no longer apply .
If the interim agreement falls , it is likely to take considerable time before any alternative can be put in place .
So refusal of consent risks leading to both a data protection gap and a security gap .
Finally , the interim agreement is only an interim agreement .
It might not be the best agreement in the world .
It can - and it will - be improved .
The Commission is now finalising the draft mandate and the guidelines for the long-term agreement and we will adopt them swiftly .
I give a personal commitment to you to ensure that the European Parliament 's concern will be addressed and that we shall seek a strong protection of privacy and data protection in the new agreement .
The European Parliament will be fully informed at all stages of this procedure .
I hope that this answers a few of your questions .
Thank you , Mrs Malmström , for your explanations .
They were , truly , very important for us .
The Council and the European Commission have just made certain declarations in relation to our expectations of the negotiation mandate and about keeping Parliament informed .
In what we are doing , there is also another important element : the European Parliament has become jointly responsible for European legislation .
We are also responsible for international agreements , such as the SWIFT agreement , and we are giving a strong signal that the situation has changed , now that the Treaty of Lisbon is in force .
This is important .
I think the recent signals from the American Government show that it has become clear that the European Parliament is , today , fully responsible for legislation .
We wanted it to be a strong signal .
However , we know we are responsible to our citizens .
We are directly elected Members of the European Parliament .
Our responsibility to defend citizens ' rights is of fundamental significance and we always stress this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to welcome you on your first working day and assure you that you have the full cooperation of our group .
At the beginning of this debate , we would like to say that we want a good partnership with the Americans , in particular , when it comes to combating terrorism .
Secondly , we strongly support security for our citizens and also citizens ' rights and data protection .
Thirdly , we have worked very hard to ensure that the guidelines for the negotiations and our position were in place as early as mid September and we now want to see these implemented .
Fourthly , Mrs Malmström , I would like to say with respect that it is not that Parliament had a strong interest in this area , but rather that we regard the legislative process as our responsibility , as the President has said , and we want to be involved in this process on an equal footing with the Council and the Commission .
Our response to the text for the negotiations is to make two very clear points .
Firstly , we cannot accept the way in which this text has been produced .
Secondly , although the Council maintains that ' the points from Parliament 's resolution have been fully taken into account ' , in fact , some of the points have not been included , in particular the right to take legal action , the deletion of data and some others .
These are the main reasons why we said in the Subcommittee on Security and Defence that this was unacceptable to us .
It also became clear that it was only after this that things started to move .
The US Secretary of State has not agreed to anything , unless the Council has received information which is different from the information given to Parliament .
This has allegedly happened on some occasions .
The Council has sent out encouraging signals this week , but has not given any guarantees .
I would like to make that very clear .
This is why we are saying that we want to discuss this further , that we want a good agreement and that we are very much in favour of more discussions , if there is a guarantee that this will result in a good agreement .
Mr President , the Irish author Jonathan Swift in his famous book ' Gulliver 's Travels ' sent his hero Gulliver to the land of Lilliput , whose inhabitants were only six inches high .
However , Gulliver believed that he had arrived in the land of giants .
To me , it seems rather as if American diplomacy has followed Gulliver and believes that it can treat the European Parliament as if it were an organisation of little people .
That is a mistake .
Mrs Malmström , I would like to congratulate you on your election and your move from one bench to the other .
However , you should be aware that it was not just an error committed by American diplomats , but also by the governments of the European Union who believed that an agreement of this kind could be pushed through Parliament and did not realise that we cannot vote in favour of such a defective agreement .
This agreement embodies the spirit of the security ideology of the United States of America , but it does not embody the protection of fundamental rights , which we as Members of the European Parliament must guarantee for the citizens of Europe .
The possibility of transferring large volumes of data without specifications and without specific details in individual cases is in fundamental conflict with the data protection legislation that we have adopted in Europe in all our parliaments , including the national parliaments .
The serious problems regarding data protection have already been referred to .
You have done so yourself .
How long will the data be stored ?
Who is storing it ?
Who is passing it on to whom ?
What options do I have for finding out about what is happening with my data , who is accessing it and whether it is correct ?
What legal protection do I have to ensure that incorrect data cannot be gathered about me and passed to third parties , whoever they may be ?
When will my data be deleted , if it has been collected and stored ?
Under the terms of the Homeland Security Act , data can be stored for up to 90 years .
If this includes a guarantee that I will reach the age of 90 , then I 'm happy to discuss it .
It is worth repeating that this data can be stored for up to 90 years !
All of these factors represent serious failings in this agreement .
For this reason , Mr Rubalcaba , I have to say to you that this is a bad agreement and we cannot vote in favour of it .
If we reject it , then it is your job to negotiate a new and better agreement with the United States that respects the interests of security but , at the same time , also respects the security interests of citizens with regard to their freedom .
If you can do this , we will support the new agreement .
The objective of a new round of negotiations must be to find a compromise between these two things .
I cannot recommend to the members of my group to vote in favour of this agreement at this point and in this form .
This evening , I will suggest that my group votes against this agreement .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to welcome my former colleague and good friend , Cecilia Malmström .
It is a pleasure to see you here .
This is a first key decision for the European Parliament to take with its new Lisbon powers and expectations are high , but we need to keep a clear head .
We owe it to our citizens to make a well-considered decision , free from outside pressures or scare tactics such as false claims of a security gap , because data , and we know this , can still be obtained by the US without disagreement .
Let us not forget that the Member States were not unanimous on this agreement either .
We can only give our consent to an agreement that has full democratic legitimacy , on grounds of substance and procedure .
This is not about a battle of wills between the Council and the European Parliament nor is it about transatlantic relations .
This is about European citizens being entitled to a proper democratic and transparent procedure .
The answers of the Council so far are utterly inadequate , and the democratic rights of European citizens cannot be bargained away with promises of trips to the US or vague promises by the Council for future agreements .
The Council has had countless opportunities since 2007 to handle this in a proper manner and ensure security , as well as protection of personal data and civil liberties , or ensure proper democratic scrutiny by national parliaments or , since 1 December , the European Parliament , but the Council has been incredibly stubborn .
Parliament cannot and should not take a decision if it does not have access to all relevant information and documents .
Our voters have a right to know that we consider all elements very seriously and that we do not simply rubber-stamp Council decisions .
Finally , the European Parliament has been very clear for years about its concerns and expectations and , instead of coming up with more vague promises , the Council should finally provide us with the opinion of its Legal Service and the requested information demonstrating the use of the data for counter-terrorism purposes .
I do not consider that the second Bruguière report is sufficient .
So , if the Council wants the consent of this House , it will have to meet our demands .
That , Council , is the only way .
( Applause )
Mr President , firstly , I would like to comment on the meetings with the experts and the US ambassador .
In the two meetings which I chaired , I did not feel in any way as if I were being regarded as a little person from Europe , quite the contrary .
During these meetings with the experts from the US , I learnt a huge amount about the very different legal systems relating to the protection of fundamental rights in the US and in Europe .
I am grateful to the Americans for taking part in this far-reaching dialogue .
The nature of the task which lies ahead of us has become clear to me .
The Council has not done this task justice in the past .
The nature of the task facing the Europeans has also become clear to me , if we want to combine an effective fight against terrorism and effective protection of fundamental rights in the same agreement .
I actually find it embarrassing that people have had to come across the pond to explain this controversial area to us and that the Council has not so far been able to have an honest debate of this kind with Parliament .
The rapporteur has made it entirely clear in which areas fundamental rights , which enjoy the highest levels of protection in Europe , will be breached .
I would like to make an additional point that I regard as a major problem from a legal and political perspective , if we look at the issue in more detail .
The US and Europe have completely different definitions of terrorism and this is a problem which pervades this agreement .
As has rightly been said , the Members of this House are accountable to the citizens of Europe for ensuring that their rights are preserved .

In my opinion , we should not vote for an agreement which many of us , including Mr Weber , Mr Langen , who is not here at the moment , and Mr Schulz , have said repeatedly in public is in breach of current law .
We must take action now .
We have told the citizens of Europe in the course of the public discussion that we would do so .
We must vote against the interim agreement and we must not postpone our vote .
Parliament must not evade its responsibilities again as it did in November .
Then we had the option of bringing everything to a stop , but the majority did not want to do so .
Now we must take action and - I am saying this after the consultations with the Americans - this will put us in a better negotiating position and on an equal footing , which will enable us to improve security and the rights of citizens in the European Union and perhaps even in the US .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , like my colleagues here , I have been hugely frustrated and angered by the Council 's treatment of and substandard consultation with this House on the agreement .
Parliamentary consultation and consent should not be a retrospective tool .
The reciprocity of data protection should be beyond reproach , and the manner in which the agreement has been negotiated and concluded must never be repeated .
However , I have been reassured at least by the United States authorities and by the multi-layered data protection systems and judicial safeguards that are in place through this interim agreement .
So our poor treatment by the Council should not compromise the EU 's agreement with the United States , or any future agreements on the security of Europe . We are now receiving loads of assurances and promises from the Council and from the Commission .
I cannot yet judge whether these answer all the reasonable requirements we have laid down , so in my opinion , we now need some time before proceeding further with our consideration of this vital measure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the SWIFT agreement was negotiated on the basis of a dubious procedure and quickly pushed through only one day before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , in order to circumvent Parliament .
However , I would like to focus specifically on the content of the agreement .
We have big brother 's little sister waiting for our approval .
Mrs Clinton believes that she can persuade the Members of this Parliament to do something which we would not accept from our own governments .
From my point of view , it is fundamentally wrong for alleged terrorism investigators to have such extensive access to databases , because this undermines people 's self-determination over their own personal data .
Personal data will be stored for decades and no one will have any control over how it is used .
In addition , the data can still be retained after the agreement has come to an end . It will not be possible to take legal action to discover the whereabouts of the data or to claim damages for its illegal use by third countries .
This gives the state precedence over its citizens , who will all be reduced to the status of objects of suspicion .
The Member States are allowing other governments to spy on our citizens indirectly via the EU .
To give some examples in Germany , should Deutsche Telekom , Deutsche Bahn or the Schlecker drug store chain still be worried about collecting information on their employees ?
Will it now become the norm for the German Government to buy from tax investigators data that has been obtained illegally ?
We find ourselves in a situation in which Parliament must stand up for its beliefs and make a decision .
Why should Google be able to set data thresholds in future ?
It is important to combat terrorism and , in particular , its causes , and I believe that we all agree on this , but not at the cost of fundamental rights .
In this context , I have heard many speeches which refer to the EU as a community of values .
We are just about to sweep one of these values under the carpet and my group cannot vote in favour of that .
( MT ) Let me make it clear that the European Popular Party is in favour of this agreement .
It is all for the SWIFT agreement and tomorrow will vote in favour .
Let me explain why : the European Popular Party is going to give its backing because its primary concern is the safety of people , the security of our citizens .
The security of our citizens will be improved as a result of this agreement , and this is why we support it .
This is not simply my own opinion , but it is the expert opinion of those whose specific task was to research and evaluate whether or not this agreement enhances the security of the citizens whom we all , in this Chamber , represent .
There will be an improvement in the level of security throughout Europe and this will be extended to the security of other citizens worldwide , including the United States .
Now I agree with those who stated that the Council did not act appropriately with the European Parliament , but I believe that the message sent out by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs last week taught the Council a lesson , a lesson that was clearly understood .
I also sympathise with the concerns of my fellow Members on the issue of privacy , but here we must again recall that this agreement is an interim one .
This means that a new agreement will have to be drawn up that will provide better guarantees regarding security .
Mr President , in your introduction you mentioned responsibility .
I appeal to my fellow Members to use the powers of this Parliament , the new powers that we have , with full responsibility , in order to truly be able to face 500 million citizens and tell them that we were defending their security .
If possible , in order to retain more unity in this Chamber , tomorrow 's vote should be postponed .
We are ready to consider the postponement of the vote but if it is not granted , then we should vote in favour .
Mr President , we , too , in the Socialists and Democrats , want to fight for the European citizens and we want to fight against terrorism , so that is why we will be recommending , as my leader said , a ' no ' vote tomorrow to ensure that we vote in this Parliament on the first consent procedure under Lisbon against a bad agreement for this whole Parliament .
This is not a sectarian issue for us but a factual issue .
This is an issue about whether a badly drafted agreement serves the interests of security and anti-terrorism .
As one of my advisers once said - and he is a lawyer , I used to be a lawyer and Mr Kirkhope was also a lawyer - quoting Benjamin Franklin : He who would put security so far before liberty deserves neither .
So we all agree that , for the EU citizens , a good agreement is what we want .
Now in Coreper , it is absolutely true that the Council came up with all the issues that we as a group regarded as the important issues .
Mrs Clinton , too , in her letter acknowledged that Parliament had a point , but neither of these documents went further and gave us a blueprint for solving this problem , and that is why a ' no ' will , in our view , push towards a better agreement for the whole Parliament .
So we , in our group , are appealing across the House and not just within our group , to support the rapporteur in what she is trying to do , a better agreement to fight terrorism .
No one has the moral high ground here ; we want an effective fight against terrorism , that means a better agreement and that is what we will be recommending to the Socialist and Democrats this evening in our group .
( ES ) Mr President , I reject the methods and the time used for this agreement .
Parliament 's role is an essential part of the Treaty of Lisbon and it should be respected by all parties concerned .
Moving on to the substance of this issue : the greatest damage a democratic society can do to terrorism is to cut off its financial resources .
That is why the interim agreement should remain in place while the definitive agreement is urgently negotiated .
On at least nine proven occasions , SWIFT and TFTP have demonstrated their effectiveness and value in preventing and suppressing terrorist activities in Europe , Asia , Africa and America , in relation to the text of the interim agreement and data protection .
Which report should prevail , ladies and gentlemen ?
That of the European Data Protection Supervisor or those of the special Judge , for both are well-founded yet contradictory .
No , ladies and gentlemen , we have neither held a debate nor reached a solution on this issue .
The wording of the interim agreement guarantees rights .
It states that data provided shall be processed exclusively for the prevention of terrorism or its financing ; that no copies of data provided shall be made ; that data provided shall not be interconnected with any other database ; and that only public security authorities shall have access to data .
I trust the government of the United States and the great democracy by which it is established .
We have an obligation to strengthen our relations with that country , for we are natural , mutually reliable partners .
For all these reasons , I support a House vote in favour of the interim agreement and I welcome the very positive move Parliament has made to assert its authority , and the fact that Mrs Clinton and Mr Geithner have acknowledged that authority as an indispensable element now and in the future .
Finally , Mr President , the Council and the Commission know what is expected of them .
An interinstitutional agreement is urgently needed .
Mr President , a simple letter from the Council that the negotiation guidelines will fully contain Parliament 's concerns , that negotiations will begin immediately with the United States and not at some point in the future , and that Parliament will be fully involved in these negotiations might have sufficed , and it would not be that difficult to give in order to alleviate this Parliament 's concerns about the way it has been treated , ignored and played with in the past .
But you could not do even this today .
The bulk transfer of data , the Commissioner said , is not a problem .
Only some data will go there .
SWIFT tells us that is not the case .
The United States administration tells us that is not the case .
There is no proof of what you say in this statement .
You mentioned the negotiating guidelines that you are nearly done with .
Where are they ?
Given the pressure that exists today , why can you not tell us exactly where you agree and where you disagree with Parliament , instead of making general statements ?
I feel it is extremely important to fight together with the United States against terrorism .
I urge the United States and Council to work very seriously together with us after our vote tomorrow , and not to choose bilateral routes or dream about breaking the solidarity , but to work together to protect fundamental rights while we protect security .
( DE ) Mr President , anyone who has followed the many discussions about SWIFT over recent weeks might get the impression that without SWIFT , we would descend into chaos and that rejecting the agreement would bring an end to the transatlantic relationship and the joint war on terror .
These attempts to threaten us can be described in one word : ridiculous .
The US and the Council are not trying to rescue an essential tool ; they are simply saving face .
There are many agreements and measures in place to combat terrorism .
SWIFT could be a useful addition to these .
The failed attack on 25 December has clearly demonstrated that it is not data we are lacking , but the ability to make effective use of the data which we already have .
The idea is to divert attention away from this fact .
The interim agreement simply could not be worse .
It is full of contradictions and inconsistencies .
Instead of suitable precautions being taken to ensure that only data relating to people who are actually under suspicion is transferred , huge volumes of data will be sent to the US every month .
The agreement represents a flagrant breach of citizens ' rights , data protection and the principles of the rule of law .
If the Council and the US were really prepared to take on board this criticism and to incorporate these points into a new agreement , then there would be no need for us to accept this dreadful agreement .
In the interests of the citizens , we must say no to the interim agreement and we must start new negotiations immediately , so that we can put in place a really good agreement which acts as an additional , effective tool for combating terrorism and which preserves our fundamental rights .
( ES ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon has opened a new chapter for this Parliament , but also for the Council and the Commission .
In his speech , the President-in-Office of the Council has taken note that this Parliament should be listened to and that its concerns and demands should be taken into account .
He has also noted that the negotiation of this agreement was not conducted very well , or well enough .
Above all , however , he put forward a future commitment : to urgently negotiate a definitive agreement that meets the demands set out in the rapporteur 's report , which include the demand for a guaranteed right to appeal , to information and to the subsequent modification or deletion of private data .
We therefore have to strike a new balance between privacy , citizens ' freedom , and security , which is also a fundamental right of the citizens we represent in this Parliament .
So , whatever the outcome of the debate , Parliament urges the Minister to begin that negotiation as soon as possible and to thereby satisfy the Treaty of Lisbon , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , and the 500 million citizens that this Parliament represents , who have a fundamental right to security .
( DE ) Mr President , in the era of mobility , we cannot have security without an effective and rapid exchange of data and our job is to protect our citizens against terrorist attacks .
Therefore , we must find a balance between security and privacy .
This balance must be reflected in the agreement that we are currently debating .
However , given the importance of this issue , the Council has taken a really amateurish approach in this case .
Therefore , I would like to see more concessions made to the rapporteur , including some specific help , so that we can perhaps achieve a majority in Parliament .
If we do not have this , then the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme will remain a single central programme and it will be important for us to ensure that SWIFT only transfers individual items of data .
If we do not have this , then the full agreement is the right thing and the current agreement remains important .
Therefore , I believe that we should aim for a postponement and then ultimately ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Colleagues , this is a very important discussion .
I do not want to disturb you but you are all talking half a minute longer than you should .
There are 11 people on the list .
If you all talk for such a long time then I cannot give the floor to the others .
( DE ) Mr President , no one has any serious doubts about the need to combat terrorism .
However , the question for advanced democracies based on the rule of law always concerns what should be done and how it should be done .
In this case , this question is easy to answer .
We must not act in such a way that 500 million people are placed under suspicion and that there is a massive intrusion on their rights , without giving them recourse to legal protection .
In particular , these measures must not be put in place with a total disregard for existing democratic regulations .
Now Parliament is in the position of having to carry the can for the actions of the arrogant Swedish Presidency .
We must not do this .
Therefore , I am in favour of voting against this agreement tomorrow .
( SV ) Mr President , I want to say that nothing will be stopped - no terrorist act will be stopped - by this proposal .
None of the four attacks mentioned by the Council Presidency would have been stopped , although perhaps the subsequent investigations would have been made easier .
This agreement reduces security in the same way that any total surveillance law on the Internet reduces security , because if there is total surveillance , people will try to avoid it - even honest citizens .
Then anonymisation services are created on the web , just as now in the banking sector .
If terrorists can hide among ordinary people , security is reduced .
It is a poor agreement .
Instead I call for a complete review of all these anti-terrorism laws .
What do they cost and what is their collective effect on privacy and liberty ?
Only then will I even consider voting in favour of even more anti-terrorism laws .
Show us how effective these measures are using open documents , not secret ones .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to two matters , which , in my opinion , are very important .
It is indisputable that we should fight terrorism , but the discussion is about how this should be done , and what kind of agreements should be signed with the Americans on this .
I would like to raise two matters .
The first of these is that the agreement affects only one of the parties - it is a one-sided agreement .
Have we thought that the appropriate services in European states could also obtain data from the USA , and that this would facilitate the fight against terrorism here in Europe ?
The second matter - the basic objection concerns the fact that it will be possible to obtain all financial data .
I strongly emphasise the word ' all ' .
I think we should work towards allowing American and European special services to obtain data only from those entities which are under suspicion .
( RO ) The Council sent the agreement to the European Parliament very late , which is extraordinary .
I hope that there will be no more recurrences of incidents of this nature .
On the other hand , I have been very pleasantly surprised by the intensive cooperation between the US authorities and the European Parliament .
Unexpectedly , they have listened to this institution , something which I hope will be repeated in the future .
I am expecting the same level of interest from the US authorities as well regarding the equal treatment of Member States in relation to the Visa Waiver programme .
The United States have yet to introduce clear , transparent criteria for refusing visas in certain Member States .
Nevertheless , I believe that the temporary agreement must be supported because it will contribute to the security of European citizens .
However , the approval of this agreement must not halt the negotiations with the United States on a long-term agreement , which will include all the objections raised by this Parliament .
( DE ) Mr President , today , the Council has admitted that the results of the negotiations may not have been as good as they could have been .
We should pick up on this and take the opportunity to improve the agreement .
However , simply postponing matters will not help , because the postponement process is not governed by any conditions .
We will therefore find ourselves in exactly the same situation again during the next plenary session .
I do not believe that this will change anything .
Secondly , I would like to say that we have already had enough promises that things will be better during the next round of negotiations without the involvement of Parliament .
We have already been promised before this agreement that this time things would be quite different .
Once again , postponement will not help .
The only thing that will help in this case is to send out a clear signal .
Thirdly , the security loopholes which people have repeatedly claimed will be created if we do not vote in favour of the interim agreement simply do not exist .
We have legal reports that prove this and we have agreements on mutual legal assistance .
Mr President , the security of our citizens is of paramount interest to us all , and it is all too easy for us to be painted as soft on fighting terrorism when we stand and ask for the civil liberties of our citizens to be protected .
I have seen that happen time and time again by many national parliamentarians when it comes to actions that this House takes .
SWIFT has , of course , many examples of success , and we support all of those examples , but it is equally important also to concentrate our minds on those instances where SWIFT has failed or let us down .
There have been many failed or bad investigations in the European Union .
In my constituency alone , 12 innocent people were detained and were not able to be charged .
At the time they were detained , we were informed that financial transactions were part of the substantial evidence against them .
What can we learn from those bad instances ?
Council , let us step back .
We have time .
Our backs are not against the wall .
There is a way forward .
Let us defer .
Council , go back ; do this properly - not for the sake of this House , but for the sake of our citizens .
( PT ) Mr President , in my country , if a police officer wishes to gain access to a bank account , he has to have a warrant .
I cannot accept an agreement whereby thousands or millions of bank details are transferred to an American police officer for perusal without requiring the permission of a court .
The interim agreement that was negotiated lacks data protection .
Data protection is not a luxury - it is a prerequisite of our freedom .
There is a lack of reciprocity and a lack of proportionality .
We cannot allow this .
We certainly hope that the final agreement will be properly negotiated .
How can it be negotiated ?
Is it negotiated from a poor basis or a reasonable basis ?
I believe that it is better for us not to have a bad interim agreement than to have any agreement at all .
If we refuse the interim agreement , it means that we have a good base for negotiating the final agreement .
( SK ) The saying goes that good agreements are made by equal partners .
The agreement being drawn up at the moment , however , does not indicate that we are an equal partner but rather that the United States is making demands of us and is expecting that we will comply with its views .
Following the Lisbon Treaty , however , the European Parliament has much more power and the task as MEPs sitting here is really to defend the interests and rights , the fundamental rights , of the 500 million citizens of the EU Member States .
I therefore also support the motion for this agreement to be reworked and for it to incorporate the proposals that we , the Members of the European Parliament , who are the only directly elected representatives in all of the EU institutions , expect to be incorporated into the agreement .
I know that there are countries in the European Union that have enormous problems with terrorism .
Finally , Spain is one of the countries that have been fighting terrorism for a long time and I believe that in this case , the Council will be the partner of the European Parliament and not the partner of the United States of America .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( ES ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that I have listened with great interest and appreciation to all of the speeches made by the honourable Members , speeches of both support and criticism , although admittedly , the latter were in the majority , but I welcome them all .
I would like to say firstly that I am very pleased to have confirmed once again during the debate in this House that Parliament , the Commission , and the Council are all perfectly in tune when it comes to defending our shared values and , as I said in my speech , to taking a determined stance against any kind of terrorism .
In my opinion , this consensus is extremely important , and we should not forget it .
I want to make a distinction between the two radically different strands of criticism that we have heard with regard to the SWIFT agreement which we have examined this afternoon : criticism on the grounds of procedure , and criticism on the grounds of substance .
It is true that there has been constant criticism of the substance of this agreement , even by those Members who explicitly supported an agreement such as this .
I reiterate what I said in my earlier speech , that things could probably have been done better ; in fact , they could certainly have been done better .
However , I also said , and I reiterate this too , that as the honourable Members know well , the time limits were as they were , so that the Council and the Commission had to take action within a very short time frame .
In any case , let me be very clear that as I said earlier this afternoon , it is the Council 's wish that things be done differently from now on , and not as they have been done in the past .
Certain Members have said , probably based on their experience , that this is a promise , a commitment , which has been broken repeatedly in this House .
I would like to say in support of the Council that it is a commitment born out of a fundamental commitment within the Treaty of Lisbon , which sets a core objective that this House should play an increasingly important role in the institutional life of Europe , so that the citizens feel better represented .
This commitment from my country , which is a fundamental commitment within the Treaty of Lisbon , is the reason why I want to state here categorically that during the Spanish Presidency , the Council will do things differently .
In case some people do not trust the Council 's word , and they would be within their rights not to , they should remember that the treaty forces us to do things differently .
Therefore , if the political will of the Council does not suffice , the treaty is in place within the law to ensure that things are done differently in the future .
It is reliant on this House working with the Commission , and naturally reliant on the united spirit shown here by our Members , a spirit that seeks a balance between defending security and maintaining our core values ; it is a pan European spirit , with which the Council is fully in tune .
I would like to make three comments regarding the issue itself .
I will not address some of the more specific issues that have been the object of criticism , some of which is unfounded in my opinion .
For example , it has been said on various occasions that the SWIFT agreement , as it now stands in this House , permits the bulk transfer of data .
It has not been said , and it should be stated clearly however , that this is not the logic behind the agreement , and that bulk transfer is only allowed by the SWIFT agreement in exceptional cases , always and only when there are legal suspicions ( Article 4 ( 6 ) of the agreement ) .
This is just one example .
There have been other somewhat superficial accusations about the content of the agreement , which I believe would respond well to scrutiny , but I am not going to address them at this point .
I would like to make two more points on this matter .
Firstly , along with the Commission and some of the Members of this House , I would like to stress that the agreement has been useful in the fight against terrorism .
I have given some examples , and there are more in Judge Bruguière 's report , which has been given to the Members .
I can provide another example , or even better , two , which I previously referred to from my own country .
It is true that the SWIFT agreement was used to investigate the 11 March attacks in Madrid , with good results .
It is also worth remembering that the SWIFT agreement was used to prevent an attack on the city of Barcelona just over a year ago .
The perpetrators of these attacks are all currently serving sentences in Spanish prisons .
Therefore , we can say that yes , it has worked , and yes , it has allowed us to get results .
This being the case , then surely the honourable Members will agree with me that a suspension of the agreement will effectively mean at least a slight lowering in standards of security for European citizens .
Surely , you must accept that if the agreement is working and has been working for us , then its suspension would leave us somewhat less secure , and I am choosing my words carefully so that no one can accuse the Council of being overdramatic .
We would certainly be a little less secure ; it is as simple as that .
That is why I want to emphasise on behalf of the Council , and I think that the Commission also agrees , that it is vital not to suspend this agreement .
It may be that this agreement warrants criticism , and I want to stress once again that we acknowledge the tough criticism that we have heard here this afternoon .
However , the honourable Members will surely agree with me in saying that this agreement is a lot better than the protocol over data exchange that the United States and the EU have had to comply with for years .
The agreement under debate today is probably not perfect .
Improvements could certainly be made , and I can even agree with some of the criticisms made from certain quarters , but I ask you to acknowledge , as I do , that it is an improvement on what we had before .
The EU , Council , and Commission have introduced several motions into the agreement , which are causing concern amongst some Members , who are trying primarily to guarantee that security is not at the expense of human rights and fundamental freedoms ; and rightly so .
This is why I want to reiterate what the Commissioner said , that it is important not to suspend the agreement .
I also want to reiterate to Parliament that the Council 's sincere wish is to negotiate a new agreement - which will be a definitive one - an agreement which will incorporate many of the issues mentioned here this afternoon , issues which the Council agrees with and would like to publicly endorse .
The Council is making a commitment to do this .
The fact is that the President-in-Office of the Council has already made this commitment in a letter to the President of Parliament , but we will still have to uphold it when the time comes to negotiate .
Therefore , we are debating an interim agreement today which improves the current situation .
We are debating an agreement that will last for nine months , which is the time it will take for the Commission , the Council , and Parliament to reach a new agreement - which will be a definitive one - an agreement that will most certainly address all the very reasonable precautionary measures discussed in this afternoon 's debate in Parliament .
The Council cannot ignore this afternoon 's debate .
We cannot ignore the fact that this agreement has come in for a great deal of criticism .
As I said , some of the criticisms have certainly been more founded than others , but criticism there has been , and I think that this deserves serious consideration .
I am asking on behalf of the Council , that Parliament give us this time for reflection .
Time , naturally , to analyse and discuss this debate with my colleagues in the Council , time to discuss it with the Commission , and time , essentially , to explore the possibility of making a better agreement with the US , which I think is a real possibility .
We are asking for time , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , to allow us to come back to Parliament within a few weeks , a few months , to be able to guarantee that we have created the foundations for the signing of a definitive agreement that adequately addresses the concerns expressed by certain honourable Members today .
Concerns , which , I repeat , echo the Council 's concerns in many cases .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this has been an extremely important debate .
That is totally accurate because we talk about such important matters as how we can maintain the security of our citizens but also maintain good information and exchange systems with a high level of data protection .
There have been , as the President of the Council said , a few questions , and a few misunderstandings , I think .
Some of them are answered in the Bruguière report , so I would really encourage you to read that .
But I think we need to understand and remember why we have an interim agreement .
Why do we have it ?
Well , it was because SWIFT was moving and we were finding ourselves in a situation where we did not have a regulation on the transfer of data , so the Council and the Commission moved swiftly to arrange something .
We did achieve certain concessions from the United States and some very good data protection mechanisms .
Also , two member countries concerned asked the Commission to be involved in order to have a European approach on this and avoid bilateral agreements .
This is important to recall .
Now this is an interim agreement , as I said ; it can and it will be improved .
It is the full intention of the Commission and the Council to involve the European Parliament under the Lisbon Treaty in the permanent agreement .
We need to have more clarification concerning redress , lawful data processing and deletion of data .
The permanent agreement will also include guarantees of rectification , access to information .
Mr Lambrinidis asked why the Commission does not have that .
Well , Mr Lambrinidis , the Commission has been in office for 16 hours and 20 minutes .
This is an extremely important negotiating mandate .
We need to be able to discuss this together , within the new Commission , before we formulate the full negotiating mandate to discuss with the European Parliament .
We have only very recently taken office so you could not expect us to have done this .
But we will make sure - and Mr Barroso expressed this very clearly in the letter to Mr Buzek - that we are working on the negotiating mandate ; we will present it to the European Parliament as soon as possible and make sure that you are fully informed the whole way on this .
It might be a very good idea to postpone the vote and we might need more time to discuss the mandate .
You will see the negotiation mandate ; you will have time to look at the papers , the reports and so on , and the Commission is willing , as I said , to work together with you and the Council for a good - and much better - permanent agreement on this .
Colleagues , the blue card rule does not operate during presentations by the Council and Commission , but this is an extremely important discussion .
We must take a decision tomorrow .
This is not according to the Rules , but could I ask you , Mr President-in-Office , to take two short - and I emphasise short - questions from Mr Schulz and Mr Lambrinidis - nothing more , as we could discuss this for another two hours .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Rubalcaba , I have listened carefully to what you have said , along with all the Members of this House .
You have used the following words : ' Give me more time to discuss this with the other members of the Council .
Give me more time to come back to you with a better agreement . '
I would therefore like to ask you very specifically whether it is the case that the Council is no longer insisting on this agreement and on the vote on this agreement and whether you want to have to time to negotiate with the US on a new and improved agreement .
Have I understood what you said correctly ?
Mr President , is the Council aware of the fact that in the past years , SWIFT has never once transmitted specific data because it cannot extract it , and always transfers bulk data ?
Is the Council aware of the fact that , precisely because of that , there is an agreement between the US and SWIFT that stations SWIFT personnel in the Treasury Department in order to ensure that the bulk data the Treasury gets does not get searched in a bulk manner ?
Is the Council aware of the fact that the interim agreement does not include even the slightest concession to Parliament ?
If I am right - which I hope I am - are the Council and the Commission committed to taking the bulk data issue extremely seriously in the mandate of the negotiations ?
Mr President , the Council would like to reiterate once again how important it is that we do not cut off the flow of financial data exchange between Europe and the United States .
However , the Council is also mindful of the fact that the precautionary measures , criticisms , and suggestions of the honourable Members must be the subject of serious consideration .
For this reason , I have asked for time to work with all the countries of the European Union , with all the Member States , to look at whether we need to incorporate this type of consideration into the new agreement .
Even more importantly , I have asked for time to consult with the United States .
I believe that the USA is willing to incorporate into the new agreement many of the precautionary measures , reservations , and restrictions expressed here today by the European Parliament .
In short , it is willing to seek a greater balance between security and freedom in the definitive agreement , which is essentially what we are talking about today .
I would like time to explore this possibility so that I can come back to Parliament and say , in a session such as this one , before proceeding to the vote , that the Commission and the Council have a commitment from the United States to incorporate these suggestions from the European Parliament into the new agreement .
Under these conditions , I think that we would have a very different debate from the one we are having here this afternoon .
( DE ) Mr President , that is very helpful .
Thank you very much for making this possible .
If I have understood things correctly , because this is a sensitive issue that we are discussing , then Mr Rubalcaba cannot assure us that the existing agreement will not come into force .
In other words , if we postpone matters and give ourselves more time , it will come into effect .

Therefore , my next question is : Can Mr Rubalcaba assure us that , for example , a long-term agreement will be in place within a month with higher standards or is the Council telling us that we must still wait nine months until the end of the period ?
It is very hard for Parliament to accept an unconditional assurance .
Therefore , we must have clear conditions relating to the Council 's assurance , in order to be able to decide tomorrow about a possible postponement .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you for applying the House 's Rules of Procedure with generosity , and allowing the two representatives to speak , firstly from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats , and secondly from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Mr Rubalcaba , you have put your finger on it .
Most of the arguments put forward for debate in the House have been fair ones .
I have great respect for everything that has been said .
However , these words should have a documental and informative component , with full knowledge of the facts , and frankly , I have been very surprised to hear certain statements that suggest otherwise .
Such statements give the impression that very few people have actually read the agreement that they are criticising , since having read it , there is no way they could have come up with some of these arguments .

That is why I want to ask you , Mr Rubalcaba , about the matter mentioned by my colleague , Mr Manfred Weber , and by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert in her letter ( as you already know I am in favour of keeping the interim agreement whilst negotiating a new agreement ) .
In her letter , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert asks the same question as Manfred Weber .
Can the Council guarantee to Parliament that with the participation of this House , it will present the final text of the new agreement , in committee in June , and in plenary in July ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( ES ) Mr President , some of the honourable Members are calling for an interim agreement and others for a permanent agreement .
With regard to the timing , it is clearly not the same to bring to this House the foundations of a definitive agreement , or in other words , to bring a commitment from the United States to include some of the precautionary measures and suggestions put forward by this House , as it is to bring a new agreement to the table .
If the honourable Member is asking me whether we can bring a new agreement to this House in one month 's time , the answer is no .
If you are asking whether , within a deadline of a few months , we can bring to this House the results of dialogue between the United States and Parliament , whose participation is very important , so that we can debate whether we are right in thinking that the definitive agreement will be much better than the present one , my answer is yes .
In my opinion , we are capable of achieving this .
This is precisely what I am asking for .
Therefore , I am not specifically referring to the rapporteur 's proposal , which I admit I have not seriously considered this afternoon after assessing the general mood and the multiple actions and speeches against the signing of the interim agreement .
Let me reiterate my opinion that things being as they are , it is a much more realistic option to ask the House for a deadline of say three months , to give us time to bring forward the foundations of an agreement with the United States for debate in Parliament .
In other words , this agreement would include the elements that we in the EU ( Commission , Council and Parliament ) and the United States believe should be incorporated into the definitive agreement that would subsequently be negotiated .
I believe that in these circumstances , the debate we are having today would be radically different .
rapporteur . - Mr President , a lot has been said .
Let me underline to Mr Busuttil and the President-in-Office , in particular , that by our withholding our consent on the interim agreement , the security of European citizens is not being compromised .
I think it is very unfair to use that as a form of argument .
Other legal instruments remain available for targeted transatlantic data exchange and , as stated by Claude Moraes , nobody has the moral high ground here .
With regard to the USA letter , that letter is obviously appreciated , there is no doubt about that , but to state that Parliament 's views will be heard , considered and responded to is a bit weak , is it not ?
It is very non-committal .
Also , it is stated that this is only provided this interim agreement remains in force , which I consider as pure blackmail .
I am getting angry and I am sorry for that , but this debate is slowly getting on my nerves .
TFTP is not , and cannot be considered to be , consistent with the strongest European traditions on civil liberties .
It must be seen , and I want it acknowledged , as a departure from European law and practice .
I said this before and I want to hear it again clearly .
I also want to say that nobody doubts the necessity for continued and stronger cooperation between the US and the EU , though the EU and its Member States , in the Council in particular , must be strong in setting their own objectives .
In that respect , Parliament and the Council are not in tune yet .
Finally , let me stress that it is all about European responsibility , and a European solution is to be found .
The Netherlands and Belgium cannot end up being the ' dupe ' of all this .
I listened carefully to your statements , to the request for more time , and I am willing to refer that request to the Conference of Presidents , but you did not give me the reassurances I was looking for : it was too vague .
I will , however , refer your request to the Conference of Presidents which will meet later this afternoon .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 February 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Cooperation with the United States to combat terrorism is important , but not at any price .
The agreement with the United States on the transfer of financial data rather comes down to opening and reading the personal mail of all European citizens or monitoring all their e-mail exchanges on the pretext that terrorists are likely to send each other letters or electronic messages .
The agreement we are talking about does not guarantee respect for personal data and still less for the use to which they may be put .
The risk of meddling in the private lives of millions of innocent citizens or in the perfectly legal financial transactions of European companies , simply on the orders of an administration , is unacceptable .
I still remember the ' Echelon ' affair , that listening system that was allegedly intended for military and security purposes and which proved to be an alarming potential commercial and political spy system directed against the allies .
We can accept an exchange , that is to say , a reciprocal transfer , of targeted data on request from a judicial authority in a specific context .
We certainly want to help SWIFT break the technical deadlock that prevents it from carrying out anything other than mass data transfers .
However , we cannot accept this agreement .
Mr President , we are recommending to our fellow Members that they vote against this report with the aim of giving the members of the Council and the Commission the opportunity to make some adjustments and thereby alter their position .
We very much hope they will seize this opportunity .
For the rest , France has just decided to sell a Mistral class warship to Russia ; we believe that it will sincerely regret its action .
The threat of terrorism is not getting smaller .
The recent attempt by a suicide bomber to blow up an aircraft flying from Europe to the USA shows there are people who are ready to kill hundreds of innocent people in the name of fanatical convictions .
It would , however , be a mistake to view acts of terror exclusively as the deeds of desperate individuals .
For behind all terrorists is an organisation which trained them , supplied them with explosives and financed them .
Terrorism has to be well organised to survive , and for this it principally needs money .
We must not stop in our efforts to track financial movements and establish the source of funds used to support terrorism .
Efficient exchange of information between governments and mutual assistance in identifying suspicious people and organisations is a matter of paramount importance for ensuring security for our citizens .
We should make every effort to ensure that the final agreement guarantees the necessary protection of personal data .
We must not forget , however , that our primary objective should be to limit terrorism , because terrorism is still a real threat , including in Europe .
When we are talking about security , political games should be set aside .
The European Parliament should not make a show of its authority by rejecting the interim agreement with the USA on the processing of financial messaging data , because this agreement improves the security of our continent .
Body scanners - Operation of intelligence services in the context of counter-terrorism strategies ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on combating terrorism and the statements by the Council and the Commission on body scanners and the operation of intelligence services in the context of counter-terrorism strategies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin this debate by thanking Parliament for the opportunity to hold a calm debate on counter-terrorism policy , and on certain elements of counter-terrorism policy in particular .
I also applaud the timing of this debate , as a reasonable amount of time has elapsed since the worldwide commotion caused by the failed attack in Detroit in December of last year .
Of course , when something like this happens , when it comes to tackling a threat such as the threat of terrorism , I believe in making a response , but I am much more in favour of working quietly and continuously , slowly but surely , as we say in my country .
I would emphasise to the House that the threat of terrorism is still as real as it was in all of the EU countries .
We know that the terrorists observe us , we know that they are innovative and try to change their methods to evade our strategies in the fight against terrorism .
Our strategy also needs to be innovative and varied because of this ; it needs to improve and , most importantly , we must learn from our mistakes , since we certainly do make mistakes .
This being said , we are all aware that if there had not been a failed attack in Detroit in December , we would probably not be debating this issue in the terms that we are in this House .
In other words , this debate is born from the need for precautions , and especially for conclusions , which we have all drawn from examining the success in Detroit that I just mentioned .
At the core of today 's debate is also an analysis of where we failed in dealing with the alleged attack , and the measures that different countries are adopting to prevent those mistakes from being made again .
Therefore , we are talking about analysing data , about counter-terrorism services ; we are talking about exchanging data , and we are talking about body scanners .
We are talking about mistakes made in an attack that fortunately did not happen .
Given that this is the subject of our debate , I would like to mention some of the most obvious conclusions that I think we can draw from the failed attack on Detroit .
There are five conclusions .
Firstly , Detroit highlights the fact that terrorists continue to target civil aviation as a priority .
Secondly , Detroit highlights the importance of collecting data , but also of integrating and analysing it .
Thirdly , Detroit highlights that the associates of al-Qaeda are in a position to launch attacks outside of what we would call their own territory .
This applies to al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula ( the terrorist organisation suspected of being behind the failed attack in Detroit ) or al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb countries , who represent a threat to us all .
The fourth conclusion I have drawn is that the events in Detroit should remind us how important it is to work on reversing the process of radicalisation .
In my opinion , the personality of suspected terrorists is a very significant factor in relation to this issue .
Lastly , Detroit calls for us to pay close attention to failed states , or to any states that are in danger of becoming failed states due to their circumstances .
The first and second conclusions concern the ongoing threat to civil aviation and the need to integrate all of the data available to us ; they lead us directly to this afternoon 's debate or debates , regarding data and its use , and body scanners .
I should say that this is not a new debate , nor is it the first time we have debated it in this House .
Mr de Kerchove , the Counter-terrorism Coordinator , talked about information management and personal data protection in his interesting and lucid report during a debate on the subject in this House on 26 November .
Data and analysis of data are a key element in the struggle to prevent and deal with terrorism , which is the subject of this afternoon 's debate .

We need to identify terrorists ; we need to know where they are planning to attack , who is providing them with weapons ; we need to know the material infrastructure supporting them ; we need to know their communication systems ; and we can find this out by means of databases and specialised sources .

We need data exchange so that we can obtain all the available information , and we must manage it properly .
I hasten to add that some of the attacks that we have suffered in the past could have been avoided if the information had been made available in good time to those responsible for counter-terrorist measures ; in other words , if the information had been handled in an integrated , and if you will pardon the expression , an intelligent manner , which does not always happen .
This brings us to the debate on information management .
We have the framework of the EU within which we can exchange information appropriately .
Our recently adopted strategy formed part of the Council 's conclusions last November .
It aims to provide the security forces and intelligence services with the necessary data , in the interests of improving the usefulness and effectiveness of the counter-terrorist strategy .
The necessary data and only that , nothing more , since bulk data sometimes has a negative effect on its own value and effectiveness .
As this strategy indicates , the decisions regarding data exchange should be of a coherent , professional , efficient , viable , reliable nature , and understandable for all the citizens and all the professionals who work with it .
According to its guidelines , the strategy must bear in mind the statements and concerns that we have dealt with in this House ; the need to fight against terrorism , as well as the issues of human rights , the right to privacy , and to protection of personal data .
As I said at the beginning of the debate , another of the consequences that we can draw from the alleged Detroit attack is that commercial aircraft continue to be a fundamental target for terrorists .
Obviously , the alleged terrorist succeeded in boarding the aircraft with a sufficient quantity of explosives to cause it to explode in the air , thus thwarting all of our surveillance systems and all of our airport security systems and mechanisms .
In other words , we obviously need to review these security mechanisms , because they were clearly insufficient for preventing an attack such as the alleged Detroit attack , which fortunately did not take place .
To summarise , we must keep on improving our security services , to try to avoid terrorists or suspected terrorists boarding commercial flights .
We have to prevent anyone being able to board a plane with weapons , explosives or chemical precursors of explosives .
In case these two safety measures fail us , we need to do more to protect our planes and avoid in-flight incidents .
This is precisely the framework for the debate that we are having on an issue of concern within this House and the Council , the issue of body scanners .
As the honourable Members know , in matters of air safety , the Commission holds the relevant jurisdiction to set targets and make regulations .
These matters are debated in the formal and informal Council of Transport Ministers .
However , I would like to mention that this matter of air security was the subject of a debate in the informal Council of Ministers , which took place a few weeks ago in Toledo .
We agreed on various matters in this Council : firstly , that it is correct and appropriate for the EU to hold a common position on body scanners and , more generally , on all of the protection mechanisms in our airports ; it does not make sense that some airports are less protected than others , because it essentially means that we are all less protected .
As such , we would be pleased if the European Union could reach an agreement , and hold a common position in this debate .
Secondly , on a more difficult , delicate matter , where there are different aspects to consider : firstly and obviously , to find out how efficient this type of body scanner is in preventing terrorists from boarding planes with explosives , or chemical precursors to explosives .
Secondly , we need to find out and analyse if these scanners are compatible with people 's right to privacy and intimacy , which is of concern to the Council , the Commission , and to this House .
The third matter we agreed on is to find out if there could be any health risks for those who pass through this machine to board commercial flights .
With regard to these three issues : the Commission is working on three studies regarding the efficiency of body scanners , their effect on health , and on their compatibility with people 's human rights and fundamental freedoms .
These studies will be available to the Council and this House in the near future .
For this reason , the informal Council in Toledo agreed to research and provide this information , so that we can have a thorough debate , and hopefully reach a unanimous position on this matter , which would be very desirable .
Once we have achieved this common position , we will take fully into account the Resolution that this Parliament passed on 23 October 2008 , after a debate on body scanners .
During the debate , we discussed the need for an evaluation of the impact on human rights , the health risks and the economic impact , as well as the need for consultation with the European Data Protection Supervisor .
These considerations must be taken into account in our next debate .
I would like to reiterate my thanks to this House for the opportunity to debate these issues , and my thanks to Parliament for its flexibility regarding the timing of the debate .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we are here to present a combined view on certain aspects in the fight against terrorism .
My priority as Transport Commissioner is definitely the safety and security of passengers .
This is a major priority for our common transport policy and this is always extremely important .
The attempted terrorist attack on Northwest Airlines flight 253 to Detroit on 25 December has again confirmed the reality of the threat to civil aviation .
I would like to stress that existing EU standards on aviation security were correctly implemented on 25 December at Amsterdam Schiphol airport .
The incident showed first of all the failure of intelligence , a failure ' to connect the dots ' .
Aviation remains a target for terrorists .
We cannot ignore this fact .
Aviation security must therefore be guaranteed by all appropriate means , in full compliance with fundamental rights .
The travelling public , the media and aviation stakeholders all legitimately ask us whether the existing security arrangements are good enough , or whether we need to take further action .
In this regard , the new screening technologies , the so-called ' body scanners ' , are discussed everywhere today .
Regarding the use of body scanners at airports , aviation security experts are of the opinion that these machines have better detection capacity than current screening equipment .
Some think that they are considerably better .
Some think that this is not such a big advance , but how big the added value of these machines is to airport security and what the consequences are for health and privacy is not yet entirely clear today .
As noted previously by Parliament in 2008 , the use of body-imaging technology raises a number of questions , notably in relation to privacy , data protection and health .
I intend to present to you in April a report on imaging technology and its use at EU airports .
This report will address the questions raised in the European Parliament resolution of 2008 .
We need to look at these questions seriously .
We also need to make up our minds on whether these concerns are better addressed at national or European level .
To my mind , an EU framework would be better .
I say this based on our experience of a common approach since 9 / 11 and with a view to the efficiency of the single market for aviation .
An EU framework guarantees uniform standards in relation both to security and to respect for individual rights .
Finally , I would like to underline that airport security is a much larger question than the introduction of a new screening technology .
To fight terrorism targeting civil aviation , we need a large variety of combined and coordinated measures - intelligence , profiling , different search methods and international cooperation .
As the Minister just said , terrorists develop .
We must develop as well , and body scanners are only one element in this variety .
I look forward to your views and thank you for your attention .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is the Commission 's new dual approach .
As the former debate showed , now that we have the Lisbon Treaty , work at EU level now enters into a new phase .
I am very happy and honoured that I will work together with you in the fight against terrorism and on other security-related matters .
We will do this while , of course , fully respecting that it is the Member States who have the final responsibility for all operational and intelligence work in this field .
I would like to recall to you - some of you were at my hearing a few weeks ago - that I made a promise that I would do an evaluation of all counter-terrorism policies .
As a first step , I have asked my services to prepare an overview and an assessment of everything that has been achieved so far .
This will be the basis upon which I will decide how to move forward .
We need to evaluate and to get a full understanding of what we have , its effects , what is possibly missing and what is overlapping in order to be able to propose new measures and more thought through measures .
I look forward to bringing this evaluation to you and to discussing it with you .
But this stocktaking does not mean that I am not fully aware of the fact that the threat of terrorism has not diminished .
As my colleague , Mr Kallas , and the Council Presidency have said , we know that terrorism is still one of the greatest threats to our values and to our democracies .
The Denver flight showed that recently .
We have statistics from Europol showing that in 2008 , EU Member States reported a total of 515 failed or successfully perpetrated terrorist attacks within Europe ; 359 individuals were tried on terrorist charges in a total of 187 proceedings ; 50 % of these were related to al-Qaeda or Islamist terrorism , and 39 % to separatist terrorism , such as ETA activities in Spain .

We also know that in 2008 , we had the tragic events and the horrible bombing in Mumbai , which also targeted European citizens , among them Members of this House .
These events and the figures from Europol speak a clear language : terrorism is still there , and it is important that we do not lower our guard and we ensure that all tools are deployed in the fight against terrorism , while of course always fully respecting fundamental rights .
If we look at the instruments that we do have today , we have the EU counter-terrorism strategy , developed after the attacks in Madrid and in London .
This strategy highlights the EU 's commitment to combating terrorism globally while respecting human rights and to making Europe safer , allowing its citizens to live in an area of freedom , security and justice .
This , of course , is a commitment that it still valid .
There can be no freedom without security and there can be no security without freedom .
That is why respecting fundamental rights in the fight against terrorism is not only a requirement of any democratic society but is a necessity in order to ensure that our policies remain credible , legitimate and sustainable .
That is why the Commission will only propose measures that will continue to be subject to EU law screening , especially with regard to fundamental rights and rigorous impact assessment , including the impact on personal data and individuals .
Terrorism is , as we know , a global phenomenon , and that is why we will remain dedicated to cooperating with our allies and partners and international organisations all over the world .
Regarding the internal dimension of countering and preventing terrorism , we do have in our counter-terrorist strategy some key objectives on how the Union can contribute in the fight against terrorism .
I fully share these objectives , in particular the need to stop violent radicalisation , protect our critical infrastructure , support victims , improve exchange of information between national authorities and cooperate with all appropriate stakeholders .
We have to react to non-conventional threats and to improve the detection of threats .
We have to deprive terrorists of financial resources and to invest more in research and technological development .
This development on these policies has , of course , been strongly supported by the European Commission in cooperation with the Member States .
Over the past year , the Commission has made a major contribution to approximating the legal frameworks of Member States in this work .
We have , for instance , the European arrest warrant , which created an EU-wide common understanding on terrorist crime and facilitated extradition procedures within the EU Member States .
We have also undertaken important activities to counter the terrorist abuse of the Internet , addressing conditions conducive to terrorist radicalisation , launching a European programme for the protection of critical infrastructure , and limiting access by terrorists to the means they need to commit their acts - funding and explosives .
The EU action plan for enhancing the security of explosives foresees important measures to raise the threshold for terrorists who want to use explosives for an attack .
I would propose a legislative framework to address the dangers associated with precursors which can be used to fabricate improvised explosive devices .
I will do so this year .
We also have the CBRN action plan proposed by the Commission last June and agreed by the Council .
This Action Plan consists of 130 measures .
The Commission has earmarked up to EUR 100 million which could be made available from its existing financial programmes to facilitate implementation .
I am fully committed to ensuring that , in the coming years , the European Commission will continue to develop its role as facilitator and catalyst for cooperation , expert networks , exchanging best practices , pooling resources , improving research and developing common approaches to transnational challenges .
We will also have to revise how we use our financial resources .
This might be by creating an internal security fund , which is foreseen in the Stockholm Programme .
On a large scale , international information exchange concerning the collection of data and storage of data concerning thousands of citizens has to take account - and this was very visible in the last debate we had - of very high data protection standards in order to prevent abuse and mishandling .
We also have to make sure , as Commissioner Kallas said , that we connect the dots in an appropriate way .
Together with my colleague , Viviane Reding , I will submit in the near future a combined data protection regime that would also cover police and judicial cooperation .
All this will be considered in the evaluation and it will be under the umbrella of the internal security strategy that we will put forward to you within a short time .
Finally , let me conclude by underlining that , in the long run , we can only succeed in fighting against terrorism if we remain able to communicate our values and remain respectful of fundamental rights .
We have to avoid our policies being perceived as ambiguous or as applying double standards .
We can only defend high moral ground and prevent alienation from our societies and our way of living if we remain faithful to our values of democracy and the rule of law .
You gave us a very hopeful prospect .
Maybe one day we will have you , Mr Kallas and Ms Reding representing the Commission at the same time .

Mr President , Mr Rubalcaba , Commissioners , I am pleased that we are not only talking about SWIFT and body scanners today , but also having a general debate on the war on terror , because this is a subject that affects us all .
Looking back , we have to say that terrorism is a real threat to the people of Europe .
We are taking positive action and I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the public authorities .
The people who are responsible for security have done a good job over recent years .
I would also like to thank our partners .
Now we must look to the future .
What will we be faced with over the next few years ?
In this respect , I have three specific requests or proposals .
The first concerns cooperation among the authorities in Europe .
Every document comes with a headline emphasising the importance of collaborating and strengthening our cooperation .
These are wonderful words , but nothing has happened in practice .
Once again nothing happened in Toledo with regard to practical cooperation .
There is no lack of action - this has been made clear in Detroit .
What we are lacking is cooperation between the authorities .
That is where the problem lies .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Council finally to do its job in this area and to call on the Commission to put some appropriate proposals on the table .
My second point is that we should investigate our existing legislation with regard to the collection of data and mobile phone data , for example , in the case of the retention of data .
For this reason , you have the support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for this evaluation .
After an interval of a few years , it is important to put it to the test .
Thirdly , we have just had a discussion about SWIFT .
I would like to ask the House why our cooperation with the United States has to be organised in this way .
It has to be organised like this because we Europeans are not in the position to evaluate the data ourselves .
Therefore , the question arises as to whether we are self-confident enough to evaluate it ourselves .
This is another thought for the future .
In the short time that has been allocated to me , I want , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , to set out three important basic conditions that we think are essential in evaluating the issue of the potential introduction of body scanners , which were not long ago being pushed as the miracle cure .
First of all , we must take a coordinated , harmonised European approach .
We must , therefore , have European rules , or else you simply relocate the security problem and you create chaos , and the President-in-Office of the Council made reference to this , but I want to point out to the Spanish Presidency that a number of Council members have , in the meantime , adopted a solo approach , and I ask you to explicitly denounce that .
Secondly , we need a global approach to security and counter-terrorism , and that means that we need to avoid drawing hasty conclusions , that we need to stop the politics of announcements , that the potential introduction of body scanners also cannot be seen in isolation from the broader context of other existing or potential measures and that we clearly also need to see it in the context of other aspects , such as public health and the budgetary implications .
The third point is that we must also stop giving the impression that these body scanners will guarantee 100 % security .
You will be aware , for example , that this equipment is capable of finding explosives located on , but not in , the body .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to say that I therefore also support the Commission 's approach in first setting up trials before bringing forward a proposal .
Mr President , Mr Rubalcaba has rightly said that we currently do not have a secure system for air travel .
We need more security in this area .
The events in Detroit and Munich have shown that there are security loopholes .
For this reason , body scanners are being introduced in a mad rush as if they were a miracle cure .
They are already in place in the US , in the Netherlands and in other countries .
However , this raises the issue of whether body scanners will really make air travel safer .
This is one of the crucial questions that we must ask ourselves .
There is , in fact , a whole series of questions relating to body scanners .
What type of technology is being used ?
What type of radiation do they emit ?
Can they cause damage to health ?
What do they allow people to see ?
Just a few green or red dots or the whole person who is being scanned ?
Finally , can we ensure that the data is being protected ?
Also , these scanners are expensive .
If we are going to install them , who will be paying ?
There are a lot of questions to be answered and we are in the process of doing this .
You also want to do this and present us with a solution .
Whatever happens , we need a solution which covers the whole of Europe .
We also need to take into consideration Tel Aviv and the possibility of using another method .
We need to search for the bombers and not the bombs .
We cannot adopt this method wholesale , because it involves discrimination , but we must investigate all the possibilities while protecting our fundamental rights .
Some time ago , Parliament laid down the requirements that body scanners must comply with if they were to be introduced .
These specifications covered privacy , data protection , human dignity , health and freedom of choice .
There are technologies that do meet all of these requirements , meaning that x-rays , radiographs and naked images must be outmoded , which is where we are going wrong at the moment .
At Heathrow Airport in London , this equipment is being used without the element of freedom of choice .
New equipment is being introduced in Italy .
The Dutch Minister for Justice is calling for this equipment to be introduced at all airports across Europe , not just for flights to the United States , but for all flights .
If we just continue to hold the same old debate about the technology , we will continue to avoid asking the real question , the serious question , namely does this actually help and is this the society we want to see ?
I agree with my fellow Member from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament who is indeed asking these questions .
We need to consider what kind of Europe we want to live in , because total security does not exist .
The latest generation of scanners satisfy the requirements that Parliament has laid down .
Security personnel see display images of human contours , with spots showing up where people are carrying liquids , weapons or other prohibited items .
If such spots are seen , the passengers in question are checked separately on the spot .
The latest scanners also do not have any effect on health .
The radiation they give off is less than that from mobile phones .
What is more , the scanners are also user-friendly .
The queues at security will be shorter , as more passengers can be scanned every hour .
That will therefore also make a difference to costs for air travellers .
However , Mr President , the latest scanners are additional security tools .
Profiling and good intelligence exchange are also very much required .
As far as I am concerned , we can quickly move on to implementing these tools as additional tools .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) A few days ago , I received an email from a lobbyist selling body scanners .
This email spoke of the ' post-Detroit era ' .
No surprise there .
Each machine cost EUR 250 000 .
There is a fortune to be made by selling body scanners , but in reading the email and thinking about this post-Detroit era , after an amateur attempt made by a terrorist who was overpowered by other passengers on the plane , I asked myself whether this attack really merited having an historical era named after it .
It did not , unless it refers to the era of sheer effrontery .
Not everything can serve as an excuse to increase the levels of intrusion into the private lives of members of the public .
European citizens also need to know that we in Parliament have a responsibility .
Yes , we do indeed need to investigate terrorism .
It is true that the police always need more data , as do airports , but it is also important to base research on clear assumptions , and there are many assumptions being made by the Council and the Commission .
I am sorry to say that these are incorrect .
The idea that the terrorist threat has not diminished is debatable and should be debated here .
The idea that terrorism is evolving and that we should evolve too is true , but the first thing is to do our jobs well , because the Detroit attack , or rather the attempted attack , could very easily have been prevented .
Now we find ourselves debating the databases and police practices of the future .
When they discover that terrorists can ingest the materials for making bombs , will they start doing endoscopies at airports ?
Is this where we want to end up ?
There comes a time when this House has to sit down and discuss this matter carefully , with respect for the rights of the public .
The European Parliament must do its utmost to ensure that the intelligence agencies do not use the war on terror as justification for torture , secret prisons or even a coup d 'état where there is resistance to this .
Mr President , let me quote the evidence the British Ambassador in Uzbekistan , Mr Craig Murray , gave to the temporary committee of the European Parliament : ' I have seen plenty of evidence of torture in Uzbekistan .
I have come across a file of a detainee who died during interrogation because of waterboarding in boiling water ' .
Giving evidence , another official , Sir Michael Wood , stated that , ' receipt of intelligence gained under torture is not illegal under the UN Convention Against Torture provided we do not do the torture ourselves . '
Can there be any greater mockery of human rights ?
Mr President , I call on you to reopen the parliamentary inquiry and to reconvene the temporary committee on the extraordinary rendition and imprisonment of CIA prisoners in Europe .
( NL ) We need to watch out that a debate about terrorism is not narrowed down into a debate about body scanners or data protection .
It is striking that , in their statement , the Council and the Commission did not mention the radical Islamism that is still the breeding ground and seedbed for international terrorism .
Since we are no longer allowed to see the truth , due to political correctness , every approach is doomed to failure before it even begins .
The Commission and Parliament put the emphasis on respecting civil rights , something which is right and necessary , but the danger is that we lose ourselves in formalism and that is what we saw in the debate about the terrorist finance tracking programme .
Certain quarters are guilty of whipping up public sentiment against any possible approach to tackle terrorism and that is no way for us to serve the citizens of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the war against terror is the major challenge of the 21st century .
We are facing up to this challenge on both a technical and a parliamentary level .
In the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we have not only implemented regulations concerning the ban on liquids in hand luggage , but we are also looking closely at body scanners .
I would like to say one thing first of all .
We do not currently have complete security , as many of the other speakers have already emphasised , and we will not have it in future .
However , we can develop natural techniques that will allow us to come close to complete security asymptotically .
We need to take some fundamental rules into account , both outside and inside Parliament .
We are already in agreement across all the groups that there should be as little impact as possible on the health of the passengers .
Therefore , it is necessary for us to introduce advanced body scanners which work according to a specific principle .
Of course , it is obvious that personal rights must be protected .
In addition , we must not only refer to the body scanners which scan the naked body when giving examples of the type of screening to be used .
In the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we have agreed with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs that the Commission will present us with a proposal for legislation on body scanners by the end of March or early April , in any case , before the summer recess .
There are a number of factors to be taken into account in this area .
These include consistent cooperation between the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which is taking the leading role , and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the reliability of the equipment , European certification and establishing the same conditions throughout Europe , so that we can ensure that there is security within its continent .
Mr President , you said that there were three Commissioners who are responsible here .
We are very happy about this .
May I quote the only one who is not here .
Commissioner Reding said last week ' what we do know is that body scanners may have a considerable privacy-invasive potential and so we need full consideration of their impact ' .
That is exactly the kind of statement we should be making at this early stage .
We in the Socialists and Democrats believe that technology can fight terrorism , and Mrs Malmström rightly couched it in a wider potential legal framework which she spoke about .
This is a serious fight .
I have been stopped many times at airports .
If technology can speed me through so that I am not mistaken for someone else , then that is a great thing , but for the many people I represent in my constituency who are badly treated at security , or singled out , what they want is safety .
We will have that from the Transport Committee in this good , joint approach , but they want their civil liberties protected from the effects of terrorism so that there is no weak link at any airport .
Those Member States that have started this should know that there should be a pan-European approach , an effective and safe approach .
Mr President , I want to talk about respect for the rule of law by intelligence services .
A ruling today by the UK Court of Appeal has blasted open the British Government 's attempt at secrecy .
It has confirmed , as Parliament said three years ago , the shocking truth that UK secret services did collude in the torture of British resident and rendition victim Binyan Mohamed .
What does the Council think of that total breach of Article 6 of the EU Treaty and the Torture Convention ?
In 2006 , I led the MEP delegation from our Temporary Committee on Extraordinary Rendition and Torture to London .
The then UK Defence Secretary , Geoffrey Hoon , wasted half the meeting lambasting me just for saying that we were enquiring into UK complicity .
He owes me and , more importantly , the British and European public , an apology .

Four things now need to happen in the UK : a full independent inquiry into UK complicity in war-on-terror abuses during the years the UK Labour Government acted as a Bush poodle ; a rapid police investigation and , if necessary , prosecutions for breach of the Torture Convention ; disclosure of what instructions were given to UK intelligence officers and if they were told to keep silent in the face of torture ; and full parliamentary accountability - which we do not have in the UK for the intelligence services .


Mr President , back to body scanners .
I remain of the view that any measure which increases security for the travelling public must be welcomed .
However , it must also be proportionate and give innocent travellers - the vast majority - the respect they deserve .
Following the Christmas Day attempt to blow up the aircraft in the USA , we have seen what amounts to a knee-jerk reaction to impose any possible means to enhance security .
In some Member States , particularly my own , the use of such machines is now mandatory with no alternative such as a ' pat-down ' available - the so-called ' no scan , no fly ' tactic .
I fundamentally object to that policy .
On the privacy front , I have to say that the decision by the UK Government to overturn child-protection laws in order to introduce body scanners is nothing short of a scandal .
We have to look at the fact that on Christmas Day - the issue that reopened this debate - it was not down to poor security at airports .
It was , to quote the US President , ' a failure in the system to properly exchange intelligence ' .
Some experts have already said that the explosives used would not have been detected by such scanners .
Finally , I regrettably have to say that I now think we need to have a proper system of passenger profiling .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , terrorism is continually evolving and we must stay on top of the changing scenario .
Individual terrorists are difficult to identify and here we are discussing privacy laws and whether or not to adopt technologically more advanced measures .
I believe that instead , we should be more concerned with certain judgments handed down by the Court of Justice in Luxembourg that open up breaches in the united front of the West against terrorism , or to refer to it by its proper name - Islamic terrorism - and be very careful of legal political correctness .
Legal political correctness is no good to anyone , it does not get us anywhere and it weakens us when we should be presenting a very strong front , because a persistent threat exists that is even more serious now that terrorists are so difficult to identify .
So much for body scanners .
They can get everywhere : tomorrow morning , they may be on the plane we are just about to take .
If Europe persists in over-guaranteeing civil liberties , we will open up an extremely dangerous breach in the internal security of our nations and this is what the Commissioner should be concerned with .
Instead , I find him to be over-general and cowardly by failing to identify Islamic terrorism and the danger it represents by name .
( DE ) Mr President , throughout the world 1 200 people died as a result of terrorist attacks in 2000 .
Eight years later , in 2008 , the figure had reached 16 000 people .
In comparison , 6 000 people die of AIDS every day .
What do these figures tell us ?
Firstly , terrorism generates hysteria which results in the rights of citizens being restricted unreasonably , as in the case of body scanners or the current SWIFT agreement .
Secondly , the war on terror has failed .
It has only succeeded in increasing the problem .
On the subject of cooperation between the security services in the European Union , I would like to say that the European Parliament urgently needs democratic rights of control in this area , as is the norm in every democratic Member State .
In addition , I would like to recommend that the Commission supports the introduction of the Common Standardised User Interface ( CSUI ) .
We must push forward with the development of this interface and it must be financed by the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , when dealing with a topic as serious as terrorism , we should not wait for things to happen before we act .
We should anticipate events , but we do not .
Unfortunately , we only change in response to each attack , such as the failed attack in Detroit , which is forcing us today to take decisions to ensure the safety of air transport .
Taking a decision on body scanners in airports is a responsibility that we cannot avoid , ladies and gentlemen .
We cannot wait any longer because the terrorists are not waiting .
Consequently , the Commission must guarantee , as soon as possible , that the dignity and privacy of individuals will be preserved and that there will be no harmful effects on health .
Once this is guaranteed , we must adopt decisions for the European Union as a whole .
To those who are worried about infringement of our fundamental rights , I say that there is no greater right than the right to life , and those of us who cherish freedom above all else must be able to live safely in order to feel truly free .
( ES ) Mr President , terrorism is a global threat and tackling it is a responsibility that we all share .
In this regard , too , the Lisbon Treaty lays the foundations for us to be able to finally develop a common anti-terrorism policy in the European Union .
I agree entirely with the comments of the President-in-Office of the Council and would like to highlight some of the elements on which such a common policy must be built .
The first is to step up the exchange of information , particularly in relation to the efforts to prevent terrorist attacks and research into funding mechanisms .
The second is to apply all of the scientific and technological advances that have been achieved to the fight against terrorism , with due respect for individuals ' fundamental rights .
The third is to work with third countries , especially Afghanistan , Pakistan and the countries of the Horn of Africa .
Fourthly , in the debate on air safety we must ensure that technological advances , namely body scanners , are compatible with human health and privacy and , above all , that they do not affect processing times in airports or passenger comfort .
However , there are also three institutional elements .
The first is COSI , the Standing Committee on Internal Security .
The second is the declaration on counter-terrorism measures issued at the last informal meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs ( JHA ) Council of the European Union in Toledo .
The third is the transatlantic area of security , which must provide for the development of close cooperation with the United States to combat this common threat .
( FR ) Mr President , one of the means of preventing terrorism is information .
Even then , information needs to circulate .
Is this really the case today ?
Nothing is less certain .
Do the US intelligence services keep their European counterparts up to date ?
In any event , as far as the alleged terrorist arrested on the Amsterdam-Detroit flight is concerned , there is still cause for doubt .
Apart from this incident , there is the issue of knowing whether , generally speaking , the system for exchanging counterterrorism data really does observe the principle of reciprocity .
A parliamentary supervisory body on the matter is urgently required .
In fact , there is no need to call on our Parliament to support the transfer of more and more of our citizens ' personal data if , by contrast , the US authorities deprive our services of essential counterterrorism data .
This entails the creation of a parliamentary supervisory committee within the European Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must admit that when we talk about the fight against terrorism only in terms of intelligence and technology , I always feel as though we are still not getting to the bottom of things , as though we wanted to cure a disease by only concentrating on its symptoms and not on its causes .
Has the time not come to tackle the problem of terrorism by looking at the heart of the matter instead of limiting ourselves to its external effects ?
Tackling the heart of the problem means , for example , becoming aware that terrorism is also a direct manifestation of the inability or lack of will of ethnic groups to integrate within the fabric of society in Europe .
I wonder , and I ask Parliament : do we want a debate on terrorism ?
Does Parliament have the courage to face up to a political debate on the level of integration of Muslims in Europe and their willingness to share Western values , rights and freedoms ?
To this end I have tabled a question to the Commission on the burkha to prompt this House to face up to the topic openly .
It seems that no one is willing to deal with the subject .
I wonder , and I ask you , ladies and gentlemen from all the political groups : if the political forum representing the people of Europe cannot express an opinion about these subjects , what can they express an opinion on ?

Mr President , as a representative of Northern Ireland , I know only too well the terrible impact of terrorism on innocent civilians : murder and mayhem inflicted while people were doing their Saturday shopping in the Shankhill Road in Belfast ; young and old blown up at an act of remembrance to the fallen of the world wars in Enniskillen - acts carried out in the name of Irish Republicanism .
We talk here about the cooperation of the security forces .
From the experience of Northern Ireland , we can see that their contributions prevented many people from losing their lives ; of that I have no doubt .
We need to support our security forces with the equipment they need to prevent terrorism .
Those today who have pitted safety and security against freedom of choice and data protection need to consider where they stand .
Believe me , terrorism destroys lives and shatters communities .
I have even heard in this Chamber today that terrorism is hysteria .
What utter nonsense !
Believe me , when a gunman is trying to take a life , it is a cold and lethal reality - something that my constituents know a lot about .
( PT ) Mr President , I believe that we all agree with the need to protect people and goods and ensure security on public transport .
There are legitimate concerns about body scanners .
I hope that three of them will be resolved by the studies that the Commission is carrying out .
I ask that they conclude them promptly and refer them to Parliament .
Firstly , is it necessary and effective ?
Secondly , is it or is it not harmful to health ?
Thirdly , does it or does it not violate the privacy and dignity of individuals ?
There are , however , other concerns .
Initially we were told that it would be optional .
People could choose between submitting themselves to the scanners or to the old system of a personal check .
It seems , however , that certain Member States are implementing the ' no check , no fly ' principle as obligatory .
I would like to congratulate Commissioner Cecilia Malmström on the comprehensive assessment which she is going to discuss with Parliament , and I would like to stress that we have a responsibility to find solutions which promote security without compromising the rights of individuals .

( FR ) Mr President , we all want to combat terrorism and the threat that it poses to democracies ; there is , I believe , agreement on that point within our Parliament .
While the adage that ' a people that is ready to sacrifice a little freedom for a little security ends up losing both ' seems completely over the top to me , I am nevertheless convinced that we must do everything we can to find a balance between freedom and security , because this is the foundation of democracy and because , without that balance , the terrorists will have won if they succeed in terrorising us all .
I have two questions concerning body scanners .
In terms of security , do these scanners make it possible today to really guarantee security conditions ?
In terms of freedom , as a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I wonder whether there is not a risk to health and , of course , a risk with regard to infringements of personal privacy , and therefore of fundamental rights , and with regard to the use of these images .
Let us wait determinedly for the Commission 's work so that we can make progress and so that we can do so as a European Union , all together , in order to ensure our security in a European democratic area .
Due to lack of time , I cannot accept any more interventions under the ' blue card ' or ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
Mr President , terrorism is defined as the use of violence and intimidation to achieve political ends .
Those of us who value peace , freedom and democracy ought to be concerned about terrorism because it works .
Sinn Féin / IRA now hold posts in the government of Northern Ireland .
They bombed , shot and murdered their way to success at the ballot box .
What better examples of successful terrorism are there than those of Communism in Russia , Eastern Europe and Asia ?
China is still terrorised by the Chinese Communist Party after 61 years of power .
No greater example of successful terrorism exists than that .
The European Commission which this Parliament voted in yesterday contains Communists , former apparatchiks of brutal Communist regimes in Eastern Europe and their fellow travellers .
And , of course , the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso , is a former Maoist .
No doubt future terrorists will find this all extremely encouraging .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the security of our societies is a non-negotiable value that we must pursue with determination .
It is very clear that more efficient checks at the security gates must be backed by a higher level of cooperation between intelligence systems and the use of high-tech instruments .
The European ministers have done well not to be carried away by a tide of emotion and instead to concentrate on how to go about coordinating this operation .
Some governments have legitimately started to test body scanners on more sensitive routes .
Unless we are to end up with a European space that applies non-uniform standards , however , we must obtain the results of the studies under way as soon as possible .
Of course we must defend personal rights , but without preying on people 's fears .
Let us talk about health , let us reaffirm the precautionary principle , let us ask for confirmation of possible harm resulting from exposure to radio waves or x-rays , but let us stop wailing about an invasion of privacy just because of a few blurred images of faceless bodies that are immediately deleted , as though GPS , mobile phones or TV cameras had not been part of our lives for years .
Until the international terror centres have been obliterated , we must learn to live with these sacrifices , giving citizens solid answers and effective solutions , with a single limitation : the physical integrity of the individual .
Ladies and gentlemen , we now come to catch-the-eye .
These are the names I will call out .
I will simply stop the microphone after one minute .
I will not bang my gavel , I will not beg and I do not want to be misunderstood .
I shall call the speakers in the order that I have :
Mr Zasada
Mr Iacolino
Mr Matula
Mr Leichtfried
Mr Enciu
Ms Flašíková Beňová
Mr Tannock
Ms Ernst
Ms Rivasi
and Mr Mölzer .
One minute each , and that is it .
Apologies to the rest of you .
( PL ) Mr President , in the light of today 's debate , the use of body scanners at airports still leaves many questions unanswered .
The safety of travellers is , of course , paramount , but we should not forget the need for a sense of proportion in the protective methods used .
Use of this type of equipment still leaves a series of unanswered questions .
What effect do the scanners have on the health of passengers who are scanned ?
How will protection of the images of people who are scanned be guaranteed ?
Is it not better to tighten up the existing system than spend billions of euros on equipment , when it is known that the equipment does not detect explosives concealed inside the human body ?
We should be against the compulsory introduction of scanners at European airports until we have heard answers to these questions .
Finally , I have a comment - I have the impression that we have found a solution , and now we are looking for a problem for it to solve .
It may be that scanners are a solution , but they certainly will not solve the problem of security at airports .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in essence I wanted to state the following : there is no problem as serious as that of personal rights and the protection of privacy when this right is not adequately safeguarded .
If we adopted the resolution on the Stockholm Programme a few weeks ago in this very Parliament , it is because we achieved a balance between different needs : firstly , that of individual freedom , secondly , that of privacy and thirdly , that of security .
If today we are concerned with ensuring that the European Union deals with this common problem , because the Member States have gone ahead , it is probably because a significant challenge , such as that of protecting crossing points , and other matters besides , may not necessarily be met in practice .
I therefore call on the Spanish Presidency and the Commissioners to cooperate with one another on the basis of enhanced cooperation and a culture of information .
( RO ) I would like to clarify right at the start of my speech that through this debate we are not only confirming the existence of the risk of terrorism , but we are also highlighting the need to be one step ahead in the battle against this phenomenon .
However , the debate on the introduction of body scanners at airports in all of the European Union 's Member States has wider ramifications .
The effectiveness of this measure is debatable due to the fact that this technology cannot detect substances which have been ingested or are explosive in powder form .
However , it also poses for us the problem of safety with regard to passengers ' health , especially of those who frequently pass through these screening devices .
We cannot ignore either the issue of citizens ' fundamental rights , the right to privacy and dignity , as long as the scanners provide a detailed image of the human body .
In my view , independent studies need to be carried out to determine not only the safety of the technology being used , but also the effectiveness ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , the one principle that applies to the security of air travel is that European responsibility is constantly increasing .
It is no longer possible for individual Member States to do what they want .
This applies in particular to body scanners .
We have the one-stop security principle , which means that there must either be European regulations for body scanners or no regulations and no body scanners .
The alternative is the principle that everyone does what they want and no one does what they should , but everyone does something .
If a measure of this kind is to be introduced , we must discuss who will pay for it and how it will be financed , because both liquid scanners and body scanners cost huge amounts of money .
I happen to be the rapporteur for this area and I would be pleased to see the Council gradually starting to move on this issue , because it is important to establish in principle that public security is a public matter and must be financed at least in part from public funds .
( RO ) I would like to draw the attention of the Commission , the Council and my fellow Members to the side-effects and increased risk of carcinogenic conditions and genetic mutations following repeated exposure to gamma , X and T radiation .
The effects and risks of radiation from X-rays are well known in medicine where repeated exposure to this kind of radiation is not recommended .
The public are less aware of the effects of terahertz radiation .
Apart from the fact that T-ray scanners can generate accurate 3D images of the human body , which contravenes the individual 's right to privacy , repeated exposure to this kind of radiation may induce lesions in the DNA chains and cause genetic abnormalities to appear later on .
I would like to stress that the risks and distress which we could be exposed to if body scanners were possibly used on a large scale , along with the uncertainty about their effectiveness , do not justify such a solution ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Terrorism has no values , nor does it have any deeper meaning .
The only aim of terrorism is death .
Death of civilians at the lowest possible cost .
This is perhaps the story of various suicide attackers .
It is also a sad fact in respect of this aim that terrorism has led us to introduce various measures focused on protecting the civilian population using methods which in some ways curtail the rights of the civilian population .
It would therefore be a very good thing if this plenary sometimes approved scanners and if we could begin to think about adopting legislation and harmonisation in the area of justice and in the area of home affairs , because only the adoption of new technological measures will really assist us in the fight against terrorism .
Mr President , the recent announcement of compulsory back-scatter X-ray technology whole-body scanners at British airports by Prime Minister Gordon Brown is an outrage , in my view .
This is the first time ever that ionising radiation is being forced on people , including children and pregnant women , and indeed being used widely on healthy humans for non-medical reasons .
Soft low-energy X-rays actually are more absorbed than the higher-energy cosmic rays you receive whilst flying and are thus more dangerous and not less dangerous to the skin and soft tissues .
Furthermore , diagnostic medical X-rays allow the user , the patient , the possibility of a lead shielding on their gonads to reduce the total population dose causing DNA damage and future genetic mutations - not possible with these devices either .
As a doctor and frequent air traveller , I totally reject this draconian measure for health reasons , not to mention privacy and ineffectiveness reasons , and I hope that the EU refuses such mandatory measures Europe-wide .
Instead , I argue we should bring on Israeli-style profiling of passengers .
( DE ) Mr President , it is absolutely indisputable that body scanners quite clearly represent an invasion of privacy and a serious invasion at that .
We need to ask ourselves two questions .
The first question concerns the extent to which this response is proportionate and can really help to achieve the objective of combating terrorism .
We do not currently have any clear answers to this question .
This is why I support what Mrs Malmström has said concerning the need for an evaluation of all types of scanners .
I would like to see this assessment completed before we do anything else .
The second question concerns the risks to health .
Everyone in this room and also those Members who are currently elsewhere will have to pass through body scanners several times each week .
I would have to do so at least twice a week .
This is a long-term measure and I would like to know to what extent it will harm my health .
No real assessments have been carried out in this area .
I would like to make it quite clear that I am not prepared to expose myself to body scanners until these assessments have been made .
Therefore , I am calling for clear answers and not for hasty reactions .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to make the connection between the scanner , health and terrorism .
What does the Interagency Committee on Radioprotection , which brings together the European Commission , the IAEA - the International Atomic Energy Agency - and the Nuclear Energy Agency say ?
It says that pregnant women and children must not be subjected to body scans , even if the doses are extremely small .
Indeed , we should be aware that frequent exposure to low doses of radiation can cause cancers and malformations .
My question therefore concerns justification of the risks .
Given the existence of alternative technologies that enable the same goals to be achieved , these scanners really do need to be justified in relation to the given objective , and we need to know ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , we must not forget that misinformation and poor decisions made by the US secret service have repeatedly made it possible for acts of international terrorism to happen .
Despite this , the usefulness of the various anti-terrorism measures has never been called into question .
Instead , every attack is followed by further restrictions on civil rights and liberties .
The European Parliament is only waking up to this now that EU citizens are being obliged to undress both literally and financially in front of the US .
The transparent citizen is increasingly becoming a reality and all of this is based on data and information from the secret services whose role and reliability have become highly controversial , not least since the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq .
In addition to the doubts about the benefits , feasibility and compatibility with personal rights of body scanners , it seems highly unlikely that they will divert radical Islamists from their terrorist intentions .
We must take consistent measures to combat Islamist terrorism , but we must put a stop to EU citizens constantly ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I have listened carefully to the speeches by all the groups and Members on this topic .
We have heard some extremely interesting views , and I welcome them .
I would like to remind you , as I did in my first speech , that I am certainly not in favour of holding debates on such a complex and sensitive topic as the fight against terrorism after attacks or apparent attacks .
We obviously need to examine these attacks or apparent attacks to find out what went wrong with our security systems , but there is no doubt , as has been said time and again here this afternoon , that the counter-terrorism policy must be a carefully thought-out , calm and deliberate policy and must be applied in a proportional manner .
If we adopt measures that will undermine our principles , we are probably making a serious mistake .
As a result , we need to analyse , for example , what happened in Detroit to try to prevent mistakes , but we must not respond with a knee-jerk reaction after every attack because this would probably result in us adopting measures that , in some cases , would simply not make sense .
Europe has a strategy for its counter-terrorism policy .
We have a good strategy for fighting terrorism in the European Union , one that has proven to be effective in recent years .
We only have to look at the actions of the security forces in the different countries to see the extent to which , on many occasions , those actions were based on application of the common strategy we introduced a number of years ago .
We have an important figure , a Counter-Terrorism Coordinator , whose speeches are very interesting .
Once again , I would recommend that you look in detail at his last speech in this House because I believe it is an excellent speech that highlights the extent of our strategy .
Indeed , we have recently been trying to give concrete expression to this strategy through prevention , unlike the early years of its application , when we put much more emphasis on detection .
Of course , the most important element in the fight against terrorism is prevention , in other words , preventing attacks .
That is why we are focusing our common efforts , as I said , on prevention .
That is also why we are concentrating on aspects such as radicalisation , which I mentioned in my speech , as did the Commissioner .
We are keen to analyse the policies being implemented in each country to prevent radicalisation , which is undoubtedly the root cause of many of the terrorist attacks we have suffered in recent years .
We are also keen to ensure the correct exchange of information .
This has been emphasised in the House on various occasions .
The important thing is not to transmit all of the information that you have , but to transmit the information that is relevant to those who are receiving it .
That is the information that needs to be transmitted .
The aim is not to swamp ourselves with information , but to have information management tools that make the exchange as effective as possible .
There have been significant improvements recently in the European Union in that regard .
We have a strategy that , when implemented , will , for example , improve the functioning of our exchange systems .
When I talk about exchange , I am thinking of Europol , I am thinking of Eurojust , I am thinking of COSI , which has been mentioned here by some Members , and , lastly , I am thinking of the exchange of information and how to make it more effective .
Finally , yes , the controversial body scanners are now on the agenda , and I believe , as I said in my first speech and as the Commissioners said , too , that it is an issue that we have to tackle .
Ideally , we will be able to decide on a common solution at European level .
Of course , if we do not , each country will be able to implement its own policies , and probably , even if we do decide on a common solution , there may be some countries that decide to go ahead with their own policies under their own laws .
However , there is little doubt that a common position on this matter would be extraordinarily helpful .
In order to adopt such a position , and in line with what I said at the start of this speech , we need a calm and deliberate debate focusing on three elements that are currently being studied by the Commission : firstly , the effectiveness of the scanners ( whether or not they are effective , what their limits are and whether or not they can do what we want them to do ) ; secondly , their compatibility with fundamental rights and individual freedoms ; and thirdly , their compatibility with the health of the people who will have to pass through them .


I believe these are the three topics that we need to examine .
Once the reports are available , we will adopt a common position , which I believe is necessary .
Mr President , I would like to say once again how much I appreciate the speeches made here in the House , which I consider to be extremely useful for the Council 's work .
Mr President , I asked a direct question to the Council and I would like an answer .
I asked what the Council thought of the gross breach of Article 6 - the fundamental rights clause - of the EU Treaty in light of the UK Court of Appeals ' ruling confirming that the UK was guilty ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for your contributions , but I must say that we have not got a proposal today to introduce some new machines in a compulsory manner in all Member States and all airports .
This is not the case .
We are just in a process of careful examination of these new technologies and we will come to you after April , after a substantial report which will examine all aspects of these new technologies .
I myself have certain doubts , especially about efficiency and , as somebody said here , the proportionality of using this new technology , but we should not reject outright new technologies .
Terrorism develops and we , too , must use all technological developments to defend our citizens and passengers .
So do not demonise new technologies .
We will , together with colleagues Cecilia Malmström and Viviane Reding , propose a common European approach with all necessary requirements concerning all technological , legal , fundamental rights and privacy issues and aspects .
We definitely will propose some common European approach , an approach on which I believe there is consensual understanding and which is preferred here and , I understand , also in many Member States .
So this is what we will do in the near future .
We will come with a report and then we will continue this discussion .
Believe me , we do not have any conspiracy to introduce some kind of new machines immediately ; there is no technological solution which is totally bullet-proof or which guarantees 100 % security , and aviation security is an especially complex area where we need a large variety of combined measures and also very strong international cooperation .
So after this report , we will come with concrete proposals and we will definitely propose a common European approach on what the standards might be and what the requirements might be if Member States opt for the introduction or use of new screening technologies .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is indeed an extremely important debate .
Counter-terrorism is an important tool for fighting terrorism .
We have painful experiences within the European Union of the effects of terrorism and the threat that it presents , not only to individuals but to societies , democracy and our fundamental values .
Member States , of course , have the operational responsibility and the responsibility for their intelligence , but I am convinced that we can do much more at European level to coordinate and to fine-tune the tools that we have .
That is why I have asked my services to , very quickly , carry out an analysis of the policies , of the framework , of the tools that we already have , in order to see what can be improved and how we can use them in an even more intelligent way .
I agree with certain Members who have said that .
I am also convinced that Europol , Eurojust and Member State authorities can work much better and in a much more coordinated way .
There are certainly measures for doing that .
Events like the one in Detroit are important as they serve as a kind of alarm bell , alerting us to the fact that terrorism is still present ; it is still a very important threat .
There are demands and pressure on us politicians to do things quickly , to introduce improvements and to protect the citizens immediately .
This is totally natural .
We have a responsibility to protect security , but also to act after thorough analysis , assessment and discussion so we propose appropriate and proportional measures , as Commissioner Siim Kallas and as the Council have also said .
We will do this .
We will also have to give full consideration to respect for fundamental rights .
So this is how this Commission will work .
We will come back to you with more detailed proposals after this evaluation has been carried out and discuss this further with you .
Thank you very much for an important and very engaging debate .
The debate is closed .
( ES ) Mr President , before we finish , I would simply like to make a point of order and express my surprise , because when the catch-the-eye procedure began , I raised my hand , thinking that it was starting then , but you already had a full list .
I would simply like the catch-the-eye criteria to be standardised so that we can all speak , because there seemed to be other Members speaking even though you said you had a full list .
I therefore just want to express my surprise and request that for the next time , we all know what we have to do to be able to speak .
Terrorism remains a high-level threat in the European Union .
This is why all Member States have stepped up their efforts to improve the tools used to prevent and combat it .
The adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon offers the opportunity to respond much more efficiently in every area linked , directly or indirectly , to combating terrorism .
The use of body scanners is a delicate issue .
I think that there are important factors which must be examined carefully before making a decision on this .
They concern the scanners ' effectiveness , respect for the right to privacy , the financial impact of using them given the particularly high cost of buying them and , above all , the way in which the use of these machines affects the health of those who are screened by them .
The European Commission is due to produce three studies on the use and effects of body scanners .
For this reason , I believe that it is important for us to await the experts ' conclusions and closely analyse them and only then make a decision on a common position on this issue .
in writing . - When the issue of counter-terrorism measures arises , the debate always focuses on the affect on civil liberties .
I have always taken the stand that it is a question of priorities .
It is a question whether passengers are prepared to sacrifice their discomfort for their safety .
Civil liberty groups have the duty to weigh all new measures being advocated .
Those proposing new measures such as body scanners have the duty to prove their necessity .
Although solutions are normally based on compromise , in this instance , compromises may not be possible .
It is apparent that current procedures , in particular , body searches , are not sufficient .
It has been established that body scanners are more effective .
The problem is that they may offend passengers ' dignity .
Therefore , this is the issue which has to be addressed .
Many possibilities exist .
For instance , different body scanners for different genders manned by personnel of the same gender .
Ensuring the security of air travel in the fight against terrorism is without doubt essential , but we must ascertain what impact the measures created to ensure this security have on our health , fundamental rights and freedoms , privacy and dignity .
The use of body scanners , as one of the possible technical solutions , is a very serious matter , concerning the use of new technologies for the security of citizens , and therefore I hope that the Commission will finally present an assessment of the impact of body scanners on people 's health and fundamental human rights and freedoms .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that while using new technical measures , which are aimed at achieving a high level of airport security , it is also very important to set boundaries between human rights and security itself , as those measures are not only related to the protection of citizens , but to the impact on their rights and freedoms .
The Commission has yet to present an impact assessment report , confirming that precisely body scanners will ensure the effective protection of people travelling by air , and therefore there are still doubts as to whether these technical security measures will really be safe , effective and sound .
Therefore , once we have evaluated the existing situation , we must continue our work in this sensitive area .
in writing . - The European Parliament cannot give its consent to the introduction of body scanners , which are essentially a type of X-ray , before the existing health and privacy concerns surrounding them have been properly addressed by European authorities .
I am aware that concerns exist among frequent flyers and I am concerned about subjecting other passengers , such as pregnant women and children , to body scanners .
There are also considerable concerns regarding the intrusive nature of these images , and we must ensure that the privacy of European citizens is protected before we agree to the widespread distribution of these time-consuming and expensive machines .
Given that the American authorities have conceded that it was a failure on the part of their security agencies rather than airport technology which led to the recent Detroit terrorist scare , I believe that , before we invest in this controversial technology , a variety of less expensive methods - such as increased intelligence , different search methods and enhanced international cooperation - should be explored .
The American founding father Benjamin Franklin once said that ' He who would put security so far before liberty deserves neither ' , and I believe that Europe would do well to heed this particular piece of advice over the coming months .
in writing . - The International Federation of journalists , representing 600 000 journalists in 125 countries , has called on the Israeli Authorities to revoke a deportation order on journalist Jared Malsin who was deported because his reports on the situation in the West Bank and Gaza were critical of the Israeli Government .
They have condemned the deportation of as an intolerable violation of press freedom .
In addition , 13 Israeli Human Rights Organisations have protested to the Israeli Knesset and Prime Minister Netanyahu regarding the increasingly systematic campaign against Human Rights Organisations in Israel .
It has been reported that Israel is now demanding that the European Union stop giving financial assistance to Human Rights Organisations operating in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories .
I wish to ask you Mr President to make contact with Prime Minister Netanyahu to make it clear that the EU is founded on respect for the right of free speech , the right to criticise one 's own government , a free press , and the right to peaceful protest , as fundamental to a democratic state .
Prime Minister Netanyahu must also be reminded that EU trade agreements require those we do business with to respect those rights .
Nearly 10 years after 11 September , the terrorist threat is still present , and aeroplanes are one of the tools favoured by terrorists to strike at our countries .
We must find a way of protecting our citizens and preventing them from becoming the victims of terrorist acts .
Body scanners may be one of the ways of strengthening security in airports and on board aeroplanes .
Before taking a decision , however , we must make sure that these machines do not infringe individual liberties and that they are not harmful to the health of travellers or of airport staff .
I await with great interest the study that the European Commission will submit on this matter in March .
In dealing with all the different aspects associated with their use , this report should make it possible to certify the scanners throughout Europe , guaranteeing the protection of civil liberties and health while improving security .
In order that all citizens should benefit from the same protection , I hope that , following the submission of this study by the European Commission , we shall encourage Member States to come to an agreement on this matter .
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the toolset of security measures used in international airports is continually expanded as aviation safety - our safety - faces more and more challenges .
At the same time , a number of elements of measures already taken , planned or tested to improve aviation safety already exceed the strictly aeronautical or aviation safety requirements .
This is why these issues should be investigated in their overall context .
Safety is a key issue in our lives - it is the most important issue .
However , we only feel safe when safety measures do not restrict our rights disproportionately , do not violate our personal rights and , in some cases , do not damage our health , and when the measures taken to ensure our safety , as a whole , are not disproportionate , cannot be circumvented and have an appropriate level of efficiency .
We need devices , such as body scanners , which provide efficient passenger traffic monitoring , are used on the basis of voluntary consent , taking into account , among other things , passengers who have essential medical implants ( electronic pacemakers or metal implants ) , are not harmful to health , children , pregnant women or frequent travellers , and finally , do not record image data and are used only to provide an appropriate warning in the event of a risk .
Therefore , any further debate on the introduction of test scanners is only useful when sufficiently detailed impact assessments of the conditions listed above have been carried out .
Only the use of devices compliant with this set of requirements is acceptable to us .
in writing . - We cannot wait for another catastrophe before acting to protect air passengers .
Dublin Airport Authority ( DAA ) has tendered a contract , worth up to EUR 2 million , for body scanners at Dublin airport .
The DAA said that , if the Department of Transport gives the go-ahead , which seems very likely , and the equipment proved successful , the scanners could be extended to Cork and Shannon airports .
But the Data Protection Commissioner is concerned that any moves by the Irish authorities to bring in scanners goes through proper consideration and balances security needs with individual privacy rights .
Manchester Airport , where one of the scanners is being trialled , insists the black and white images are not pornographic or erotic and are viewed by a single officer at a remote location after which they are immediately destroyed .
Body scanners are not infallible but they are the best technology available at present and so we need to use what tools we have to hand in order to reduce the terrorist threat .
We need a pan-European approach to the issue of scanners - airport security needs to be uniform .
I eagerly await the conclusion of the Commission report of the impact of body scanners .
Ladies and gentlemen , listening to today 's debate , one might have the impression that the main problem currently facing European countries is whether to increase the use of body scanners at airports or to limit possibilities for their introduction .
It seems to me that this is not , however , a correct understanding of the matter .
From this point of view , the problem of guaranteeing protection of human rights is not very significant , either .
The fundamental question we should ask is whether the new methods and instruments proposed by the special services will be used effectively .
If we give up part of our liberty in favour of security , will our security really be guaranteed ?
The information we are receiving about this makes us very sceptical .
If the appropriate services are not even able to guarantee effective passport control , and if they cannot use the information they possess - which is so clearly shown by the incident with the flight to Detroit - what guarantee do we have that they will be able to use the new instruments effectively ?
History teaches us that in crisis situations , special services want to take the simplest route .
They demand new powers , more money and better instruments , while they are not able to use to the full the possibilities they already have .
Someone should stand up for common sense and healthy scepticism , and it seems to me that the European Parliament has a not insignificant role to play in this regard .
The events of recent years have forced us to look for new solutions which will ensure the greatest possible security for travellers .
The terrorist threat has made us agree more readily to the restriction of our own freedom .
I hope that before a decision is made on the general introduction of body scanners at airports , a thorough analysis will be made of their effectiveness and safety , as well as the costs which will have to be incurred .
We do not want a repeat of what happened with the mass introduction of vaccines against A1 / H1N1 influenza , when governments , in a wave of panic , bought stocks of vaccines at huge cost without receiving a guarantee of their safety from the producers , and now those stocks remain unused .
Perhaps it would be more effective to use solutions developed by the Israelis , where emphasis is placed on observation of passengers ' behaviour and on thorough checking of those who arouse most suspicion , and not of everyone .
This system has proved its effectiveness over many years .
It is our duty as MEPs to get involved in resolving the issues raised by the subject of body scanners with regard to both the fight against terrorism and the civil and personal rights of Europeans .
I totally agree with finding viable solutions for enhancing our citizens ' security .
However , we have an obligation to ensure the protection of all the rights of our fellow citizens across the European Union .
This implies the right to privacy and the fundamental right to personal dignity , which must be balanced with the security concept of the airport machines .
The question which arises in this context is whether these body scanners are the most viable solution for resolving the security problems at airports .
I think that Europe must say YES to finding solutions for combating terrorism and organised crime and NO to infringing the right to privacy and personal dignity , which is a basic principle of democracy .
in writing . - Every time a real or would-be terrorist boards a plane , fooling the vigilance of our brave security guards and their wonderful machines , millions of passengers get a more miserable life for years to come .
The 9 / 11 terrorists have been successful beyond imagination : they managed to alter our lives - for the worse - forever !
We , in the East , wanted to get rid of our ' Big Brother ' and we got in exchange the ' Western ' variant , more sophisticated but no less scary .
Many ' security guards ' at some airports misbehave ; they consider themselves above the law , looking at every passenger as a suspect , taking the liberty to inspect every bit of luggage without any explanation and , of course , excuse , when their ' suspicion ' proved unfounded .
And when you dare to protest , they laugh in your face .
You would agree this is an abuse .
It is high time , then , that the Commission looked into the activity of these firms and imposed some standards of behaviour towards the large mass of honest citizens .
After all , we have a Charter of Fundamental Rights to be respected equally by every European , including those in charge of security in our airports .
To fight terrorism effectively , we need coordinated action , including EU rules on scanners .
The principles which we accept must include protection of basic rights and personal data as well as something no less important - citizens ' health .
A decision on compulsory use of scanning equipment must be made .
There is no point talking about it at all if the scans are to be voluntary .
For it is difficult to suppose that terrorists will agree to being scanned .
A very important question is , of course , the safety of the scanners for health .
Opinions are divided on this , from the opinion of the Czech Office of Nuclear Safety , which shows that scanning equipment emits radiation which is harmful to human health , to that of the French Central Civil Aviation Directorate , which considers the equipment completely safe .
Further tests are essential to show which types of scanner are safe for health and any possible side effects of their use .
The research should be coordinated by the European Commission with the full cooperation of Member States .
The scanners used must have a safety certificate allowing their use in all Member States .
In this way , we will avoid duplication of research costs by individual Member States , and we will be sure that citizens ' health is protected equally in each Member State .
Mr President , a new method of searching passengers has been introduced at some European airports .
Alongside the current forms of security , full body scanners have been brought into use .
Most airline passengers are decidedly against this , seeing in this form of search a violation of fundamental human rights , including the right to intimacy and protection of personal dignity .
In addition , and this is very significant , this reluctance is deepened by a lack of knowledge about what effect the scanners have on the health of those scanned .
There are no clear regulations on the storage and protection of data collected by scanning .
It is also being argued that the scanners are nowhere near as highly effective as is claimed by their producers .
One would hope that their effectiveness does not turn out to be similar to that of the vaccines against swine influenza , which , in the final analysis , were effective only in increasing the incomes of pharmaceutical concerns .
Taking into account all these justified doubts , I think the European Commission should specify principles for protecting the rights of passengers which , at the same time , ensure their safety .
Situation in Ukraine ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the Commission on the situation in Ukraine .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , Cathy Ashton , asked me to make the following remarks .
Allow me to thank you for this very timely invitation to address you on Ukraine , which is a key partner for the European Union .
As you will be aware , a second round of presidential elections took place on Sunday in Ukraine .
This was an important event , not just for the country itself , but for the wider region as a whole .
It is important because a democratic Ukraine will serve as an important example to its neighbours .
We welcome the positive assessment made by the OSCE / ODIHR-led International Election Observation Mission that the elections were conducted in accordance with international standards and that there has been further progress in Ukraine 's already good electoral track-record since 2004 .
The statement issued by the High Representative on Monday expressed this sentiment .
It also congratulated the people of Ukraine for their continued commitment to the democratic process .
The high turnout on both election days was particularly encouraging .
It is clear that Ukraine 's democracy is continuing its process of consolidation .
The population of the country goes to the polls , makes its choice freely , and expects to be heard .
This is a significant achievement .
Most importantly , it demonstrates Ukraine 's attachment to European values .
Elections have winners and losers .
It is the electorate who decides .
As we meet here today in Strasbourg , official election results have not yet been certified by the Central Election Commission .
Preliminary election results show a very small gap between the two contestants .
We have already heard about possible challenges to the results in the courts .
Some local court cases have already been initiated .
It is logical and legitimate that any possible problems are investigated .
At the same time , it is of utmost importance that the electoral process as a whole continues in a smooth manner , demonstrating both the resilience and depth of Ukraine 's democratic maturity and the candidates ' own shared commitment to the country 's development .
Every election is a demonstration of popular will .
It is also an opportunity for a new start .
It is now vital for Ukraine to move forward .
The success of the electoral process in Ukraine - given Ukraine 's geographical and strategic importance - matters to the EU , and to Europe as a whole .
In the past years , we have seen political instability , characterised by competition between the President and Prime Minister , exacerbated by a lack of clarity in the Constitution .
Ukraine has consistently held good elections , and has a vibrant civil society and free media .
Regrettably , however , the overall reform process - which is vital for Ukraine - has significantly slowed .
Much more should have been done in the past years .
Pre-election politics also got in the way of the implementation of the IMF standby arrangement , with Ukraine failing to meet required conditions .
The weakness of Ukraine 's constitutional framework has also contributed to this .
I am convinced that I speak for all of us in saying that we look to the new leadership in Ukraine to give new impetus to its reform efforts .
As a first priority , in order to address the effects of the global financial crisis and ensure future economic stability , Ukraine needs to get back on track with the IMF programme , without delay .
This is also a precondition for the disbursement of possible EU macrofinancial assistance .
In the weeks and months to come , we will see a new administration being formed in Kiev .
The EU 's message to Ukraine 's leadership is consistent and clear : now is the time to act .
We expect to see concrete steps forward .
Reform is essential for Ukraine 's own long-term prosperity and security .
It is in Ukraine 's own interest - not just to please the international community .
This message was also already conveyed at the EU-Ukraine Summit of 4 December 2009 .
Action is needed at many levels .
On the economic front , Ukraine needs to take urgent action to tackle corruption and to improve the business and investment climate .
This includes efforts to strengthen the independence of the judiciary , to open up the economy and to ensure fair and transparent competition - for example , by the adoption of a public procurement law in line with international standards and the European Union acquis .
At the same time , essential sectoral reforms in areas such as energy - in particular the gas sector - transport and the environment need to be undertaken and implemented .
We have also consistently encouraged Ukraine to revisit constitutional reform , to bring stability and put in place functioning ground rules for political life .
A constitution needs to stand the test of time , and its reform should not be tied to short-term political considerations .
It is up to Ukraine to choose the model it wants to adopt .
However , it should ensure that an effective system of checks and balances is in place which avoids the political paralysis that Ukraine has experienced in the past .
The help and advice of the Venice Commission will be important in ensuring that this is done in a manner corresponding to European standards , availing of the best experience available .
Over and above the first reform priorities , Ukraine needs to continue the extensive task of ensuring regulatory approximation with European Union standards .
This is a prerequisite to ensure that Ukraine can enjoy the full benefits of the new and ambitious EU-Ukraine association agreement which we are currently negotiating with Ukraine - including a deep and comprehensive free trade area ,
It is our task to encourage Ukraine on the way forward and to support Kiev 's own leadership in a process of far-reaching reforms and modernisation .
We have many tools to do so .
Through the European neighbourhood policy , we have the means to support Ukraine 's own reform efforts .
Already today , ongoing and planned technical and financial cooperation with Ukraine is in the region of EUR 435 million , without counting possible macrofinancial assistance .
The Eastern Partnership has brought additional tools .
The comprehensive institution-building programme envisaged by the Eastern Partnership is a case in point , as it specifically targets institutions within the Ukrainian Government which need strengthening in order to deliver on reform .
More generally , in negotiations with Ukraine on a new ambitious EU-Ukraine association agreement , we have set out our goals clearly : political association and economic integration between the European Union and Ukraine .
This is a very significant undertaking , including the establishment of a deep and comprehensive free trade area involving extensive regulatory approximation to the European Union acquis .
But our offer to Ukraine is not a one-way street .
The pace at which Ukraine and the EU come closer together in the future depends on the quality and depth of Ukraine 's own reform efforts .
We look forward to working with Ukraine 's new leadership to achieve our common goals .
We have been in contact today through our cabinets with the High Representative and my colleague in the Commission , and let me summarise the three following messages : firstly , we both agreed that these elections testified the vibrancy of democracy in Ukraine ; secondly , we are committed to deepening the relationship with Ukraine and supporting it in implementing its reform agenda ; and , thirdly , we look forward to starting a constructive cooperation with the President-elect as soon as official results are announced .

Madam President , Commissioner , we are rather disappointed .
I am one of the people who was in the tent city during the Orange Revolution in Kiev and when I look at what has been done over the past five years , I want to say to President Yushchenko that he has not brought stability to his country , he has not created parliamentary opportunities and he has brought the legislative process to a halt .
He is certainly responsible for the failure of the Orange Revolution .
I hope that these elections will bring new stability to Ukraine .
However , despite the elections apparently being conducted in accordance with international standards , I am concerned that this is not a stable , self-confident democracy .
When the legislation is amended three days before the second ballot , right in the middle of the elections , for whatever purpose , this does not demonstrate that the process has been understood .
Instead , it causes us to watch Ukraine with great concern .
I believe that we must become closely involved in the issue of the development of democracy and the rule of law in Ukraine , together with the related subject of stability , which is not a contradiction , but a consequence of this .
Mr Füle , you have a specific responsibility relating to neighbourhood policy .
However , neighbourhood policy does not simply mean going on as before .
Instead , it means using the tools available to us not only for a bilateral relationship with a country like Ukraine or with other countries in the region , but instead in a multilateral approach to these countries , so that they come closer together and become more stable .
We must give them perspectives .
This does not involve referring every day to the enlargement of the European Union , but instead making visa facilities available to them now , considering the possibility of a free trade zone and perhaps even offering them the prospect of the same status as Norway within a European economic area .
This will not harm anyone , does not represent aggressive behaviour towards anyone and , at the same time , will lead to the introduction of the European perspective and of stability in countries of this kind .
I hope that the new government will prove itself worthy of taking part in this type of project .
Madam President , Commissioner , one of the drawbacks of your being responsible for both enlargement and the neighbourhood policy is that you will spend more time in this Chamber .
Now to the matter in hand .
We must say that the international observers gave a very positive assessment of the elections in Ukraine , regardless of the fact that the legislation surrounding the actual elections stood on shaky ground .
It can be said that the fact that changes were made at the last minute did not directly affect the result of these elections .
In fact , we can say that democracy in Ukraine was the main winner because , when the current president stands again as a candidate and only receives 5 % of the votes , this seems to me to be a very clear sign that democracy is working .
One of the rules of democracy is that you accept the result of the elections as it is .
Also , you acknowledge your rival 's victory when the assessment of the actual elections is positive .
This is why our message to the losing candidate must be very clear : Ukraine needs political stability and must be given the opportunity finally to initiate long-delayed reforms .
Apart from these messages , we must clearly state in this House that we will help Ukraine to start moving forward again through our policy , the Neighbourhood Policy , and the Eastern Partnership .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the recent presidential elections in Ukraine marked the end of the period in recent years in which the colour orange carried a political message .
The recent presidential elections can be seen as another step in the consolidation of democracy .
There is a saying that a revolution devours its own children .
This is true , but Ukraine remains a state even after these elections .
It still has its multi-party system , and this is mainly thanks to the Orange Revolution .
Likewise , the existence of freedom of speech and a free press can be attributed to the events of five years ago , when the route towards freedom and respect for human rights was taken .
And all of this is very important .
Thus , we have to recognise the development of Ukraine towards democracy and the rule of law , towards improving economic integration and promoting relations with the European Union .
I believe that , despite the official results of the elections , Ukraine will continue on the same course - it will continue to support integration with the European Union , to make the state government more effective , to make the political system more balanced - and to continue with constitutional reform .
Ukraine 's internal political stability and concentration on internal reform are a precondition for the further continuation of relations between the European Union and Ukraine .
It is a crucial precondition for bilateral and multilateral cooperation that Ukraine 's Government continues to implement its objectives .
We have to continue talks on the association agreement between Ukraine and the European Union .
In recent times , the tempo has been slowing , and we must speed it up again .
We also have to put a more concrete content into energy and environmental cooperation .
Joining the World Trade Organisation is a significant achievement , which is also an important precondition for creating a proper free trade area for us and Ukraine .
We also have to mention shortcomings , however : corruption has already been mentioned , and there are entrenched special interest groups and nepotistic practices .
We hope that Ukraine turns round these shortcomings ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , first of all , I would like to pick up on what Mr Brok said .
It is true that it was a very sad result for the hero of 2004 , Victor Yushchenko , to be beaten in the first ballot .
In my view , Mr Yushchenko is the only person to pick up the tab for the failings of all the leaders of the Ukrainian parties or blocks .
One important issue that we need to deal with is the fact that the people of Ukraine do not really trust any of the heads of the Ukrainian parties to lead their country on behalf of and for the benefit of all its citizens .
If there is one result that has come out of the presence of the election observers , alongside the fact that the elections were conducted properly , which goes without saying , it is the discovery during the course of many discussions that most people voted for the lesser evil .
None of the citizens whom I met had great expectations of this election .
That is alarming in the case of such a young democracy , which has moved further away from the former Soviet system than any other country in Eastern Europe .
Mr Füle , I hope that your presence today and the absence of Baroness Ashton does not mean that Ukraine is once again taking second place and will disappear among all the other foreign and security policy priorities .
It must be one of the major priorities , because this has not been the case during the last five years .
The internal failings in Ukraine are mirrored by failings in the European strategy .
We must not take this lightly any longer .
We must give our unconditional support to Ukraine 's focus on the West , because we have a lot to lose .
Gas is one subject which always causes a great deal of consternation .
I only need to mention Sevastopol , where we are facing a major conflict .
We cannot simply let things go on as they have before .
You have taken on a significant responsibility in this area .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , of course , Yulia Tymoshenko is entitled to appeal against the result of the presidential election .
Given the intrigues and scheming which went on in 2004 , we cannot blame her , except for the fact that this time , international election observers have confirmed the results .
She can stand up for her supposed rights .
However , this is not a clever move in political terms , because a dispute of this kind will result in the political and economic uncertainty in the country continuing .
The close election result reflects the fact that the country is split into two camps .
However , realistically , it will not be possible for Mr Yanukovich to reinstate the authoritarian regime that was overthrown years ago , even if he wanted to , despite the fact that the oligarchic structure in the political and economic system has undoubtedly been reinforced by the presidential elections .
Given the close result , both camps will have to make compromises .
It is important that the cultural and social East-West split within the country is overcome for the sake of the people .
A lot will depend on whether Mr Yanukovich appoints a prime minister whom both the Eastern and Western Ukrainians can live with and whether Mrs Tymoshenko has the democratic maturity to acknowledge her defeat and join the opposition .
Madam President , Commissioner , five years ago , this Chamber went through the Orange Revolution , too , in a certain sense .
However , several weeks ago , including in Mrs Ashton 's speech , questions were asked about whether the Ukrainians were ready for the Orange Revolution , and if they had put it all into practice ?
I share Mrs Harms ' regret , here , that Mrs Ashton is not with us today .
There is an answer to this question : a 70 % turnout at an election is , truly , a rarity in Europe , and it is a real rarity in our countries , too .
In this sense , Mr Brok is not right when he says the Orange Revolution lost .
It won , because it was all about having rules from which everyone could benefit .
In Poland , too , we know about situations in which the beneficiary of democratic rules was someone who had formerly been opposed to democracy .
However , this is good - this is how it should be .
Now the time has come for our answer : have we done everything we should have done following the Orange Revolution ?
Have we answered that question ?
Apart from all the instruments which the Commissioner has spoken about - and it is good that we have created these instruments - have we answered that the door is open for Ukraine ?
Can far-reaching reforms be carried out in a post-communist country without that promise ?
Can we encourage people to make sacrifices if we tell them they will always be kept waiting outside ?
Should we not , rather , tell them : there is room for you in Europe , not today , not tomorrow , but there is room .
To say that is a great opportunity for the new Commissioner , Mr Füle .
Mrs Ashton has not come , today .
Commissioner , be bold and be the first person who starts to say that there is room .
Not today , not tomorrow , but there will be room .
This will be of great help to the Ukrainians .
This may be the last moment when this can be said , and this is why all Ukrainians must be certain that integration , cooperation with Europe and changes to the law are their own personal opportunity .
This must not just be said to the elite , to businesspeople or to students .
It must be said in such a way that everyone will understand that it is still worth making sacrifices after the years of communism , that it is still worth doing something .
It is an opportunity for you , too , Mr Füle .
Say this clearly , and you will go down in history .
You will help not only Ukraine , but all of Central Europe , because prosperity and security for Ukraine mean an opportunity for the whole of Central Europe .
Everyone must feel that they have an opportunity .
This is why , apart from the association agreement , which is very important , we need to relax the visa requirement for Ukrainians and , in the future , lift it .
We need to say very clearly : the door to Europe is open for Ukraine .
Someone must , at last , after these five years , say it .
Madam President , Ukraine 's recent elections have shown that the country is a functioning democracy .
The new President will be governing in the face of robust opposition and free media .
It is to be hoped that the opposition will be constructive and the standards of governance in the country will improve .
The election campaign confirmed that the Ukrainian political elite wants to continue the process of integration with the European Union and to maintain good neighbourly relations with Russia .
The European Union must respond with clear signals welcoming both trends .
At the same time , Ukraine needs to speed up its reforms .
If such progress is made , the EU must consider extending a promise of membership to Ukraine .
In the meantime , we should encourage and do much more for integration at the grassroots level .
People-to-people exchanges , youth and school visits , scholarships , city and regional twinning arrangements and business contracts are the best way of spreading the message that reforms are the only way to a better future .
What is most important at this moment is that the EU finds a way of liberalising the entry visa regime .
We must ensure the greatest possible flow of people across our frontiers with Ukraine .
As one of my constituents wrote to me recently , help 1 000 people to travel to the EU from eastern Ukraine and 100 000 will hear about their favourable impressions when they return .
This is the way to underpin the reforms we want to see happening in this valuable democratic neighbours of ours .
( PL ) Madam President , there is at least one country of the former Soviet Union where the results of elections are not known in advance .
That country is Ukraine , and we should be pleased about this , because we , too , have played our part , here .
After the elections in Ukraine , something will change .
There will be a new President , and that new President should meet with a friendly reception in the European Union and the European Parliament .
This is because Ukraine 's European inclinations are not a passing interest , but a serious challenge and the ambition of millions of Ukrainians .
A new openness to Ukraine is needed from the European Union .
Let us not be motivated by personal ambitions .
I do understand that in the European People 's Party , there is a little regret that the elections were not won by the woman they wanted to win .
However , let us not push the new President of Ukraine into the arms of Moscow .
Ukraine is going to be a partner from whom much will be expected .
Ukraine is going to be a partner who will be given much to do .
Ukraine is going to be a partner who should be treated with goodwill .
Therefore , once again , a new European impulse is needed , because Ukraine is part of Europe , and we must implement this policy in our own interest .
( RO ) I hope that the Ukrainian authorities will step up their efforts to cooperate externally with the European Union and to come into line with European standards internally .
The Eastern Partnership and Euronest initiative offer a suitable framework for this .
Regardless of the political hue of the new administration , the question is not whether the Ukraine should remain eastern or become western .
The question is whether the Ukraine can consolidate democracy internally .
This means establishing democratic norms and protecting human rights .
One sensitive area is , for instance , the situation of the Romanian-speaking minority in Ukraine and their right to education in their mother tongue .
On the foreign policy front , Ukraine must be encouraged towards cooperating with the European Union through developing good neighbourly relations with EU Member States .
However , it is just as important to involve Ukraine in the European processes for cooperating on the Black Sea region .
Finally , consolidating relations with the pro-European government in the Republic of Moldova may be an immediate , beneficial step towards a good neighbourhood policy .
( PT ) Five years after the Orange Revolution , the Ukrainians seems to be looking back on the period as a lost opportunity .
This is not solely the fault of their political elite .
It is true that they were too consumed with conflicts of power and influence .
Many reforms were never implemented , and many never left the drawing board .
In a democracy , it is inconceivable for electoral law to be changed between the two rounds of an election .
This does no credit to those who proposed them , those who voted for them or those who made them .
It suggests that there are unworthy and undesirable intentions behind it .
A lot needs to change with the judicial authorities ' lack of independence , as they are subject to too much influence , not only from political powers but also from economic actors .
Without a free and independent justice system there can be no law , human rights are not guaranteed , and there is no foreign investment or progress .
However , the blame for this disillusionment can also be laid at the door of this House , and many Member States in particular .
I wish that for a few seconds , we could put ourselves in the shoes of a citizen of a European country which , due to the vicissitudes of history , is still not a member of the European Union .
What would we expect from the EU ?
Solidarity .
Yet many foreign ministries , with the sole concern of not bothering or upsetting Moscow , have used and abused the permanent infighting in Kiev in order to avoid stating unequivocally that the Ukraine is an independent and sovereign country .
As such , if the majority of its people freely show themselves to be in favour and it meets the established criteria , Ukraine can aspire to becoming a member of the European Union in the future .
( LT ) Although it is disappointing , we must recognise that the six year romantic period in Ukraine 's political life is over .
The result of Ukraine 's presidential elections is neither an accident , nor a ' mistaken ' choice by the people of Ukraine .
Rather , it reflects deeper political problems and the fact that the hopes of the Orange Revolution were not fulfilled .
Commissioner , you said that we expect energetic and purposeful action from Ukraine 's new President and new administration .
The country needs serious structural reforms .
However , we should say something to the European Union .
In this situation , if we want to have influence in the post-Soviet space and consolidate the positions of democracy and human rights in this region , then we must work with Ukraine , and more actively than ever before .
The European Union must give Ukraine an alternative European vision .
To do this , we should first of all aim for so-called ' soft ' measures that have a long-term impact , such as promoting economic integration , the more active creation of people-to-people contacts and political dialogue with Ukraine 's government institutions .
( HU ) In the debate about the current situation in Ukraine , I would like to ask the Commission to use its relations or network of relations with Ukraine to request and show a consistent and clear commitment with regard to the rights of national minorities , alongside other areas , as what we have heard today about recent setbacks in Ukraine , affecting so many areas , applies exponentially to members of minorities , to education in the languages of minorities and to the use of their mother tongue .
Clarity and consistency is required on our side because the European Union does have the ability to influence Ukraine , which has a neighbourhood policy status , right across the board , including the rules and regulations regarding national minorities .
We have seen that the consistency of our standpoint and messages does work , and we hope that this may help in finding the appropriate remedies for such issues .
I propose that any future agreement drafted with Ukraine specifically covers these issues , including the right to mother-tongue education , as this is a fundamental pre-requisite for the survival of national minorities .
( LT ) Today , Ukraine is experiencing not just an economic , but in some senses a political crisis .
Perhaps these presidential elections will help bring the country out of political stalemate and will provide more stability .
Ukraine is still deciding which model of civilisation it should subscribe to .
Should the country cooperate with the east or choose integration in Europe ?
It is not such an easy choice to make , especially when the ideological division that exists in political life has also spread to society .
The door to Europe must be left open for Ukraine and transparent elections are an important step strengthening the principles of a democratic state .
The people of Ukraine have expressed their will to choose the leader of their country .
Ukraine is a European country which must have the right to take decisions on Europe .
Therefore , the European Union must cooperate intensively with Ukraine , strengthening democracy in this country and speeding up its integration in the European Union .
( SL ) Commissioner , your report on Ukraine today was very clear .
Ukraine has the prospect of accession to the EU and we have the instruments to make that prospect a credible option .
This election was closely fought , but it was a democratic one and , for us , that is the news of the day .
Basically , the close contest has exposed how complicated this country is .
Ukraine is a multi-ethnic and a multi-confessional country and one with a very chequered history , which is something we have to take into account .
I think that we , both the European Parliament and Europe as a whole , should use all means to encourage some sort of productive dialogue within Ukraine , a dialogue that would strengthen the Ukrainian state and society from within .
Attaching labels to this country or spreading any kind of prejudice about it would be a negative thing .
I do not think we have done this in the past and I hope we will not do so in the future , either .
Madam President , on Sunday , I had the privilege to be present in Kiev as an observer for the ECR Group .
Everything I saw was peaceful , transparent and - in many ways , curiously - more robust than in my own country , the UK , with transparent ballot boxes and photo ID required in order to allow you to vote .
However , I was , of course , disappointed by the result , because President Yanukovich is no Western-style democrat .
He will now formally drop all NATO aspirations and pay only lip-service to EU membership for his country which , of course , is now also formally opposed by Russia , his close friend and neighbour .
He will content himself , instead , with an FTA and a visa liberalisation regime .
Mrs Tymoshenko is clutching at straws , in my view , by challenging the result of her narrow defeat in the courts and I doubt very much this will succeed .
The one real concern I have now is what I heard being discussed on the night : renewed splittist tendencies to break off the Ukrainian west - opposed to Yanukovich and supporters of Tymoshenko - to either join Poland or form a new western state .
It probably will not happen but , if it does , it must be peaceful and by consensus .
What we must do here in the European Union is to support the legacy of the Orange Revolution and our common shared democratic values with Ukraine .
( DE ) Madam President , the battle is over and at least for the next parliamentary term , Mr Yanukovich will be president of Ukraine .
It is encouraging that this was the result of a fair election .
This also indicates that the voters did not want the various positions to be set in concrete , such as joining NATO , on the one hand , or the orientation towards Moscow , on the other .
Mr Yanukovich will be well advised to continue the democratic process , not to concentrate solely on looking towards the East and to bring about noticeable improvements in the living conditions of the people of Ukraine .
Otherwise , the results of the next elections will already have been decided .
The EU must provide close support and assistance for this stabilisation process .
It will be clear by the time of the European Football Championships in 2012 at the latest whether Ukraine has developed a common Ukrainian consciousness or whether it will continue to suffer from its linguistic and geographic divide .
Again , I apologise to all those to whom I could not give the opportunity to speak .
I am sure it is a subject to which we will return again .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me once again thank you for the opportunity of addressing you today .
I believe that this has been a useful exchange of views , taking some concrete suggestions and remarks to reflect on .
As I said at the beginning , Ukraine matters .
It remains a partner of strategic importance for the European Union , and a leader in the region .
EU-Ukraine relations have deepened considerably in the past years .
I firmly believe that this dynamic should continue in the future .
The pace and depth of the rapprochement of Ukraine to the European Union will depend on the implementation of reform .
That will encourage me to be even braver .
The EU stands ready to support Ukraine in this task , with a wide range of tools at its disposal .
Nevertheless , we look to the new leadership to demonstrate the political will for reform in the interests of Ukraine 's future stability and prosperity .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the second part-session in February .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Ukraine is particularly important to the European Union from the perspective of getting involved in the Eastern Partnership and Black Sea Synergy and for the EU 's energy security .
My contribution today will refer to an aspect which is not mentioned very much , but which is of particular concern to me when we are talking about Ukraine .
More than half a million ethnic Romanians live in this country .
The authorities in Kiev have hitherto shown them little interest in terms of guaranteeing basic rights .
However , we saw for the first time that during the election campaign in this country neighbouring Romania , a new concept of governance was promoted .
One of the candidates guaranteed Romanians in this country that he would support the introduction of Romanian as a regional language in areas where Romanians are in the majority .
Ukraine is currently faced with two value systems .
Some citizens would like to move closer to the European Union and want our values , such as freedom and peace , to be guaranteed .
Another group of citizens look at European integration with distrust .
Ukraine needs support and solidarity from the EU to continue the reforms already under way in order to eliminate this division between East and West .
After the presidential elections , a new chapter begins in relations between the EU and Ukraine .
One of the most important areas of cooperation will be the issue of energy supply .
This is no accident , as the European Union , with its increasing dependency , has a notable portion of energy imports coming via its easterly neighbour .
For the security of energy imports , I think it is justified that the European Union should assist Ukraine by every possible means in maintaining and modernising its energy network , especially the vital gas pipeline network .
At the same time , in agreement with the conclusions of the June EU summit , I think that there is a fundamental pre-requisite for financial support : Ukraine should start its reform of the industry and make its gas industry more transparent .
The lack of transparency in the system of intermediary companies has resulted in disadvantages for the citizens of Ukraine , while also hindering the security of supply for EU Member States .
Furthermore , efforts aimed at expanding storage capacity are also worth supporting .
In fact , establishing reserves is one of the main ways to guarantee the smooth transit of gas in Europe during the cold winter period .
The European Parliament is expected to adopt the new gas supply regulation for the EU in spring .
This regulation will require Member States to approve coordinated action plans in the event of gas supply disruptions .
I think that Member States will need to coordinate such action plans not only among themselves , but also by involving Ukraine in the consultation process .
Even in future , resolving the issue of disruptions to imports is not something that is conceivable without intensive talks with leaders in Kiev .
The election of Viktor Yanukovich as president means that Ukraine is entering a new phase which will bring it closer to the EU .
As a member of the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee and a European citizen , I believe that the European Union can and should tip the balance in favour of a European and democratic path for its eastern neighbour .
The European Parliament Election Observation Mission welcomed that the ballot passed off lawfully without incident , thereby guaranteeing the legitimacy of the new president and marking a particular contrast to the elections which took place in 2004-2005 .
The change of political hue must not affect our approach to Ukraine , which must remain just as consistent and even more effective .
Although it is well known that President Yanukovich is not going to weaken ties with Russia , this does not mean that he is going to move away from the EU .
In order to precisely avoid the risk of this happening , however small , we must be proactive in handling relations with Ukraine , which is the only country able to guarantee stability in the area .
We must show openness through dialogue and firm commitments so as to give Ukraine the necessary encouragement towards a pro-European development .
I am confident in Ukraine 's ability to resume the reforms and demonstrate that it is a trustworthy partner for the EU .
in writing . - Ukraine continues to be crucial for the stability and democratic development of Europe .
Although the Orange Revolution to which the European Parliament so effectively contributed has disappointed most expectations , it is to be hoped that the legacy of Mr Yushchenko 's Presidency - free and fair elections , people who have overcome fear when voicing their opinions and a basically independent media - will endure .
It is true that a big country like Ukraine that has been deprived of independence for a long time and has suffered a real genocide - the Holodomor - will need some time to better define its European identity and future strategic goals .
But we cannot look away from the responsibility of European Union policies toward Ukraine since 2004 .
The EU has not been eager to offer Ukraine the prospect of EU membership .
The EU 's support of Ukraine has proved to be mostly ambiguous and not convincing to the Ukrainians as it has often been dominated by a fear of irritating Russia .
We need to realise that the main key to a genuinely democratic and good neighbourly Russia is an independent and Europe-integrated Ukraine .
This will remain the EU 's responsibility .
Now we need to make maximum use of the Eastern Partnership .
Madam President , I have taken note of the information given about the election of Viktor Yanukovich as President of Ukraine .
Although Ukraine is in a very serious situation , changes for the better can be seen in terms of respect for the law in the period since the previous elections .
I hope the legal dispute over the election results will be resolved quickly and that both sides will concentrate on work to help Ukraine come out of the economic crisis and strengthen its position in the world and , in particular , to help Ukraine develop closer relations with the European Union .
In view of the newly-elected President 's promises to increase democratisation and ensure international stability , as well as the fact that he places great emphasis on Ukraine 's accession to the European Union , I am convinced that the current good cooperation between Ukraine and the European Union should not only be continued , but extended .
Representatives of all EU countries hope that Ukraine will , finally , enter a period of political stability and consensus on economic policy .
In my opinion , Ukraine 's new leader will also turn to the European Union for help in bringing Ukraine more rapidly out of its profound crisis , as a result of which there has been a horrendous economic decline and a 12 % budget deficit .
Europe should consider making a specific proposal to include Ukraine in European structures .
I hope that the new president will take into account the pro-European direction expressed by the majority of Ukrainians .
The association agreement is being negotiated and I believe that it is beneficial to both sides to conclude it as quickly as possible .
Election promises must be fulfilled .
One of these is respect for the rights of minorities and the removal of the policies on denationalising and assimilating ethnic minorities .
Romania can serve as a model for Ukraine when it comes to applying European standards to the situation of minorities .
In this respect , the MP representing the Ukrainian community in Romania in the Romanian Parliament can act as a good adviser , and I recommend him to the future president of Ukraine .
Ukraine is a European state and shares all of Europe 's cultural values .
Ukraine needs to implement honestly and effectively a political programme guaranteeing rights to national minorities such as Russians , Tatars , Romanians , Poles , Hungarians , Greeks and others .
It has to implement the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , which guarantees these languages the status of regional languages .
I believe that the EU must support the implementation of such measures , stressing that not a single minority should be overlooked .
For example , there is a Romanian-speaking minority in Ukraine numbering more than 410 000 .
It is a traditional national community with deep historical roots , which lives in harmony with the majority and other minorities , especially in the Chernivtsi Region ( Northern Bukovina , Northern Bessarabia and the Hertsa Region ) , the Odessa Region ( districts in Southern Bessarabia ) and in the Transcarpathian Region ( historical Maramureş Region ) .
I think that the EU must encourage the Ukraine authorities to develop sections offering teaching in Romanian as a mother tongue in the vocational colleges and secondary schools currently operating in the towns in the regions mentioned above .
In addition , the EU should cooperate with Kiev so that the Chernivtsi State University establishes sections offering teaching in Romanian as a mother tongue in all the current departments and specialties .
I am pleased that the Ukrainian elections last Sunday passed off well .
The results of the elections must be acknowledged by all the parties involved as a democracy cannot be built on permanent distrust and dispute .
I am sorry that Yulia Tymoshenko lost the elections .
However , I am even sorrier about the numerous statements she made during the latter part of the campaign , which disputed the judgment of the International Court of Justice relating to the Black Sea continental shelf .
I hope that the Ukrainian Government , regardless of whether it is going to be led by Mrs Tymoshenko or anyone else , will accept the fact that such a judgment is definitive .
Viktor Yanukovich promised the following measures to the Hungarian minority in Ukraine if he wins the election : immediate withdrawal of restrictions affecting the Hungarian education system , Hungarian primary school pupils and final-year students ; unrestricted use of their mother tongue in education , justice , public administration , the media and other areas ; unrestricted use of national symbols , unimpeded contact with their mother country ; involvement of community representatives in local , regional and national public administration .
The results of the presidential elections in regions with a higher proportion of Hungarian residents and the narrow margin of the final results indicate that the votes of the Hungarian community contributed to the victory of Mr Yanukovich to a great extent .
In the heat of the campaign , Yulia Tymoshenko also promised to cancel the discriminatory measures affecting mother-tongue education .
However , this did not sound credible coming from a politician who has been prime minister for 5 years and during that time showed no interest in the problems of the minorities .
So the Hungarian and Ruthenian minority now put their hopes in Mr Yanukovich , expecting him to recognise the regional status of minorities and to create new grounds for relations between the majority and the minorities .
However , if the new Ukrainian president fails to fulfil his promises , for example , in return for support from Ukrainian nationalists , he would not only lose the support of minority communities , but the establishment of the much-heralded European Ukraine may also be delayed for years .
The European Union should play a more active role in Ukraine ; we should stop the practice that has prevailed over the last few years of the European Union treating one of the largest states in Europe in an uncertain and half-hearted way .
Ukraine is a major partner in the Eastern Neighbourhood Policy of the European Union and it is also the most important transit state for relations cultivated with Russia .
With Viktor Yanukovich elected as president , Ukraine has a strong , easy-going leader who is open towards both Europe and Russia alike .
The most important task for the new president will be to overcome the deep political divide so that a stable administration can be established and the long-overdue , comprehensive social and economic reforms can be implemented .
The most important thing for the European Union now is to make its presence felt more strongly than before in Ukraine , and to establish new grounds for cooperation .
The Eastern Partnership provides an excellent framework for this , and the External Action Service created pursuant to the Treaty of Lisbon will provide appropriate means .
I would like to emphasise that Hungary , with Ukraine being its largest neighbour , is particularly interested in political and economic stability being established in Ukraine .
It is also in our interest that relations between Ukraine and Russia are consolidated .
We also very much hope that Ukraine will give up its anti-minority policies , which have encroached upon the rights of minorities in the Lower Carpathians region , including those of Hungarians .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0006 / 2010 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Creating an internal energy market
Creating a single internal energy market is referred to as a political priority in the agreement and long-term strategy of the troika of Spain , Belgium and Hungary .
In order to attain this objective , the most isolated regions of the Community , such as the Baltic Sea region , need to be better integrated into the European energy market .
The Baltic Sea Strategy contains many electricity and gas interconnection projects , which , if implemented , will allow Baltic countries to break free from their energy dependency on a single supplier .
In view of their cross-border nature , implementing these projects successfully will depend not only on providing funding but also on the political will and intentions of the Member States involved .
In creating an internal energy market , the Community has undertaken to speak with one voice .
Will Spain , which holds the Presidency of the Council , take a lead role in encouraging Member States to speak with one voice in the implementation of energy projects in the Baltic Sea region , such as AmberLitPol , Swedlink and others , that would bring about an increase in energy security not only at a regional level but throughout the Community ?
Madam President , the internal energy market and security of energy supply are inextricably linked .
We have gradually realised this in the European Union and energy security has therefore become one of the Union 's strategic priorities .
Indeed , this became a critical issue just over a year ago , with the gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine .
We realised at that point that an internal energy market , a fully-functioning , interconnected , effective market , is a precondition for security of energy supply to Europe .
Security of supply is thus a key strategic element that has to be improved by ensuring greater energy efficiency , by diversification of energy suppliers , sources and distribution channels , by promoting the Union 's energy interests in relation to third countries and , finally , by creating a genuine common energy market , which we still do not have .
To help us achieve this , we will have the support of the Lisbon Treaty , in which , for the first time , there is an explicit reference to that competence for the Union at primary legislation level .
The Union therefore needs to be more assertive in its relations with third countries , and it must speak with a single voice in those relations .
The Spanish Minister of Industry , Tourism and Trade made this very clear when presenting the Spanish Presidency 's priorities to the relevant committee of the European Parliament on 27 January 2010 .
Consequently , within the framework of the Second Strategic Energy Review , what can be called connecting the energy islands in the European Union to the internal market has become one of the Union 's key objectives .
In July 2009 , when the Commission presented the Action Plan on Baltic Energy Market Interconnection , an initiative that aims to promote the integration of the energy market and the development of energy infrastructure in the Baltic region , the European Council welcomed it as a major contribution to enhancing the energy security of the Union , and I am reading this word for word .
The Baltic energy market initiative now falls under the wider umbrella of the Union 's Baltic Sea Strategy , which was one of the Swedish Presidency 's main priorities .
The October 2009 European Council adopted the initiative and welcomed the progress made on energy infrastructures and interconnections in the Baltic region , thereby endorsing the information in the Commission 's report .
( LT ) Minister , once again , I would like to thank you for your thoughts and answer .
However , one aspect of my question was related not just to third countries but the European Union itself , namely that some European Union Member States have neither an economic nor political interest in contributing in some way or other to joint projects .
So my question was whether , during the Presidency , Spain is taking on a political role to speak on behalf of the European Union to ensure the implementation of these future projects ?
Madam President , we believe that undoubtedly forms part of a common energy policy and that just as we do not want to have energy islands from a technical point of view , we do not want to have them from a political point of view either .
That is certainly not a position that you could call pro-European and , in fact , that has not been the case in practice .
I seem to remember that during the debate on the Regulation on measures to guarantee the security of energy supply , a European commitment on this issue was agreed .
I am referring specifically to the energy projects approved as part of the programme to aid economic recovery implemented during the Czech Presidency last year .
A total of EUR 425 million was allocated to three interconnection projects in the Baltic region : the Skanled / Baltic gas pipeline , the Estlink-2 electricity interconnection and the Sweden-Baltic States interconnection .
The Spanish Presidency will therefore urge the Member States to support the energy infrastructure projects in the Baltic region , although it will then be up to the Member States themselves to implement the specific projects in accordance with national legislation and applicable European legislation .
The Member States concerned should also act as one on this matter .
Before we go on , can I just make it clear to everybody in the Chamber that the Minister is prepared to stay until 19.20 , so there will be more questions than would be taken up to 19.00 .

( RO ) Minister , I would like to draw attention to the importance of integrating renewable energy sources into the national power grid , with the European power grid being made up of the Member States ' power networks .
The Baltic States provide an example of good practice in using renewable energy sources and in energy efficiency in buildings .
An internal energy market needs better interconnection between national power networks .
I would like to ask you whether you have an action plan , along with Member States , aimed at the use of renewable energy sources .
( DE ) The process of integrating the electricity market in the Baltic states should include unrestricted deregulation of the market for private customers and a common energy exchange .
The Baltic States have been hit very hard by the economic crisis .
Therefore , I would like to know how a total deregulation of the energy market can be achieved realistically in this very fragile economic situation .
I am thinking in particular of price volatility .
What is the plan with regard to the infrastructure in the Baltic States and what will happen about the diversification of energy transport routes and energy sources ?
Madam President , we agree with the views expressed on the subject of renewable energies and their integration into the European energy network .
We also believe it is one of the main objectives of the European Union 's strategy for the fight against climate change , which we argued for at the Copenhagen Summit .
We hope that by 2020 renewable energies will make up 20 % of the overall European energy mix , and we would like that approach to be included in the second Energy Action Plan for 2010-2014 , which we hope to see adopted under the Spanish Presidency .
That objective of the action plan is therefore clearly on the Spanish Presidency 's agenda , and is shared , of course , by the Belgian and Hungarian Trio , because it is a strategic objective .
With regard to what Mr Obermayr has said , we also believe that diversifying resources is , without doubt , another strategic objective , as I mentioned earlier .
The European Union and its institutions are being very proactive , giving all their political support to projects such as Nabucco , Nord Stream and South Stream .
All those projects have a very clear objective : to diversify energies , to diversify suppliers of energy , and to diversify the different channels by which energy is distributed .
They are , of course , part of our strategy to become a Europe with a truly common energy market , which it currently does not have .
All of this is necessary in order to establish that market and to achieve that energy security , which forms the basis for it all .
Subject : Development approaches , objectives and actions under the EU 's 2020 sustainable development strategy
The economic crisis , climate change and demographic changes are having a drastic impact on the lives of European citizens .
Health , education , agriculture , the development of transport and energy infrastructure and investment in research and innovation and in the modernising of public services must be priorities , both for the Member States and for the EU .
There is a joint obligation to guarantee the fundamental rights and freedoms of European citizens , including the free movement of workers .
The European social model ensures the necessary support for employees who have lost their jobs , for the elderly and for the young , as well as for migrant workers .
The EU 's 2020 sustainable development strategy is to be presented at the informal European Council meeting in February 2010 .
Could the Spanish Council Presidency indicate what the main development approaches , objectives and actions will be under that strategy , and what resources it estimates will be needed for its successful implementation ?
Madam President , there is no doubt that the 2020 strategy is probably the most ambitious and important objective for the immediate future , and is going to be at the centre of the debates that are being held in Brussels tomorrow in the informal European Council , and which are taking place at the highest possible political level under the Spanish Presidency .
The aim is to propose and approve a programme promoting growth and the creation of quality employment , replacing the Lisbon Strategy and focusing , on the one hand , on strengthening certain indispensable aspects which are necessary for the competitiveness and productivity of the future European economy : investing in information technologies , making Europe a space for the information society , and highlighting social aspects as well , meaning that employment should be based on specialisation and training ; we are also , of course , driving for a green , low carbon economy as referred to in the content we have already discussed .
Another fundamental element - one that will no doubt polarise tomorrow 's debates in Brussels - is the issue of governance .
At the informal European Council meeting , the President of the European Council is going to present an initial proposal for a debate on governance , in other words , moving towards economic union within Europe , not only monetary union , and making it essential - as stated in the Treaty of Lisbon - that our economic policies , our employment policies and our social policies converge within the European Union .
This element of the strategy for sustainable development and the creation of quality employment is therefore a central objective of the Spanish Presidency and the whole of Europe .
The proof of this can be seen in the fact that we have begun to tackle the matter already , at the highest level , by holding the informal Council meeting tomorrow in Brussels .
( RO ) We also now have comments which have come from the stakeholders .
The public consultation about the EU 2020 strategy on the Commission website is over .
However , we have a 10 % unemployment rate in the European Union , and it has reached 20 % in Spain and Latvia .
This is why I would like you to tell us what measures we are taking for the benefit of the European Union 's citizens in order to preserve and create jobs and , above all , improve their quality of life .
I think that at the centre of the future 2020 strategy must be exactly those points you make and , to be precise , Mrs Ticău , jobs must not be so precarious , so volatile , so unstable as has been the case in the European Union .
You mentioned the case of Spain which indeed has suffered greatly in the property sector .
Therefore , we need to aim towards a production model which in itself creates stronger , more solid , more stable jobs based on specialisation .
Thus , we must work towards measures along these lines , measures which increase specialisation and staff training in order to place workers in knowledge-based society , information technology and specialised society jobs , upon which the production and development model for future employment should be based .
That is the idea which we believe each country should put into practice ; however , we must coordinate this among all European countries .
Furthermore , the European Union must provide support , for example , through incentives or stimuli such as the use of specific Structural Funds , for instance , the European Social Fund , thus stimulating those countries which indeed invest in this production model so as to create quality employment .
That , I think is the guideline which should be at the centre , at the very heart of our strategy which , between us all , must be implemented within the next few months , before the European Council in June to replace the inadequate Lisbon Strategy .
Subject : Freedom of religion in China
What steps does the Council plan to take to improve the situation of religious communities and , in particular , of Christian churches , and the implementation of the right to freedom of religion in China ?
Madam President , Mr Posselt , you will be perfectly aware that one of the main instruments of our relations concerning the human rights issue in China is the biannual human rights dialogue which was set up more than 15 years ago .
It is therefore a structured Dialogue which gives us the opportunity to exchange viewpoints regarding matters which are of concern to us .
In November last year , the Council adopted conclusions about religious freedom which allowed us to once again reiterate the European Union 's position on this subject , in clear terms .
Respect for religious freedom , as defined in the international instruments on human rights , forms part of the human rights clause which is included in agreements between the European Union and third countries .
Over the last five years , the European Union has periodically brought up freedom of religion and beliefs in its dialogues on human rights and in its consultations with third countries .
It has made a number of statements regarding this and negotiations have taken place in relation to people threatened for their beliefs .
The European Union has played a very active part , on a global scale , in promoting religious freedom in international fora , such as the United Nations General Assembly and the Human Rights Council .
As regards China , the Council determined a certain number of reference criteria for the human rights dialogue in 2001 .
I can assure you , Mr Posselt , that religious freedom forms an integral part of those criteria .
We recently discussed this issue several times with our Chinese counterparts , we have met with the competent authorities in Beijing and , with the purpose of the dialogue in mind , those responsible for religious matters have visited Europe in order to increase their awareness of practices in a number of Member States .
( DE ) Mr Garrido , thank you very much for your detailed answer .
I have two brief additional questions .
Firstly , when will you next have the opportunity to discuss these matters with China ?
Secondly , could you push for a list to be drawn up of the priests , nuns and bishops who have been arrested ?
I have already said that there is a structured dialogue and so a series of conversations take place regularly with China , on this subject .
We , the Council , are aware that there are a certain number of people practising religion who have been threatened or have been subjected to practices which equate to persecution in China .
This is the case with certain Tibetan Buddhists who are practitioners of Falun Gong , and has also occurred with Christians , priests and believers as well as the lawyers which have defended them in some cases .
The Council has investigated these cases and has brought them to the attention of the Chinese authorities .
On all these occasions , we have said that the peaceful practice of religion is a right and that it should never be considered as a threat to the State .
Of course , honourable Members , I must reaffirm that with regard to the application of religious freedom in China and the evaluation process of the human rights dialogue , we will examine all the ways in which we can maximise our ability to produce positive changes in this area .
I thank the Council for its reply .
A lot done ; a lot more to do .
The reality of it is that , as regards religious practice in China , Article 36 of the Constitution of the People 's Republic states exactly what is involved .
It is very carefully phrased .
' Religious belief ' is guaranteed , but what about practice ?
What constitutes ' normal religious activities ' ?
And , as regards ' foreign domination ' , if an outside preacher comes in , that is regarded as ' foreign domination ' .
And the religions that are really looked at askance are Buddhism , Catholicism , Deism , Islam and Protestant Christianity .
A lot done , but an awful lot more to do - so keep up the good work .
( DE ) Thank you for your accurate answers , Mr Garrido .
However , I would like to ask for some even more detailed information .
Is there a clause in the current bilateral agreement with China which is intended to provide special protection for Christian churches or is the Council planning to introduce a clause of this kind ?
Honourable Members , indeed , there is still work to be done , but we certainly place our trust in the dialogue and what we could refer to as the impact of the dialogue and its effects .
As Baroness Ashton said in the European Parliament a short while ago : the human rights dialogue does undeniably have an effect and , of course , there are various places we can conduct it .
We can conduct it with specific people , for example , in the case of the well-known human rights activist , Liu Xiaobo , or we can also conduct it on other levels , on a political level in political dialogue .
In any case , we will continue to conduct it with determination so as to protect all human rights , each and every one .
We must not support some more than others , as human rights are indivisible and we will strive to strengthen and improve the situation concerning human rights in China .
Dialogue is essential and , of course , it is also essential to see how changes take place in this area , and we are certain that the Chinese authorities , our counterparts , appreciate the importance of this dialogue .
Subject : CIA - secret prisons and flights
Recent press reports have revealed the existence of a secret prison in Lithuania , located in a former riding school and used by the CIA since 2004 , where a number of ' terrorism suspects ' have been tortured .
An Italian court has found more than 20 US agents and two Italian officials guilty of the kidnapping in Milan of Abu Omar , who was subsequently tortured in Egypt .
A number of other trials are under way , notably in Poland and the UK .
There is evidence that other governments and , in particular , Portugal , were ( in the context of a secret NATO agreement ) aware of the use of their airspace and airports for maintaining the detention , kidnapping and torture network masterminded by the US .
What is the Council 's position on this new information and these trials , and what explanations can it furnish ?
What measures will it propose to ensure that these circumstances are not repeated in the future ?
I would , firstly , like to reiterate the support of the European Union for the United Nations global strategy for fighting terrorism , which recognises that development , peace , security and human rights are interconnected and reinforce each other .
The so-called secret detention and transportation programme by the United States or the alleged CIA use of European countries to transport and illegally detain prisoners has been , without a doubt , a source of concern for many Members of this House .
It was the subject of a very recent debate , just a few days ago , and , as the Presidency has already said , the Council clearly shares Parliament 's view , there is no two ways about it ; that the possible existence of these secret detention centres does not comply with international law .
This continues to be our opinion .
That is why we felt it was so appropriate for President Obama to change US policy in relation to certain detentions and to the existence of prisons such as Guantánamo .
What is more , we believe that , in reality , this change has occurred and a turnaround has occurred in US policy .
We have always taken the opportunity to express our concerns to the United States from a European Union standpoint regarding these matters .
We must be pleased that this change has taken place and because this joint declaration was made official between the European Union and the United States on 15 June last year .
We therefore believe that we will remain along the lines of this policy and we will always be very clear as long as we are aware and have irrefutable proof of the existence of these cases .
In certain cases , we have not had this evidence , although it has been talked about , or there have been specific references made in the media ; however , on some occasions , there has been a lack of proven and thorough knowledge of the existence of these cases .
However , there is no doubt that the European Union has been very clear on this matter and has always been against these detention centres , whether they be known detention centres such as Guantánamo , or allegedly secret ones , and we have always been very open in the European Union to finding out the facts as to whether the latter really exist .
( PT ) Madam President , Minister , thank you for your response .
In fact , however , even after that statement in July , there were new discoveries .
It is known that last November , the Italian court itself convicted 23 US agents and two Italian officials of the kidnapping of Abu Omar in Milan , and one of the convicted CIA agents admitted to the press that he broke the law and that the decisions had been made in Washington .
The Obama Administration merely declared that it was disappointed with the decision by the Italian court .
Other cases , also relating to CIA flights , are under way , such as in Poland and the United Kingdom .
The Lithuanian Parliament has confirmed that there was also a clandestine jail in Lithuania , and that many flights by the CIA covered up their activities and , of course , led to people being illegally imprisoned .
The question is this : will we denounce the human rights violations that are inherent in all of this ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( ES ) We are defenders of human rights and I believe we can say this clearly and confidently ; therefore , we do not have a right but an obligation to denounce cases of human rights infringements , wherever they may take place .
It is also true that the European Union must respect the competence of Member States and so specific areas must be investigated by Member States ; they cannot be investigated by the European Union .
The Treaty of Lisbon , for example , makes it very clear that the supervision of intelligence services in Member States ' territory is a Member State 's competence .
With respect to something also mentioned in the question , we are certainly not aware of an alleged secret NATO agreement .
In any case , the possible existence of this agreement , of which we are completely unaware , would by no means prevent Member States from having to carry out their obligations in accordance with international law and humanitarian law .
However , Mrs Figueiredo , we certainly believe the European Union is clearly one of the areas in the world where human rights are respected and the European Union is obliged , while respecting how each country chooses to govern itself , and will obviously always be obliged , to denounce human rights infringements , as we have a responsibility to humanity and not only to each of the competent States .
We will continue to act and develop along these lines .
What is more , we now have a new more important reference point , which is the Charter of Fundamental Rights of citizens of Europe .
( LT ) Minister , the media and media sources were mentioned in the question , because it was precisely the media that broke the news of the setting up of a secret prison in Lithuania and elsewhere .
How do you assess in general the role of the media in these matters , and would it be possible to mobilise public opinion , so that such events are not repeated ?

( PL ) Madam President , I would like to make a statement thanking Mr López Garrido for what he has said , but he has not said anything new .
Three years ago , a special parliamentary commission was appointed on Guantánamo .
The European Council also worked on this matter , and now keeps coming back to it .
There are , really , more important matters , and it is true , as Mr López Garrido said , that it is the Member States which are obliged to monitor human rights .
One more thing - Mr López Garrido , when speaking about China , you said that there are different human rights and we should uphold them all .
However , the fundamental right of liberty in dictatorships is liberty itself , and I think that , first of all , we should stand up for the right to liberty .
I agree with the points made by the last speakers .
I believe that the defence of human rights is one of the crucial objectives that any democratic State and any democratic organisation such as the European Union must pursue .
Of course the European Parliament has a culture of defending human rights , of which we are proud and also of the European integration , in this sense , as the construction of Europe is based on human rights .
The nature of Europe and what unites Europeans who speak different languages and have different traditions is precisely the fact that we share these values of defending human rights .
In this respect , I believe that the role of the press is an absolutely vital one .
The press is a key feature at the centre of democracy and is undoubtedly a necessary and indispensable instrument for the defence of human rights and for denouncing cases of human rights infringements when they occur .
When these infringements take place but are not known about other than on a personal level , it is simply impossible for us to pursue them .
Therefore , the press plays a fundamentally vital role and I also believe that the most genuine and authentic culture of journalism must be extremely sensitive to the defence of human rights and the defence of all freedoms .
That is what truly ensures that life is worth living and it is what ultimately gives meaning to the coexistence of human beings .
The pursuit of those who infringe human rights and the defence of victims is , without a doubt , one of the axes of the European integration , of the European Union , and I feel very proud to belong to an area in which those values are cherished and where instruments of legal , supranational , judicial independence have been established , such as the European Court of Human Rights which is located in this city , Strasbourg .
I feel very proud that Europe preserves precisely these objectives and truths in its tradition , in its culture and in its history .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
Question Time is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.25 and resumed at 21.00 )

Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Effects of the economic crisis on world trade ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Vital Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the effects of the economic crisis on world trade - B7-0005 / 2010 ) .
author . - Madam President , I am going to put the question on behalf of my committee , the Committee on International Trade , and as the chair of this committee .
The effects of the crisis on world trade indicate a possible 10 % decline in 2009 .
This represents the biggest such contraction since the Second World War brought on by the collapse in global demand .
Keeping international trade flowing is vital for the EU and other exports-oriented countries .
Despite commitments made by the G20 , trade restrictive and distortive measures in response to the crisis have increased within the G20 , as well as globally .
The first sub-question is : what steps have been taken by the Commission to tackle such measures and , conversely , have any steps been taken by third countries against any other EU measures to boost economic growth ?
The second sub-question : there are indicators that some of the emerging countries that have been less affected by the crisis are becoming drivers of growth in international trade .
In this case , EU industry needs to retarget its export markets and possibly the future of its products .
What strategy does the Commission intend to pursue to enable EU industry to become more competitive ?
Third sub-question : the global crisis and subsequent fall in world trade are having multiple effects on developing countries where the most unemployment is concentrated .
What adjustment measures does the Commission plan to take in its trade relations in particular for the poorest countries in the world ?
Fourth point : while , on the one hand , large trade deficits are driven by excessive spending and indebtedness in some Member States , including the United States of America , on the other hand , large export-driven economies in certain emerging countries are experiencing trade surpluses .
These trade deficits have contributed to global imbalances that are at the root of the global economic crisis .
What strategy does the Commission intend to pursue to mitigate such global imbalances in its trade policy ?
Fifth and last point : the social impact of the economic crisis and the subsequent fall in world trade are set to outlast economic recovery .
For example , we are seeing signs of economic recovery now , but levels of unemployment remain very high .
When does the Commission plan to conduct an impact assessment on the impact of the crisis on jobs in Europe and in the developing countries ?
What strategy does it intend to pursue to incorporate the social and environmental dimension of trade into international WTO rules ?
These are the five points that the Committee on International Trade would like to address to the new Trade Commissioner Mr De Gucht , whom I welcome to the floor for the first public exchange of views with Parliament and the members of the INTA Committee , in particular .
Thank you in advance for the answers that I am sure you will be able to give to the questions that we are putting to you .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , quite a lot of broad questions have been asked which would , in fact , deserve much more time than I have .
I suggest focusing in my initial reply on the contribution of trade policy to economic recovery .
First , as regards the impact of the crisis on trade , we should be relieved that world trade only decreased by 10 % .
This did not happen by chance , but is a result of strong political will expressed at various G20 summits .
It is also the result of systematic monitoring of trade restrictive measures by the WTO , the OECD and the Commission .
By and large , only a few countries resorted to trade protectionism .
The international community thus avoided a protectionist downward spiral of the kind witnessed at the time of the Great Depression .
In order to maintain this , it is important to remain extremely vigilant .
Where protectionist or trade-restrictive measures are identified , we will take action against them with all available trade tools , such as our market-access strategy or even the WTO dispute-settlement mechanism .
External sources of growth will be crucial to EU economic recovery .
I therefore concur with you that European industry should target the new and fast-growing emerging markets .
Through our trade policy , we can help them to achieve this by further opening up these markets and reducing all sorts of barriers to trade and investment .
This will be achieved through the free trade agreements that we are currently negotiating and by deepening trade and economic partnerships with key trading partners such as , for example , the US and China , where the TEC and the high-level dialogue have already laid solid foundations .
This will be a priority for me as Trade Commissioner .
Over the coming weeks , the Commission will put together the EU 's new common agenda for sustainable growth and recovery via the EU 2020 strategy .
This strategy will have an effective external dimension in which trade policy plays a key role .
In a globalised world , the EU 2020 strategy should be a vector to promote openness and constructive international economic engagement .
This will also be a central theme of a communication on future trade-policy priorities that I intend to present later this year .
But trade policy is about more than just competitiveness and growth .
It is also about projecting our values worldwide and it must also duly integrate the development dimension of trade .
Promoting a strong contribution to development goals is already an important part of the EU 's trade policy .
The current multilateral negotiations are a development round .
We have bilateral and regional negotiations with developing countries and autonomous preferences in favour of these countries .
We help them to contribute to , and also tap into , the global economy so as to raise living standards in a way that delivers both greater political stability and social progress .
As regards social issues , I agree that trade must contribute to helping those people in our societies who suffered most from the economic crisis , especially those who lost their jobs .
In this respect , I believe that we will need trade - and more trade - to preserve our social system of protection in Europe .
Our European model of society , the combination of a free economy with a high degree of social protection , must be preserved in a sustainable way , and this will take growth .
In sum , the Commission 's forthcoming EU 2020 strategy will support a full recovery from the crisis while speeding up the move towards a smarter and greener economy .
Open trade policy will be an important element , both as a contribution to European economic recovery and as a vector for the external projection of our principles : openness , social and environmental protection and sustainability , and constructive engagement on the world scene .
Putting the right strategy in place will naturally involve working closely with Parliament as well as the Council and other stakeholders , and I look forward to your cooperation in building a shared agenda .
Madam President , I , too , would like to start by welcoming the Commissioner .
It is a pleasure to see you here .
We have high expectations and hopes of you .
You have an important task ahead of you .
A year ago , I was extremely concerned .
When trade crashed and we were expecting world trade to develop in ways not seen since the Second World War , the situation was very serious indeed .
The World Bank stated that 17 of the G20 countries had , in total , introduced 47 new trade barriers and tariffs .
Russia imposed tariffs on cars , China restricted food imports , India banned imports of toys and Argentina introduced import licences for textiles and leather goods .
It was almost like a protectionist arms race - a pattern from the 1930s that was worrying .
However , no trade war came about .
I think it is important to stop and reflect on why that was .
I think the main reason was the WTO , the global regulatory authority for trade , which forces countries to behave and not to resort to protectionism and populism .
I would say that it is too early to declare the crisis over .
The crisis has not passed .
We all know that unemployment is highest late in the economic cycle - and it is unemployment that drives protectionism and populism .
If we look around us right now , we can see that a number of countries have not yet come through the crisis ; perhaps they even have the worst yet to come .
I am therefore somewhat concerned when I listen to some members of the Council of Ministers , who do not say much about new markets and free trade but rather criticise globalisation and talk of protecting European companies and European jobs .
That is not necessarily protectionism , but at times , they are only a hair 's breadth away .
It is , in any event , an expression of a mercantilism that I believe to be damaging .
We should instead work together and think about how we can make Europe more competitive by making it more open .
That would amount to considered action and leadership on our part .
We need to think about what we can do to make sure that there are fewer barriers to trade , not more - especially when it comes to making decisions on Korea and mandatory origin labelling and when there are increasing demands for climate levies .
We in Parliament need to reflect on that too .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe is currently experiencing an unprecedented crisis which , beyond the economic and financial crisis , represents first and foremost a crisis of the system .
Even before beginning to deal with the effects of the economic crisis on world trade , which forms the topic of our debate , I wish to clarify one point : trade is not a victim of the crisis ; it is also one of its contributing factors .
Indeed , we are currently experiencing a period of huge global imbalances , fuelled , on the one hand , by certain countries ' excessive trade deficits at the cost of growing domestic indebtedness and , on the other , by trade surpluses stimulated by the exports of certain , especially emerging , countries with internal consumption that is not growing at the same rate .
Moreover , the trade liberalisation policy conducted thus far has only exacerbated these imbalances , weakening , in particular , the poorest countries on the planet .
These countries , which have been encouraged to specialise in export monocultures , have therefore found themselves destitute in the face of extreme fluctuations in the prices of raw materials , the volatility of which has increased as a result of international speculation .
It is a strange world that sets as its first Millennium Development Goal the eradication of poverty and hunger but then , at the same time , speculates on the rise in wheat prices .
However , the very people who defended liberalisation and deregulation at any cost in the 1990s are now finding themselves in a difficult situation as well .
The continual rise in job losses , stagnant , sometimes even negative , growth , and the developing social crisis are all factors that mean we can no longer afford to let jobs disappear in the name of this cult .
In a period of crisis , how do we explain to employees who are losing their jobs that the main thing is to maintain deregulated trade , even at the cost of sudden and sometimes tragic relocations ?
The crisis we are going through is therefore definitely a systemic crisis , to which we must respond with a new development model .
In its current Global Europe strategy , the vision developed by the Commission is essentially based on access to the market and the liberalisation of all sectors .
Commissioner , I believe we need to redefine this strategy , which has been on the wrong track and sometimes led to setbacks .
It is not by forcing developing countries to open up even more that we will revive our industries ' exports .
That would only aggravate the situation in those countries , which already accommodate 70 % of the 59 million people in the world who lost their jobs in 2009 .
On the contrary , it is essential to consider a new strategy that strikes the right balance between openness , protection and support .
I would like to return to these ideas .
We cannot ignore these developments , which lead the United States to make further use of its trade defence tool or China to take issue with the WTO over European anti-dumping measures .
Indeed , when we are faced with unfair practices , it is clear that protection is necessary , but the principle of it must be accepted and defended internationally and the sometimes false accusations of protectionism dismissed once and for all .
Moreover , the need for support for trade policies is becoming more obvious every day , and such support depends , in particular , on the policies implemented by the Union being genuinely consistent .
Consistency in policies is not an intellectual debate , but an absolute necessity if we want to redefine a new development model .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis has indeed had a detrimental impact on trade in the European Union Member States .
For example , in countries like Bulgaria , exports for the first 11 months of last year fell by a whole 24 % compared to the previous year , and imports by 35 % .
Property and tourism are sectors which have been particularly affected by this .
This has an extremely powerful effect on employment .
Consideration must be given to the sharp rise in business-to-business indebtedness , non-payment of national and local public contract organisations , etc .
The problems presented above are typical of other countries as well .
A comprehensive solution is needed for them at EU level , which requires close cooperation between the European Commission 's various directorates too .
Commissioner De Gucht emphasises the importance of support for expanding European companies ' area of activity and opportunities , deploying clear preventive commercial instruments , successfully concluding the Doha negotiations , using new facilities for direct foreign investments and their protection , as well as for a new investment policy against the backdrop of a financial crisis .
The achievement of these aims , along with the successful signing of the economic cooperation agreements with countries from Africa , the Caribbean Basin and Pacific Ocean region , is also closely linked to the recovery from the financial crisis .
However , a number of issues remain on the agenda , some of which have already been mentioned .
Are we making effective use of European funding to combat the high level of unemployment ?
What can the European Union do faced with the current deficit , devaluation of the currency and high inflation , which are having a direct impact on trade ?
What commercial policy instruments does the European Union have available to tackle the financial crisis and its repercussions ?
What measures must be taken to avoid the recurrence of a crisis of such magnitude and for trade to continue expanding ?
What strategy do we have against countries like India and China , which are threatening to change the entire financial system ?
I am counting exclusively on this Europe 2020 strategy to find these answers .
Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for having put the fantasy of crisis-related protectionism into its proper context .
I think that , in the context of a debate , it is wise of you to point out that a world war linked to the revival of protectionism is not about to break out .
Now , I almost want to reverse the issue .
For me , the issue is not ultimately about what effects the economic crisis has on trade , but more fundamentally about what effects trade , and specifically the trade policies undertaken for 20 years , have on the crisis we are experiencing today .
In a way , the food crisis that we experienced two and a half years ago arrived before the financial crisis , and it was indeed a crisis of the world agricultural markets .
In the same way , we keep being told that liberalising trade with China is good for us .
I believe that , at some point , unless we incorporate social issues , monetary issues , fiscal issues and , of course , environmental issues , China will have not just a comparative advantage over Europe , it will have an absolute advantage over it .
It follows that , in all the national debates - and , as a key figure on the Belgian scene , you will know this - all the political parties are now discovering that it is impossible , in a globalised world , to manage social dumping , environmental dumping , monetary dumping and fiscal dumping .
Similarly , we might consider that the strategy that all us Europeans expected after the fall of the Berlin Wall , which was to say ' social democracy will come about through trade ' , is not working , as we can see with the example of China .
Commissioner , you have cited the Lisbon Strategy , innovation , the green economy , and you know that this European strategy is now a failure .
Indeed , if we do not mainstream the Lisbon Strategy before the Global Europe strategy , we may wonder what industrial sectors Europe will still have .
Where is the definition of the industrial choices , the agricultural choices , the economic choices and , of course , the social and environmental choices that we are making throughout Europe , so that we can learn how trade works with the rest of the world ?
Until we define these choices , we shall be pursuing a strategy of failure .
I have a more specific question : on 4 February 2010 , a meeting of the WTO 's Committee on Trade in Financial Services was held , and it focused specifically on the challenges presented by the financial crisis and the liberalisation of financial services .
Can you tell us what the outcome of that meeting was and what your opinion is on this matter , if you were able to follow it ?
Madam President , in the current global economy , most borders are allowing a more efficient flow of people , capital and services .
This , of course , is intended to produce a better standard of living .
This is all very well , as long as most countries achieve a positive trade balance and a growth in GDP .
The problems begin when the economy slows down , market indices fall sharply and problems start with unemployment .
The opening of borders , apart from bringing a better standard of living , has caused a mutual dependence of different economies on one another .
This is the other side of the coin .
This can be seen clearly in the current situation .
For example , the slowing down of the German economy is having a negative effect on the Polish economy , and this is because Germany is one of Poland 's key export partners .
Fortunately , Poland 's GDP is showing positive growth , which is an exception in Europe , but it is worrying that the unemployment rate has been rising for several months .
This example shows very clearly that governments should not only think about how to solve economic problems exclusively in their own countries , but they should also come to an agreement about how , together , they can develop defensive mechanisms so that in future , they will be protected from similar situations .
I think the present crisis will be a test for all of us .
I am thinking principally , here , about countries belonging to the European Union .
We cannot allow a situation in which some countries try to conceal their use of State interventionism , while , in the name of free competition , others are prevented from giving State aid .
Of course , I do realise that particular governments may be , in a certain sense , hostages of their electorate , but if we are going to build a European Community for the good of everyone , we must make clear rules and we must keep them .
We must also use our strengths - advanced technologies and human capital .
Only in this way will further strengthening of cooperation between our countries be effective , and we , as citizens of the European Union , will be able to think of the future in better terms and hope that our ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Madam President , world capitalism is experiencing its worst crisis since the Great Depression .
As then , it is the working class and the poor who are paying dearly for , and suffering the consequences of , this , whether in Europe or in the poorest countries on earth .
World Bank researchers predict that , in 2010 alone , 64 million more people will be plunged into extreme poverty by the crisis and that because of it , in 2009 , between 30 000 and 50 000 children have already died in Africa of malnutrition .
This crisis is having devastating consequences on world trade , but the demand of the United Nations financial summit last year , for example , that the conclusion of the Doha Round of trade negotiations is the answer , is utterly wrong .
According to the respected NGO War on Want , that would threaten a further 7.5 million workers with losing their jobs , including in the poorest countries .
This crisis of world capitalism is enormously exacerbated by the activities of the financial speculators on the world markets .
Not content with having precipitated the crisis , these parasites now want to exploit it to rake in further billions .
Did the EU Commission see the headline in the Financial Times yesterday : ' Traders in record bet against the euro ' ?
But what does the Commission do ?
It falls on its knees in front of the speculators and demands that the countries worst hit by the crisis , like Greece , make savage cuts in workers ' wages , pensions and public services .
What do you think such a draconian programme of cuts is going to do for trade , either in Europe or in the world ?
If you cut the ability of the working class to purchase goods and services , then you cut demand for those goods and services , which means you cut millions more jobs of workers who would provide them .
That , concretely , is the prescription of the Commission .
Therefore , the tens of thousands of Greek workers who marched yesterday were absolutely right .
Capitalism can only bring more suffering and crisis .
We need to replace it with a system of human solidarity , based on the values of democratic socialism .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , the great investor , Warren Buffet , once said ' when the tide goes down , you kind of get to see who is not wearing a bathing costume ' .
Last year , the UK economy contracted 4.8 % .
So did Italy 's .
The German economy contracted 5 % and EU trade much more so .
I am going to focus on the third question , which is : what strategy does the Commission intend to pursue to enable EU industry to become more competitive ?
Well , before there was the Lisbon Treaty , there was the Lisbon Strategy , and in the Lisbon Strategy , the EU intended , and I quote , ' to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world ' .
Now , one prerequisite for a competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy is to have a flexible work force .
So what has the EU done to bring this about ?
Well they have brought in the Agency Workers ' Directive in 2008 and this has been like pouring glue into the most flexible part of the labour market .
The Agency Workers ' Directive is yet another ill-thought-out and inappropriate EU directive which has yet again disproportionately and adversely affected the UK , which has a third of all EU agency workers .
And , incidentally , it is by having a flexible workforce that you raise people out of poverty .
The EU 's series of ill-considered directives stand in the way of a competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy emerging in the Member States .
The EU economic crisis reveals that the EU has , as it were , no bathing costume .
( HU ) I would like to talk about two issues : the trade deficit and CO2 emissions .
The document rightly states that the growth of the trade deficit of the European Union and the United States has contributed to the international economic crisis to a large extent .
The trade deficit of the European Union grew from EUR 75 billion in 2004 to EUR 243 billion in 2008 .
This is a three-fold increase in 4 years .
This means that the consumption of each European citizen exceeded produced value by EUR 500 .
Such a large trade deficit and a consumption that exceeds production to such an extent are not sustainable .
Measures are required to reduce the trade deficit , because if we do not do this intentionally , the laws of economy will spontaneously enforce such a change .
However , this would incur a much higher social cost .
The current events in Greece illustrate this .
As regards energy , world trade is not only distorted by protectionism , but also by energy price support mechanisms .
The use of oil is subsidised in a number of developing countries , with oil being available at prices lower than on the international market , while budget resources are also used to support the use of electricity .
At the same time , European producers need to pay taxes , carbon dioxide quotas , if they want to use energy in production .
Copenhagen made it clear that developing countries wish to hinder a climate protection agreement as they are not willing to accept sanctions related to cuts .
Measures are required to prevent this , as several economists have now pointed out that cheap carbon dioxide gives a more competitive edge to China than cheap labour .
If we do not reduce energy consumption , there is a danger that again and again ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , as other speakers have said , the full impact of the financial crisis is now becoming clear .
If you believe the Commission , trade dropped by 10 % in 2009 .
If you believe the IMF , it dropped by 12.3 % in 2009 .
The ILO itself reckons that 212 million people worldwide were unemployed in 2009 , a 34 million increase from 2007 .
Sub-Saharan Africa , which had a fiscal surplus of 0.3 % of GDP in 2008 , had a deficit of 6.4 % in 2009 .
In other words a surplus of three billion turned into a deficit of 64 billion , taking 67 billion out of Sub-Saharan Africa 's spending power .
All parts of the world have suffered because of this crisis , but the third world , the developing world , has suffered the most .
And that is why today Oxfam have today launched a call for what they have called a ' Robin Hood tax ' .
This is a variation on the Tobin Tax , which was to tax speculative trade on financial products , stocks , bonds , commodities and currency transactions .
The Robin Hood tax represents a tiny 0.05 % of transactions , but would raise billions for development projects in the third world .
The Millennium Development Goals need between 34 billion and 45 billion to be met and the banks received a trillion-dollar bail-out .
Banks should do more than simply pay back that cash : they should repair the damage they have done to wider society .
So this Robin Hood tax would be a good way to tackle poverty and to ensure that the banks make a socially useful contribution .
Will the Commissioner look seriously at Oxfam 's proposal , which has had an indication of support from the British Prime Minister , and put his weight behind it as a European Commissioner for Trade ?
( SV ) Madam President , our continent is a rich one .
The EU must shoulder a particular responsibility for maintaining free and fair trade .
The financial crisis is creating a global economic recession that depressed trade by 10 % in 2009 , as has been stated , such that trade is now at the same level as in 2005 .
Developing countries are particularly vulnerable when their exports fall and they have problems obtaining bank financing .
For the ACP countries , for example , trade in goods represents 50 % of their trade .
These countries are thus extremely sensitive to crises .
A 1 % drop in growth results in 20 million people falling into poverty .
Here , the EU must shoulder its responsibility as a rich part of the world and ensure that the financial crisis does not force more people into poverty and exclusion .
The EU must work to ensure that the poorest countries receive increased levels of effective aid and debt relief where appropriate .
In this context , my friends , I believe that a number of the countries that you come from could do more to ensure that the aid provided by your home countries is increased , improved and made more efficient .
We should not always call on the EU ; there are some things we can do on the home front .
The most important priority for the Union is that the Doha Round is concluded and that the EU 's agricultural policy is quite simply scrapped .
It is unreasonable for the rich EU to force out poor farms in Africa through competition .
A new free trade agreement would be the best way of taking the world out of financial crisis and preventing protectionism .
The EU can and must act as a beacon for the liberalisation of world trade .
Globalisation and international trade are fundamentally positive .
Protectionism is an evil and has always been an evil .
Those of you who believe that protectionism would teach and help the world in some way should learn from history .
( PL ) Madam President , one area in which we should look for ways to fight the crisis is the trade in agricultural products .
In recent years , under pressure from the World Trade Organisation , we have introduced many voluntary restrictions on the production and export of agricultural products in the European Union .
We carried out , for example , a huge reform of the sugar market , which reduced European sugar production by one third and closed down many sugar refineries .
Many farms stopped growing sugar beet , we increased unemployment and did not achieve any social or economic benefits .
It was a present for the big sugar concerns , which moved their production out of Europe , and today we import sugar from them .
I think that during the crisis , we should give strong protection to our economy and our producers .
I am not talking , here , about protectionism , but about a policy of equal opportunities which , at present , our producers do not have .
A variety of high standards are in force in the European Union , for example , in agriculture there are standards for animal welfare .
It is right to promote these standards , but we should also require that these same standards be met by those who export their products to the European Union .
If , for example , we bring in a ban on battery hens , we should not at the same time import eggs from countries where this method is in use .
We should act in a similar way on many other matters .
We should observe a simple rule - the same requirements for exporters as for our own producers , because without this , apart from the economic crisis ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) The financial crisis brought on by the US financial sector grew very quickly into an economic crisis which immediately affected all areas of economic life .
The inevitable consequences were a rapid decline in consumer spending power , a decline in output , higher unemployment , lower fiscal revenues and less money to finance state budgets .
As output fell all over the world , of course , the value of goods traded necessarily had to drop with the decline in production .
If , therefore , we are now asking how to achieve stability or even growth in the volume of global trade , ladies and gentlemen , it can only be through effective measures for halting economic collapse , through measures for stabilising the economy and through the gradual start-up of economic growth .
The current economic system is so interlinked and globalised that , in my view , it is a worthless illusion to rely on limited artificial interventions that target specific sectors and produce no added value .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , the crisis has inevitably led to a significant reduction in global trade volumes .
This is also reflected in the drop in production and investment , as well as in limited growth opportunities .
At the same time , national governments are strongly tempted to put up barriers to protect their domestic production capacities .
In 2009 , we observed an alarming increase in the various forms of national protection used , both in individual European Union Member States and in the new developing economies .
This protectionism hampers access to international markets for small and medium-sized enterprises , which form the backbone of the European economy , adding a further burden and restrictions .
In order to overcome these problems and encourage entrepreneurship and trade , I think that Europe needs , above all , a strong internal market .
This can be achieved if the European economy is sufficiently competitive , innovative and based on high standards of quality .
As also noted by the European Commission , in spite of the progress made , we must continue the efforts to increase the capacity of the educational systems as a contribution to an innovative , dynamic knowledge society .
In my view , stable public finances in the European Union , which will guarantee the sustainability of the national economies and the European currency , are an important prerequisite for overcoming the trade imbalances .
The euro 's stability is of paramount importance to the trust of our trade partners .
A further boost to reviving trade and investment is also provided by the timely implementation of the necessary structural reforms aimed at laying new stable foundations for growth .
Last but not least in terms of importance , I believe that the internal market would also be strengthened by the prudent and prompt expansion of the euro area , which will result in the economic integration of European states and make the European economy even more influential in relation to its international partners .
( ES ) Madam President , as the 2009 figures show , and as has already been indicated , the financial crisis which broke out at the beginning of 2008 has considerably reduced trading figures .
In any case , it seems that we have managed to avoid the serious temptation of protectionism which occurred during the crisis of the 1930s , and it seems that the trend for the emergence of new restrictive measures disappeared at the end of last year .
This is demonstrated in the Fifth report on potentially trade restrictive measures adopted by the Commission at the end of last year .
Nevertheless , many countries have adopted these restrictive measures , countries with different economic bases such as the United States , China , Argentina , Russia and Indonesia , but also many developing countries .
And it is these countries , the developing countries , which need open markets that can receive their products .
For that reason , I call on Mr De Gucht , in his capacity as Development Commissioner , to work towards broader and freer trade in the world , towards the European Union taking the lead in reducing protectionist barriers in developed countries and to work towards a greater commitment to taking development into consideration in trade negotiations .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider that the reduction in world trade has gone well beyond the boundaries of the recession itself .
Studies have shown that the lack of financing for trade by the banks is due in large part to the slowdown in commerce .
I should like to ask two questions : firstly , what has become of international commitments on the multilateral financing of trade ?
And secondly , what results has the more flexible financing framework to facilitate access by undertakings to financing at European level had ?
Moving on to global trade , I should like to point out that the rules , disciplines and commitments of the World Trade Organisation have , to a large degree , prevented the use of restrictive trade measures , at the same time providing the flexibility to adopt policies aimed at economic recovery .
However , we call on the Commission to closely monitor the measures adopted by our trading partners and their impact on European exports , including the ' buy national ' policies applied by important EU trading partners .
At the same time , we must not overlook the dynamic increase in exports by certain emerging economies .
In the present case , I should like to underline in particular the issue of the competitiveness of European products on global markets , which existed before and exist independently of the economic crisis .
Finally , what we need , among other things , is to achieve reciprocity with our trading partners in terms of market access , restore terms of fair competition on the international markets and ensure that imported products are subject to the same rules as goods produced within the EU .
Madam President , ( inaudible ) is in a very difficult situation already because of the global recession and the decreasing demand for a number of products worldwide .
However , protectionism further hurts international trade and the EU 's interests directly .
One of the international trade actors which have enacted additional and counterproductive trade barriers is Russia .
Since the beginning of the financial crisis , Russia has imposed a number of so-called ' temporary ' anti-crisis tariffs on a number of imports , such as meat and milk products , furniture , and also some steel products .
Another instance which may be recalled is the temporary tariff on drugs that Russia has imposed on EU exporters .
What is even more alarming is that , on 1 January 2010 , a customs union came into existence between Russia , Belarus and Kazakhstan .
As a consequence , a total of 30 % of the EU 's product lines have seen increased tariffs .
The main problem is , of course , that Russia , like Belarus and Kazakhstan , is not a member of the WTO , and is therefore not bound by the WTO rules restricting the unilateral increase of import tariffs and other trade-restrictive measures .
Since Russia is not a member of the WTO , we do not have a dispute settlement mechanism with them .
Commissioner , I have two questions for you .
How does the Commission assess the current EU trade problems with Russia , and do we have a particular strategy on how to address the issue of Russia 's membership of the WTO ?
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard on several occasions that world trade has declined dramatically over the last three months , despite the successful attempts by many members of the World Trade Organisation to keep the markets open as far as possible .
I am also very grateful that the European Union has played a highly effective role in this respect and has introduced hardly any protectionist measures .
In my country , there is a saying that attack is the best form of defence .
I would like to pick up on what Mrs Andrikienhas just said about the specific measures that Russia has taken .
We need to ask what effective options we have open to us that will allow us to go on the offensive against those trading partners who have not kept to the agreements made in the G20 , who have introduced protectionist measures , who have closed the markets and who have helped to bring about an even greater fall in worldwide economic performance than would otherwise have been the case .
Should we not make more proactive use of our Global Europe strategy and forcefully implement the points it contains ?
Is it not now the right time to address our interests proactively instead of simply preventing protectionism ?
I have in mind a possible new initiative which will allow us to make progress within the WTO at last .
I think we should take the logical step of negotiating free trade agreements quickly .
We have one result in South Korea .
However , what has happened with regard to India , Canada , Colombia and Peru ?
Would we not be sending out a very positive signal if we could make progress on these free trade agreements now ?
Many other Members have referred to the developing countries .
Is this not the ideal opportunity to bring about some progress at last in the Economic Partnership Agreements so that the developing countries and the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries ( ACP ) could be better integrated into world trade and so that effective measures could be taken to bring about economic growth and combat poverty ?
Over recent decades , it has become clear that the states which have taken part in world trade have had the highest levels of growth .
I look forward to hearing your answer , Mr De Gucht .
( EL ) Madam President , my first comment is that the correlations in our trade relations with rapidly emerging countries are not static .
When , for example , there are completely different growth rates between the Union and China , the non-tariff obstacles applied against us , which we considered to be of lesser importance when the Chinese economy was smaller , are having worse and worse results for us as China 's relative importance increases and ours decreases .
At the same time , as our relative size decreases , our negotiating power decreases as well .
There is therefore a window of opportunity through which the Union can impose its policy and effectively reduce obstacles to our exports in rapidly emerging economies and limit social and environmental dumping .
Time is working against us , even more than before as a result of the crisis .
My second comment is that , as the correlations change , the importance of trans-Atlantic trade relations and of promoting a more functional American market which will increase trans-Atlantic trade and give the parties on either side of the Atlantic greater negotiating power increases .
Here , too , there is a window of opportunity , as it will take time to build up the trans-Atlantic market , because it is a complex process .
How does the US rate the importance of these relations ?
Unfortunately , the fact that President Obama will not be attending the forthcoming summit in Madrid is not an encouraging sign .
The question is : does the Commission feel the need for urgent action , while we still have the necessary negotiating power ?
( FR ) Madam President , the economic and financial storm we have just gone through has caused a lot of damage .
Our economies are disoriented , and we are still struggling today to get back on an even keel in the face of determined emerging powers .
It is now time , European Commissioner , for you to captain an ambitious and meaningful European trade policy that is unapologetically aimed at defending our commercial interests and based on mutual openness of the markets and on the exploitation of our competitive advantages .
The European Union must first of all find a happy medium between ultra-free trade and protectionism .
To my mind , this third way must be embodied by the creation of a fair trade framework .
The European Union is armed with certain values : respect for the protection of intellectual property , fairness in terms of investments , access to markets , the fight against non-tariff trade barriers and respect for social and environmental standards .
Consequently , it has a duty to ensure that these values are accepted as principles by India and China , emerging countries which are not only our customers and competitors , but also our partners .
Apart from the need to establish balanced trade , you must , Commissioner , help to boost the competitiveness of our European companies .
How can this be achieved ?
Innovation , investment in research and development , and the international influence of competitive clusters seem to be some of the key factors that will get us out of the crisis .
We also need to focus our actions on innovative companies , especially SMEs , by relieving them of any excessive administrative and fiscal burdens , and on green technologies and services .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) We must face up to the fundamental question of whether free trade , the current system controlled by the WTO , is good for the people , or whether we should be contemplating a new guiding principle , which I would rather not call protectionism but economic self-determination ?
I would like to propose looking at the differences between these two guiding principles in three areas .
What does global world trade mean in its current form and volume in terms of creating and preserving jobs in Europe , especially when we think about small traders , SMEs , family businesses and small farms in European countries , which are adrift and have lost opportunities to progress because of the current global , liberalised world trade ?
If we think of solidarity , is it good for the poor , developing countries that , instead of developing their own agriculture and industry , they are obliged to open their markets ?
Is it good for the environment that goods are delivered from great distances ?
I would like to propose that as an initial step , at least with regard to agriculture and food , we contemplate the introduction of the principle of food self-determination , which means that communities and countries have the right to decide what they want to produce and how they want to produce it , and then how they want to sell it .
Consumers are entitled to quality , healthy and nutritious food , and we know that this is not the food that has been shipped from thousands of kilometres away , but the locally produced , locally processed and locally sold food .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on his new appointment .
Could he , if possible , give some details about the effects of the economic crisis on world trade in agricultural products ?
Mrs Andrikienhas already mentioned the case of the Russian Federation , which announced that it is prepared to ban poultry meat imports until 2015 , because it covers its requirements from domestic production .
Given that the promotion of a more competitive agricultural system in an open global trade environment is one of the duties assigned by President Barroso to the new Commissioner for Agriculture , I am going to take advantage of the commissioner 's presence in the Chamber to ask him how he views the cooperation with his colleague responsible for agriculture in terms of concluding the negotiations as part of the Doha Round .
Madam President , firstly , I want to say that the Commission is to be congratulated on rejecting a recent proposal by the WHO that we should ban the sale of duty-free alcohol and spirits .
If this was accepted , it would have cost EUR 2 billion to the European economy and hundreds of jobs across the Union .
It was a notion based on moralistic preaching rather than on scientific evidence by the WHO and , thankfully , it was rejected by the Commission .
The second point I want to make is that the banks were primarily responsible for many of the ills which we are seeing nowadays , but what happened ?
A new theory came into being - they were too big to fail .
I think , rather than be too big to fail , many of them are too big for their own boots .
That is seen in the immoral salaries that some of them are getting and the grotesque bonuses they are also getting .
No banker should be getting more than the Prime Minister of his country , and we should work towards ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Madam President , international trade , alongside the financial sector , is the area of the world economy which has suffered most as a result of the economic crisis .
It is estimated that world trade turnover fell last year by around 10 % as a result of the crisis .
In addition , the policy of protectionism adopted by many countries as a basic tool for fighting the recession is having a disadvantageous effect on trade .
The advantages of free trade in a global economy ought not to need explaining to anyone .
It is safe to say that the prosperity which free-market countries achieved in the second half of the 20th century was , in large measure , the fruit of free trade , which developed dynamically in this period .
The fall in world trade , the rise in unemployment , especially in developing countries and , with this , the growth of poverty and social exclusion - this adverse trend can be stopped by restoring dynamic trade on fair and just ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , firstly I would like to congratulate you on your appointment as commissioner .
We are pleased to see such an astute and successful politician and a well-known Liberal on the Commission .
You will need all your powers of persuasion to bring a new impetus to international trade policy in the EU .
We must fight against any protectionist tendencies .
History clearly shows that countries which have taken part in world trade have enjoyed better growth than those which did not .
We are also facing a new world order .
Some of the players involved , for example , China , have State capitalist systems , but may be using quite different methods in this arena .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to develop a new strategy for world trade .
It is clear that we must move forward with the Doha development round , because a multilateral approach is the right one .
However , we will need all our efforts to make progress in relation to China .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to pick up on a subject which two other speakers have mentioned .
Mr De Gucht , fortunately you are also responsible for the Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) .
I would be very grateful if you could put the TEC right at the top of your agenda , with the aim of solving all the problems that we have referred to .
It is still the case that Europe and the US are responsible for almost 60 % of global economic performance .
If we could manage to remove only a fraction of the trade barriers on the transatlantic market , we could do much more for our citizens and , of course , for employees than has been achieved by many of the other measures that we have put far more effort into over the last five years .
I would be very grateful if you could devote your attention to the TEC .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , if I were to try to give a balanced answer to all the questions that have been put and to all the matters that have been raised , I would need , I think , at least half an hour .
I have only two or three minutes if I understand rightly .
Having said this , let me start with a general remark .
I really do not believe that protectionism is a solution .
Whether you are a believer or not , looking back into history , it is thanks to international trade that our countries have become prosperous .
Secondly , Europe has a transformative economy , which means that we have to import to be able to export .
The idea that we could export without importing is completely false and contradictory to the facts .
So I staunchly believe that we should have free trade agreements with major economic partners , that we should make a success of the Doha Round and that we should further liberalise international trade , but that does not mean that we should not take into account the fact that this international trade also has to be fair and that we are entitled to protect our interests .
The Commission is certainly going to do so when necessary and we will use the TDI mechanisms we have to have an impact on what we consider to be unfair distortions of trade .
Some very specific questions have also been asked , by Mr Jadot , for example , on the meeting on 4 February at the WTO and what the result of this was .
Well , the main message at that meeting was that the rules of the General Agreement on Trade in Services are not an obstacle to the right of countries to ensure effective financial regulation .
The reason is that GATS has a very broad scope for financial prudential measures , so this financial regulation , be it at national or European level , is certainly not contradictory to the GATS rules .
That brings me to the origins of the crisis we are going through .
Hopefully , the major part is behind us .
I am firmly convinced that it has had a major impact on trade , but that the origin of this crisis lies with financial imbalances which resulted from completely wrong choices by financial institutions .
The financial crisis did not originate in Europe ; it came to Europe and to the rest of the world from the United States .
I can agree that the food crisis of a couple of years ago , which was still not completely resolved and digested , let us say , has added to big imbalances , especially for the developing countries .
You can say a lot about developing countries , about good governance and so on , but you certainly cannot lay the blame on the developing countries for being at the origin of the financial crisis .
That is obvious , and they are very severely hit by that crisis , so we should take that into due consideration .

There have also been some questions , the last time by Mr Caspary and one by Mr Jadot too , asking what are we going to do with the TEC and with the strategic initiative for China ?
My personal opinion is that the only good response to the economic development of China - which we are not going to stop , by the way - the only good response is to become stronger ourselves .
I think that is the only good response .
When you look at this in terms of trade deficit , it is true that the trade deficit with China has gone up considerably , but when you look at the global trade deficit with Asia , this did not go up that much .
Also , within Asia , the other Asian countries are facing very fierce competition from China .
So what we should do is become stronger ourselves .
I believe that achieving this transatlantic marketplace , for example , is one of the best answers we can give .
We have a recent report , produced at the request of Parliament , which shows that , if you were able to reduce by 50 % the non-tariff barriers between Europe and the United States , this would have an effect which would be much larger than the Doha Round .
We should work on that , but , having said this , it is not easy at all .
Speaking of the Doha Round , I staunchly believe that we should try to close that round because it has a lot of important features , among them , that the existing tariffs cannot go up any more , that we would be able to close them down .
Secondly , there is a strong developmental approach in the Doha Round , provided , of course , that we can keep it as it stands now , and that should be the goal of the European Commission .
There was also the question by David Martin on the Robin Hood tax .
First of all , I must say that I like the name Robin Hood much better than Tobin .
But apart from that , I fear the Robin Hood tax is facing the same problems as the Tobin tax , that you can only do it if it happens on a global scale .
You should also bear in mind that doing this , even on a global scale , would imply a very costly implementing mechanism to put it into place .
President Barroso said about the Tobin tax that we are ready to support it as long as everybody else does , and that , of course , is the sticking point in all this .
A last word on - Mr Higgins , amongst others , asked a question - speculation and what came about from that , and also with respect to Greece .
This is not a debate on Greece so I am not going to go into the details of it , but I think , sincerely speaking , that some fault also lies with Greece itself .
What you cannot have in a global economy , and what you cannot have in the European Union either , is moral hazard .
Being a Member State of the European Union also implies some obligations .
So Member States who get into a difficult position - and certainly we are ready to support them and help them whenever possible - should also realise that they have to obey the rules and if they obey the rules , then probably they will not get into the difficult situation they are in now .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The shrinking of world trade has had a particularly detrimental effect on the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , as the drop in demand primarily affected products which have played a significant role in exports , such as cars , consumer electronics , and so on .
At the same time , these countries have also been hit hard by the credit crunch .
Boosting exports would be extremely important to ensure that these countries are able to recover from the difficulties arising from this double pressure and the resultant social problems , such as growing unemployment .
Financing for exporters seems to be a major obstacle in this area , as payment periods have become longer , credit has become more expensive and more difficult to access , while credit insurance conditions have also deteriorated .
This is why programmes should be developed targeting the countries in question , especially EU Member States , to assist them in overcoming these difficulties .
The trend for outsourcing in the 1990s has led to capital and also expertise being transferred abroad within the world economy .
The fact that jobs have been and are being created in countries with low wages has resulted in average wages falling in Central and Western Europe , which , in its turn , has caused a fall in consumption levels .
The consequence of this is that European companies are no longer making the majority of their profits from producing goods , which is their core business .
They are attempting to improve their results by means of financial transactions and speculation .
This is the point at which we must start .
We need to impose a quota on how much ordinary share capital companies can invest in stocks and shares and also on how much of their reserves they can deposit in financial packages in third countries .
Secondly , we need regulations for the companies that have suffered damage as a result of the crisis .
Thirdly , the economy requires not only fresh capital for the banks , which were one of the main causes of the crisis , but also and , more importantly , new regulations for money transfers , strict guidelines on the sale of credit packages and an independent supervisory body for the new and flourishing trading business , which includes areas such as short selling , that should be banned .
If the forecasts presented just now by Mr Moreira are right , then the predicted decline in world trade will be the biggest since the Second World War .
It goes without saying that both Member States of the European Union and countries which do not belong to the Community are taking measures to increase competitiveness and overcome the effects of the crisis .
Research carried out by the Centre of Economic Policy Research has shown that since the first meeting of the Group of Twenty devoted to the crisis , 425 legislative initiatives have been undertaken to combat the effects of the crisis .
Some countries have resorted to protectionist practices , while others are trying to liberalise trade .
In view of the fact that the economy is a system of connected vessels , is the European Commission monitoring legislative initiatives being undertaken both within the European Union and around the world ?
Does the European Commission , when taking anti-crisis measures , take these into account ?
As protectionist and liberalising measures accumulate , a situation will arise in which they are mutually exclusive and will have no effect on world trade .
EU - South Korea free trade agreement ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Daniel Caspary , Peter Šťastný , Paweł Zalewski , David Martin , Gianluca Susta , Kader Arif , Michael Theurer , Niccolò Rinaldi , Metin Kazak , Marielle De Sarnez and Jan Zahradil , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the European Conservatives and Reformists , on the free trade agreement between the EU and South Korea - B7-0001 / 2010 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , the negotiations on the agreement with South Korea have been completed and the documents have been initialled .
That is a very good thing .
However , if we look at the details of the agreement , it seems as if speed took precedence over thoroughness .
I have the impression that your predecessor wanted the agreement to be signed and sealed at any price , so that she had at least one success during her period of office .
We are familiar with the many expert reports which were drawn up before the start of negotiations and which clearly indicated the many possible benefits for European industry and the European economy .
There is likely to be a positive impact on the mechanical engineering , chemical , pharmaceutical , food and service industries .
All of these sectors and many others hope to gain major benefits from the agreement .
However , the main protests are coming from the car industry .
There are difficulties with the duty drawback system , with the question of the amount of parts from foreign suppliers that can be used in cars from South Korea and with the issue of environmental standards which remain unresolved .
I would like to see us not only addressing but resolving many of these criticisms over the next few months using the safeguard mechanisms and the safeguard regulation .
The Members of this House can only vote in favour of this free trade agreement if we have dealt with the justified concerns of the car industry and can also incorporate genuinely effective solutions into these safeguard mechanisms .
The text of the safeguard mechanisms was published on the Internet today , but unfortunately , I have not yet had a chance to read it .
I would like to offer you the opportunity on behalf of my group to work with us in partnership to develop a suitable regulation at a European level , in order to ensure that the interests of the car industry are addressed in this free trade agreement .
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , new players have emerged out of the wings onto the world stage , some of which were actually considered developing countries not long ago .
This must change our approach , cultural and otherwise , towards free trade and the tangible manifestations of the relationship between the European Union and its major competitors .
This relationship is currently mediated by certain magic terms that have not yet entered into the vocabulary of the European Commission .
These terms are reciprocity , European interest , the fight against dumping and the fight against tariff barriers .
This is the background to the free trade agreement with Korea , which incidentally confused two Commissioners - the Commissioner for Internal Market and Services and the Commissioner for Employment - and some governments .
What are the real advantages of this bilateral agreement , when 50 % of the trade between the European Union and Korea concerns the automotive sector , when the disparity between the 700 000 Korean cars exported to us as opposed to the 27 000 European cars imported by Korea is glaringly evident ?
What is the sense in providing indirect aid of approximately EUR 1 600 for each Korean car sold in Europe when some European governments find it difficult to provide incentives for buying and selling cars to stimulate consumption ?
How can we also fail to take into account the serious doubts over the textile and electronics industries ?
We will not settle with hearing for the umpteenth time , Commissioner , as Mrs Ashton said before you , that there are advantages for our chemical , pharmaceutical or agrifood industries because these pale scandalously into insignificance compared to the consequences for textiles , electronics and , above all , for cars , or financial services .
Could it be that Europe , even with the crisis we are in today , is yet again choosing the financial option for its development ?
We all welcomed the birth of the new Europe in Lisbon with hope .
Europe cannot however , fail to take responsibility for European interests in the world , particularly today .
The United States is jumping through hoops to defend Boeing against Airbus and the Argentinean Government is threatening to expropriate Telecom .
The agreement with Korea actually legitimises pass-through financing with China which , until now , was illegal .
This is the scenario in which our major businesses are forced to operate .
Behind them are hundreds of thousands of workers , of families who can see their future going up in smoke , not because they are producing poor quality services or goods but because poorly defined interests are allowed to prevail over more evident and objective interests .
We trust in your sensitivity , Commissioner , in the hope that you will avoid over-hasty ratifications , which could go hand in hand with unacceptable decisions over the provisional application of the commercial side of the agreement pending ratification , or at least decisions that will be unacceptable until the regulation on the bilateral safeguard clause has been clearly defined .
The adoption of this clause is subject to the ordinary legislative procedure that should be considered a first step to any appraisal of the advisability ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon is opening a new chapter in the cooperation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
The right of codecision of the European Parliament that has been directly elected by the citizens of Europe gives us the opportunity to bring democracy back into decisions on trade policy .
This is the right thing to do , because it will have consequences for employees and consumers in the Member States .
Free and fair trade forms the basis for Europe 's prosperity .
We must therefore firmly oppose any protectionist tendencies .
Free trade agreements like this one with South Korea can make an important contribution to stimulating world trade , growth and employment .
However , it is in the nature of agreements of this kind , that , depending on their specific structure , they bring more benefits for some sectors of industry than for others .
It is our job in Parliament to weigh up carefully the impact on different industries and sectors within the EU .
In order to do this , we need the relevant data and impact assessments and it is the Commission 's task to provide them .
However , despite many requests from the committee and in the plenary session , we have not yet received data which we believe to be satisfactory .
This is the reason why the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has joined with other groups to ask this question .
According to the information that we have received so far , the agreement offers opportunities for the service , mechanical engineering and plant construction , chemical and agricultural industries in the European economy .
However , the concern is that the agreement will have a negative impact on the car industry and the textile and electronics sectors .
The free trade agreement with South Korea is the only agreement with a developed country which does not include a ban on duty drawbacks .
This may lead to one-sided cost benefits for South Korean industry .
As the Commission has assured us on several occasions , the provisions on the duty drawback include a safeguard clause , which allows for a waiver on the basis of certain criteria .
However , we urgently need to clarify this in the interests of the companies involved .
The system must be applicable in practice .
It must not be the case that the safeguard clauses are worthless because the companies cannot provide the necessary proof .
As the agreement seems to contain one-sided regulations and as it sets a precedent for future agreements , for example , with India or with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , we feel that the specific wording of the safeguard clauses , the procedure for settling disputes and the other regulations relating to the application of the agreement are of central importance .
We are therefore calling on the Commission to submit the free trade agreement together with the provisions on its application to Parliament for approval .
We want a decision quickly .
For this reason , a provisional version of the agreement must not be allowed to come into force .
I know from discussions with companies what an important impact the implementation has .
Therefore , my question to the Commission is as follows : Will the development of the European External Action Service lead to it playing a stronger role in trade policy ?
In our opinion , at least , this should be included .
author . - Madam President , during times of economic downturn , it is only through the opening-up of markets and the removal of barriers that we can rebuild our industry , create jobs and boost development .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your points of view on the previous debate .
EU exporters of consumer goods , electronics , pharmaceuticals , chemicals and medical devices are just some of the sectors which will benefit immensely from the removal of non-tariff barriers .
Simplification of certification procedures , transparency and price predictability are all things that will benefit the consumer .
The Korean consumer market , in turn , wants access to speciality European agricultural products , such as wines , spirits , meats , cheeses , all protected by geographical indicators .
However , it would be wrong to accept this free trade agreement - and we have heard many people speak on it - at face value , and there are areas which need further clarification by the Commission .
The inclusion of duty drawback clauses has been a concern for many of us , as I mentioned .
Any free trade agreement must be based on the principle of reciprocity or mutual benefit , but the potential burden on European car manufacturers remains unclear and of great concern to us .
The Commission has assured us that Korea is actively liberalising its import regime .
The level of duties that Korea can refund under the duty drawback are gradually being reduced .
The negotiators are convinced that the economic relevance of the duty drawback will therefore diminish over time .
What evidence does the Commission have to support this argument ?
If the Commission finds itself resorting to repeated or continued use of this safeguard mechanism , will it consider reviewing negotiations to extend the transfer period ?
Commissioner , I look forward to working closely with you in the new agreement that is coming up .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for their oral question , which confirms the interest of the European Parliament in the EU-South Korea free trade agreement .
As this will be the first major trade agreement to which the European Parliament will be asked to give its formal consent under the Lisbon Treaty , I very much welcome this opportunity to reply to the many aspects of the free trade agreement raised in the oral question .
I might not be able to give detailed replies to all aspects of the question , but I am happy to address them in a possible follow-up question .
The EU-South Korea agreement is not only the first FTA negotiated by the EU with a country in Asia ; it is also the most ambitious and comprehensive free trade agreement ever negotiated by the European Union .
After more than two years of negotiations , the free trade agreement was initialled on 15 October last year .
Throughout the negotiating process , the Commission remained in close contact with Parliament .
In this respect , the Commission welcomes the resolution on Korea voted by Parliament in December 2007 .
Many of the issues raised in this resolution have been addressed in the free trade agreement .
The whole process was also accompanied by a constant dialogue with civil society and a comprehensive trade sustainable impact assessment .
The FTA is currently being translated .
By the end of March , the Commission envisages presenting to the Council the decisions to authorise the signature of the FTA as well as to conclude the FTA .
The objective is to sign the agreement in April .
The Commission is currently completing its analysis as to whether the agreement also falls within the competence of Member States .
In this case , the FTA would require the ratification of all Member States before formally entering into force .
As this process may take some time , it may be necessary for the Commission to propose that the agreement be provisionally applied pending its entry into force .
The provisional application is decided by the Council on a proposal by the Commission .
The Commission is sensitive to the desire of Parliament to be able to give its views on the FTA before it is provisionally applied .
The Commission will continue to seek out the best means , together with the Council and Parliament , to ensure that this takes place in a manner that does not cause unnecessary delays .
It is of great importance that we apply the agreement as soon as is feasible .
As regards the regulation on safeguards , the Commission intends to present its proposal for such a regulation to the Council and the European Parliament in the coming weeks , and hopes that it will be possible to adopt this legislation rapidly so as to ensure that its application takes place as close as possible to the application of the FTA .
The economic benefits of the FTA are mostly in the EU 's favour .
It will relieve EU exporters of industrial and agricultural goods from Korean tariffs , saving them EUR 1.6 billion in duties annually , half of these directly from the day of the entry into force of the agreement .
Obviously , potential gains from these duty savings will be even higher , as trade between the EU and Korea is expected to expand over time .
According to one study , the FTA will create substantial new trade in goods and services of 19.1 billion for the EU compared to 12.8 billion for Korea .
Existing studies have not identified any sectors that would be negatively affected by the FTA , but in case of serious injury or threat thereof , the Commission would not hesitate to activate the safeguard procedures built into the agreement .
Let me also remind you that , in the event of such a necessity , we have the possibility of employing the support measures under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
With regard to intellectual property rights , the FTA contains ambitious commitments going beyond WTO rules .
Besides , the Commission has been careful to ensure that no element in the FTA contradicts the EU acquis communautaire .
On the implications of the protocol on cultural cooperation , the FTA would set a framework for engaging in policy dialogue on cooperating and facilitating exchanges regarding cultural activities .
It is , above all , a demonstration of the EU 's commitment to actively promoting the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expression .
On rules of origin , the negotiations with South Korea resulted in a number of changes which are consistent with the ongoing process of reform of such rules .
These changes go in the direction of simplification , thus implementing a specific request by the European Parliament .
At the same time , strict rules have been maintained for all sensitive sectors .
The Commission has paid particular attention to creating a new market-access opportunity in Korea for European fruit and vegetables .
In order to encourage Korea to open up its market , European Union entry prices have been eliminated except in the case of the three most sensitive products : tomatoes , oranges and Korean citrus .
Obviously , the FTA also opens the EU market to Korean products .
To protect our industry against import increases causing or threatening injury , the FTA contains an effective safeguard mechanism .
This safeguard clause can be invoked from the entry into force of the FTA .
The Commission will monitor the EU market and Korean imports to assess the need to invoke the safeguard clause , and remains committed to making use of it if conditions are met .
The same applies to the special clause on duty drawback , which can be invoked based on publicly available trade statistics on imports into and exports from Korea .
I am aware of certain concerns expressed , notably by the EU car industry , about the duty drawback provisions in the FTA , but I have to emphasise that duty drawback is currently allowed and used by Koreans as well as by EU exporters .
Thus , maintaining it in the FTA does not accrue any new benefit .
The current economic impact of duty drawback is very small , about one eighth of the value of the Korean duty concessions .
In the case of cars , available studies show that , on average , the foreign content of Korean cars is between 10 % and 15 % .
If foreign sourcing were to increase significantly , the special clause on duty drawback would provide for an effective remedy .
It cannot be ruled out that implementation of the FTA may give rise to different views and interpretation between the parties .
To address such situations , the FTA contains an efficient and rapid dispute settlement mechanism .
The Commission will monitor closely the implementation of commitments by Korea and will not hesitate to invoke dispute settlement procedures if warranted .
The FTA would also break new ground in promoting the protection of the environment and respect for labour rights , containing comprehensive commitments on a range of social and environmental standards .
The scope of these commitments is broader than that of any comparable agreement .
To ensure that these commitments are respected , the FTA establishes a strong framework for monitoring their implementation , involving civil society , business , trade unions and NGOs .
Finally , I would like to inform you that Korea and the EU have been discussing possible adjustments to the tariff dismantlement schedule .
These adjustments would imply , inter alia , that products classified under three years and five years would be subject to four- and six-year tariff cuts respectively , so that duties would be eliminated one year later than originally scheduled .
While this implies a modest sacrifice in terms of our offensive interests , we thought that such an adjustment would be appropriate , taking into account the sensitivities of certain sectors .
Korea has indicated its readiness to agree to those changes on the basis that the sensitivities of both sides are equally respected .
Commissioner , first of , I would like to wish you the best of luck in your new role .
We find ourselves in economically tricky times , but we know that you are not afraid of them .
In relation to this free trade agreement with South Korea , as you say , there are undoubtedly many positives for Europe in this agreement , but for our car-making industry , it is , and remains , a disastrous agreement .
Mr Caspary also made this point .
Just take a look at the figures , Commissioner .
For every car that we export to South Korea from Europe , 15 come the other way .
We currently have a ratio of 15 : 1 , and that is primarily the result of non-tariff barriers to trade in South Korea .
It is also no coincidence that a manufacturer such as General Motors should reverse its decision to build the new , small SUV in Europe , specifically in its Antwerp factory , and instead move the entire project to South Korea .
This forthcoming free trade agreement with South Korea is the direct cause of this decision .
I do not think , Commissioner , that we can accept that , and just sweep it under the carpet by arguing that many other sectors in Europe will benefit .
I believe that we still have plenty of time to adapt this situation for our automotive sector , and you were quite right to refer to the safeguard clause .
I accept that such safeguarding measures exist , but we are asking , first and foremost , for there to be a fundamental review of the impact of this agreement on the automotive sector .
The numbers and the trends are much too alarming .
The reality , in any case - and you know this better than I do - is that the US Government is currently negotiating with the South Koreans about making adaptations to a similar agreement that they have .
Do not forget , Mr De Gucht , that the car industry is still Europe 's most important industrial sector .
We are talking about an awful lot of jobs , here , that are under severe pressure at the moment .
In my opinion , we must not allow more jobs to be put on the line and we therefore urgently ask you to build additional guarantees into this agreement .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I believe that this Korean free trade agreement is important for three reasons .
Firstly , as you have indicated , it is a win-win deal for Korea and for the European Union economies .
It is good for consumers , it is good for jobs and , as you rightly say , it has a potential to add 19 billion to our trade flows with Korea .
Secondly though , given the debate we have just had , in the context of the current global financial crisis , it sets a very positive example .
If two large economies like the European Union and Korea can agree a free trade agreement , it sets an impetus for other partners .
Japan , for example , is showing much more interest in economic relations with the European Union than it was just a few years ago and partly that is due to the Korean deal .
Suddenly , on the other side , the Koreans are finding the US is now coming back , knocking on their door , wanting to get the KORUS agreement moving again .
The third reason - more parochially , but I hope colleagues in the House will bear this in mind - is that it is important for Parliament because many of the demands we made in my report have been met by the Commission , and time does not permit me to go through them all but I want to just give you three or four examples .
Firstly , we said in my report that we needed much better access to the Korean agricultural market .
Well , Korean agricultural tariffs are going to come down by 75 % over the first seven years of this agreement ; we wanted our geographical indicators protected , our Whisky , our Champagnes , our wines , our hams and so on are going to be protected in Korea as a result of this agreement .
And they are not , as one of my colleagues indicated , insignificant .
Scottish whisky sells GBP 137 million worth a year into the Korean market already so with this deal , we could see a significant increase .
We called for non-tariff barriers to be tackled and this will be of particular benefit to the automobile industry .
We wanted improved trade in environmental goods .
Well , under this deal , environmental trade in goods and services will , after three years , have virtually duty-free access to the Korean market and their environmental goods and services duty-free access to our market .
We asked as a Parliament for improved social and environmental standards .
Well , Korea , since the negotiations have been initialled , has signed four ILO Conventions and their trade and sustainable development forum is going to be established as a result of this agreement allowing the civil partners in Korea to ensure that greater market opening is accompanied by labour and environmental standards improvements .
All of these things , Parliament asked for .
It would be ludicrous and perverse for us to turn our back on them , having achieved them .
Is this a perfect deal ?
Well , of course it is not .
Are there things in it that I would not want in it , of course there are , but negotiations mean that you have to come and go , but on balance , is it a good deal for Europe ?
Yes .
Is it a good deal for Korea ?
Yes .
Is it a good deal , potentially , for the world economy ?
Yes .
So we should not shilly-shally on this : we should get on and sign it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a classic subject on which European institutions are staking their reputation with industrialists , with workers and with European consumers .
A free trade agreement is always good news , a cornerstone for stability and a cornerstone for the prosperity of the planet , all the more so when it represents the first successful bilateral trade policy for the European Union after years of disappointments .
Perhaps , however , for this very reason , there has been a certain amount of haste in sealing the agreement .
It is almost as though the Commission were tempted to close the deal at any cost .
For us in the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , although the duty drawback is acceptable for the WTO , even though it is already practised , it is effectively an export subsidy and a slackening of the rule of origin is a step backwards as far as transparency is concerned .
These two principles will soon constitute a precedent for our other trade partners .
We know that the Commission has driven a hard bargain , but , in the words of the Korean proverb , ' even the best make mistakes ' .
We have often heard that the Commission is losing its ability to safeguard the legitimate interests of producers , workers and consumers and something certainly went wrong in its communication with both sides of industry in a negotiation that was sometimes criticised for its lack of transparency .
Every European citizen expects all of us , Commission and Parliament , to demonstrate political sensitivity .
European industry is not doing well and it is pointless for some Member States to grant the automotive sector subsidies , which I am incidentally totally opposed to .
On the other hand , with this agreement , we risk introducing subsidies for Korean exports .
We all know that these agreements are complicated and that there are also many benefits to be welcomed : the end of Korean customs duties , the recognition of European certifications , new possibilities for European services , the protection of geographical indications .
Partly for this reason , I have no wish to go down the same road as in the United States , where an agreement with Korea has been awaiting ratification for years and where some even want to re-open the automotive chapter .
This is the Commission 's demand : the text of the agreement must form part of an overall package made up of three documents , in other words , the free trade agreement to be submitted for ratification , the implementing measures , particularly with regard to duty drawback , and the regulation on the safeguard clause .
If possible , I would also add the option of access to the global adjustment fund for areas that may be affected by this agreement .
Commissioner , we wish to see all the documents together and we consider , above all , under the ordinary legislative procedure established by the Lisbon Treaty , that we should rule out any kind of interim agreement , which we would oppose because we want to work together .
Mr President , as you said , this agreement breaks new ground .
It breaks new ground , but not necessarily in the way in which we talk about it .
Perhaps for the first time , in fact , we see in the outcome of the negotiations that there are losers , which one accepts , but within the context of trade negotiations with third parties .
It is not within the context of the Lisbon Strategy , it is not within the context of an industrial policy that it was decided who , in Europe , would lose out in an open trade relationship .
Secondly , this agreement also breaks new ground because , in trade negotiations , it is usually the farming sectors that resist and the industrial sectors that are satisfied .
In this case , we see that the opposite is true .
For the first time , it is literally major industrial sectors that are complaining about the decisions made by Europe .
Thirdly , this agreement also breaks new ground because you refer to a EUR 1.6 billion reduction in customs duties from which we will benefit on the Korean market .
Just what do these figures mean , however ?
I am an elected representative for the west of France region , and more specifically for Brittany .
If you have visited Brittany , Mr De Gucht , you will know that , these days , green algae and ground water pollution associated with the intensification of pig farming are a huge problem .
Now , we are told that we shall earn a small amount of money from pigs by trading with South Korea .
The reality , in the region I represent , is that this intensification of pig farming leads to a loss of jobs , a loss of added value , a loss of tourism and , consequently , in my region , we are the losers in this agreement .
Perhaps in your overall calculation , people gain from it , but in a region like mine , people lose .
Lastly , this agreement again breaks new ground because , for the first time , an environmental derogation will be called for .
We are continually told that Europe is the indisputable and undisputed leader in the fight against global climate change .
The reality is that we are reduced to negotiating derogations with South Korea on CO2 emissions from cars because the automobile lobby has been very powerful in Europe when it comes to pushing back the deadlines for the introduction of restrictions on CO2 emissions and because now , it is obliged to obtain derogations abroad .
We therefore clearly see once again that , when it comes to an industrial strategy , a strategy for our businesses and the choice of economy , it will be more the case that Europe suffers this agreement than that it shapes it .
You have talked about the Lisbon Strategy , the green economy and innovation .
I do not see in this agreement how this will be encouraged .
Finally , your approach to discussing issues is often very balanced , but as soon as people start talking about taxes , all of a sudden ...
On the carbon border tax mentioned during your hearing and now on the Tobin tax , I bet you , Mr De Gucht , that before the end of your mandate , the Commission will have to speak out strongly on the Tobin tax because it is now an essential tool for regulating the financial markets .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , can I take the opportunity of welcoming you , Commissioner , to your new post , and may you have a very successful term .
Can I take the opportunity to say that it is good that we are having this debate here tonight and getting some things out in the open .
The truth is that the negotiations have been long and protracted , and I certainly welcome the Commissioner 's statement that he is hoping to bring this very shortly to an end .
There will be enormous benefit to both Europe and Korea on the signing of this deal .
I know there are concerns and I have listened to those concerns .
We have heard them here tonight about the car industry .
But , you know , I think if we are going to depend on the car industry - and we are going to totally defend it - then I think we are picking the wrong particular area in which to do this , and certainly General Motors would not be the most important in my area , as far as I would be concerned .
I share these concerns and I share some of the real concerns held by many people , and I understand them .
But I believe the opportunity outweighs that concern , and I think that , if we are always to be reticent , then I do not believe we will achieve anything .
So we must look to the opportunities and take them , and not the negatives .
We cannot forget that this deal also has a political content , because to the north of South Korea there is a very aggressive enemy , and I think we send out a message as well as to whom we support .
So we must do all we can to break down the barriers that are in that particular region .
The agreement will show our support for progress .
I have had the opportunity to go there and I know the people in that area are very much inclined to go forward and to be progressive .
There is clear and visible support for each other between the north and the south when you visit an area like Kaesong This , I believe , is a tremendous opportunity for us to move forward .
Can I just simply ask the Commission : firstly , how would it comment on the provision of the dispute settlement mechanism and how will this operate in practice ?
Specifically , how quickly will we be able to utilise this mechanism in the case of serious market disruption ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , we have decried the disastrous consequence of the liberalisation of the global economy for many sectors of economic activity , particularly in some Member States and the regions that are most dependent on these sectors .
We are talking about the destruction of productive activity and jobs , a serious impact on the capacity to create and distribute wealth , an increasing dependence on foreign markets , chronic and growing imbalances in trade ; in short , economic and social breakdown .
We are also talking about the attacks on workers ' rights , social dumping , the ruination of millions of small producers and many small and medium-sized enterprises .
These are consequences of the gradual liberalisation of international trade which their advocates cannot ignore .
I recall here the clothing and textile industry , which is particularly pertinent to this agreement , and a study by the Directorate-General for Employment and the Eurofund , which presents scenarios for a decrease of 20 to 25 % of Community jobs by 2020 , while acknowledging a scenario where 50 % of jobs in this sector would be lost .
I also recall , however , sectors such as electronics and the component manufacturing industry in the automotive sector , already mentioned here .
These complaints give rise to questions that continue to go unanswered .
What measures will be taken to safeguard these sectors , doing more than mitigating the effects of getting rid of jobs ?
What defence mechanisms and safeguards are there against aggressive exports ?
When and how will we have a way of effectively tackling the relocation of businesses ?
According to the proposal of this group , the budget for 2010 will provide a new budget heading for action in the textile and footwear industry and creating a Community programme for the sector .
What are the key elements of this programme ?
Commissioner , fair economic relations must be established as a matter of urgency .
These must be at the service of the people and their countries , rather than certain economic groups or those who finance the European Union .
Defending every country 's right to produce in a sustainable way has been necessary for the future , in the name of a new economic , social , energy-oriented and environmental rationality that the neoliberal model not only fails to deliver but even renders impossible .
Mr President , I do not see this in the same way as the previous speaker .
I actually welcome the free trade agreement with South Korea .
As far as I can see , it is clearly in the EU 's interest to foster as close a relationship as possible between Europe and the democratic countries of Asia , including South Korea .
For a long time , there was an imbalance in trade between Europe and South Korea because of protectionism , between the EU with its free trade and South Korea with its protectionism .
A few decades ago , South Korea was an agricultural society ; it has developed rapidly into an industrial society , with 81 % of the population now living in urban areas .
The country is now the world 's eleventh largest economy and the EU 's fourth largest trading partner .
South Korea is an important ally in a strategically important area .
Forecasts suggest that the country will have an even more dominant position in the high-tech sector in a decade 's time .
South Korea has to compete with the economic and military giant to the north of it , China , which is , at the same time , the country 's main trading partner .
In competitive terms , China has an almost inexhaustible resource in the form of cheap labour .
Consequently , China is also the country 's main trade competitor .
By imposing quality requirements on South Korea , the EU can make the country 's goods better suited for export to the US and Europe - much better than those from China , and I imagine we are all interested in bringing that about .
This free trade agreement will , as has been mentioned , remove tariffs worth EUR 1.6 billion a year .
That may be a very good thing in general , but for me , the question is whether South Korean trade and industry has been sufficiently liberalised and whether the roadmap for the free trade agreement can be met , taking into consideration the fact that South Korea still gives extraordinary subsidies to certain industries such as the pharmaceutical and electronics sectors .
Mr President , during the last few months , the EU has experienced several changes and transitions .
We have had three Commissioners on International Trade , two EU Council Presidents and the Lisbon Treaty .
During that time , I argued with all the top officials about the need to fine-tune the South Korea-EU FTA , so as to get on board deeply dissatisfied industries , particularly the EU automotive industry .
The strongest arguments were mainly in the area of DDB safeguards and non-tariff barriers .
When the new Commissioner , in response to my question during the hearings , stated that DDB deserved a closer look , I felt optimistic .
Even the USA has shelved its FTA with South Korea partly because of similar objections from the car industry .
This is the first major FTA .
This is a template .
We need to do it right .
There must be a level playing field for both parties .
Please do not get me wrong .
I am a strong proponent of FTAs .
I understand their positive impact on GDP and employment , but we should also understand that , when the competitive advantage is one-sided , benefits will diminish and , in the worst case , could even be negative .
Employees in the EU deserve better .
Perhaps we should turn to our transatlantic partner and together demand small adjustments which would at least partially satisfy these giant industries and get new FTAs to work as soon as possible .
There will always be some unsatisfied elements but , all in all , FTAs must be beneficial to citizens of both sides .
It is my responsibility to monitor the situation and ensure that my constituents , and EU citizens , get a fair deal .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in September , we were already debating in plenary the free trade agreement between the European Union and Korea .
There were already many of us who expressed our fears about the negative consequences of this agreement , especially with regard to the automobile sector .
We did not think that events would prove us right so quickly .
On 21 January , Opel announced the closure of its Anvers site , the production activities of which will be relocated to South Korea .
Are we to believe that this decision has nothing to do with the free trade agreement that has just been negotiated ?
Allow me to spot a connection there .
During this period of economic crisis in which the workers are the first to pay for the mistakes of the financiers , the Commission is duty-bound to consider , now more than ever , the job-related consequences of the agreements that it negotiates .
It is no longer possible to give a simplistic response to these employees , for whom we know full well it will be very difficult to find another job .
We cannot say to them that international trade is a game of winners and losers and that , unfortunately , they are the ones who will be sacrificed and that we can do nothing about it .
We expect answers from you today , Commissioner .
First of all , we want to know whether your Directorate-General has assessed the impact of this agreement on jobs in Europe , for I must tell you that the figure greedily announced , that is , the EUR 19 billion profit that European exporters are expected to make , does not convince us .
Where does this figure come from ?
On what study is it based ?
Leaving aside the expected positive effects , however , have the negative effects also been taken into account ?
The Commission has drafted a regulation on the methods for implementing safeguard measures within the context of this agreement .
These methods relate , in particular , to duty drawback , an advantage that has never before been conceded , not even to our developing trade partners .
The proposals put forward provide for complicated procedures for invoking and enforcing the safeguard clauses .
Nevertheless I feel reassured because , for the first time ever , Parliament will soon be able to express an opinion on this text under the ordinary legislative procedure .
I would , however , like to point out that Europe 's employment problem will not be solved by palliative measures taken on a case-by-case basis .
That is why I , together with my whole group , am calling for a real European industrial policy , one that represents a genuine strategy for the future of our industries , to be drawn up at last .
In a context of economic crisis and of intensified global competition , this industrial policy must be coordinated effectively with the common trade policy so that our free trade agreements do not lead to job cuts in Europe .
A second matter on which we expect clarification is that of the protocol on cultural cooperation included in the agreement .
Several Member States have reacted very harshly to the negotiations initiated with Korea , a country that has failed to ratify the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions .
I condemn the very principle of initiating negotiations on this topic , and I believe that cultural issues should be handled separately from trade negotiations and placed in the hands of the Commissioner for Culture so as to prevent this matter from becoming a negotiating item under the same heading as conventional goods or services .
To conclude , Commissioner , you know how essential it is for MEPs to be kept fully informed of the negotiations under way and to be involved at all stages , including from the point at which the negotiating mandate is defined .
Leaving aside our differences in approach , I would like to point out that better upstream consultation of Parliament would have made it easier for us to understand the strategy being pursued .
I therefore trust I can count on your support and on that of your Commission to assist us in our future work , with everyone acting within the scope of his responsibilities , but always for the benefit of a trade policy that is obviously more European in scope , but that is , above all , fairer .
Thank you , Mr Arif , but the interpreters are still having problems keeping up with you .
They keep signalling to me to tell me that they cannot keep up with you .
It is all very well to make a long speech , much longer than the speaking time permits , but the fact is it is not being interpreted .
Therefore , only you yourself and the French speakers in the House are following what you are saying .
Mr President , the proposal of a free trade agreement between the European Union and South Korea has been considered unfair and unbalanced by the Catalan and the European car industry .
This industry and also the European textile sector have expressed concerns on specific issues such as the duty drawback system and the safeguard clause .
Also , the European Trade Unions Federation has criticised this free trade agreement .
South Korea has not ratified any of the fundamental conventions of the International Labour Organisation .
South Korea persists in repressing trade union rights .
Moreover , we are aware that , for this free trade agreement with South Korea , there was a clear division among the European Commission college and also among the European Commission services , in particular , between DG Taxation and Customs Union and DG Trade , on the duty drawback system .
As far as the DG Taxation and Customs Union is concerned , the duty drawback system creates economic distortion as it is actually an export subsidy .
This should create a clear competitive advantage against European industry in favour of Korean industry in the European Union .
The same Korean trade investment promotion agency has calculated this advantage as at least EUR 1 300 per car .
Therefore , does the new Commission consider this free trade agreement a fair trade agreement ?
Will the new Commission provide Parliament with a full , up-to-date impact assessment and analyses about this duty drawback system ?
( PL ) Mr President , we are discussing , today , a very important agreement , which is going to be a model for agreements with other countries in the Far East , so careful reflection and analysis are needed .
We must not be pressurised into acting too quickly .
I support free competition , and think its influence on stabilisation of the political situation and on economic development is unquestionable , but it must be competition which is balanced , and which is based on competition between technologies or product production costs , and not on instruments such as duty drawback , which is included in the agreement and serves the interests , quite frankly , of only one party .
We have an economic crisis , and we must , today , be particularly sensitive to the situation in Europe - we must take particular responsibility for the future of European industry .
This is not only a question of the motor industry , but is also about the electronics and textiles industries .
Numerous branches of industry , including many from Poland , are complaining about this agreement .
Therefore , it is my conviction that we should act as follows .
Firstly , we must be sure of the effects of the agreement , and for this we should also work with those industries which have reported misgivings about the agreement , and not only with those which think they will win on this agreement .
I expect the Commission to produce a very comprehensive analysis of the consequences of bringing this agreement into force .
Secondly , we must look very carefully at the safeguarding measures and at how to construct them so that the agreement will , in fact , be advantageous to both sides , and not just to South Korea .
Thirdly , we cannot introduce this agreement provisionally before Parliament is sure that it is , in fact , advantageous to all countries of the European Union and does not establish any kind of unjustified advantage for Korean industry .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to put two questions on the importance of this agreement for the commercial policies of the EU to the Commissioner in charge of trade .
In fact , since the launch of the Global Europe strategy in 2006 , aimed at strengthening the role of international trade in the European Union 's economic strategy , this is the first and only free trade agreement that has been negotiated , but not yet ratified , in which the trade partnership has been significant .
How does the Commission view its own role and the meagre results achieved in the light of the objectives of the Global Europe strategy ?
Does the Commission consider , then , that the credibility of its own trade policy is at stake in this treaty , and that this credibility also depends on its ratification and approval by Parliament ?
Secondly , this treaty involves only one country , so it is a bilateral agreement .
We know that the ambitious multilateral trade agreement under the World Trade Organisation is merely marking time , with no immediate prospects .
The various regional agreements proposed by the European Union have failed almost everywhere , or clearly have no real prospects .
To sum up , does this mean that this bilateral agreement is testament to the failure of EU investment in bilateral and regional agreements , and that we will henceforth be condemned to bilateralism ?
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is very clear as far as the European Union 's trade policy is concerned .
We are firm defenders of free trade and it is certainly vital that Europe continues negotiating trade agreements with other countries because they generate new opportunities for European companies , that is to say , new jobs , which are very much required in light of the serious current economic crisis .
I did very much like your words Commissioner , because I also believe that it is very important that these agreements contain sufficient guarantees to avoid signing clauses which are unbalanced and unfair for European industry .
The agreement with South Korea has been put forward by the Commission as the first in a new generation of more ambitious trade agreements for Europe , hence the importance of this agreement .
It is not a question of whether it is a small country or not ; it is a question of not weakening our capacity for negotiation in future agreements with much larger countries .
Therefore , we are not against the South Korea free trade agreement ; however , we do want certain paragraphs to be studied more rigorously , which we believe create unfair competitive disadvantages for certain European industrial sectors and give Korean producers an unfair advantage .
Commissioner , I want you to clearly explain to me why the safeguard clause for the duty drawback enters into force in five years .
On the last opportunity I had to speak to you , you stated that the reason was that tariffs on vehicles were also dismantled after five years .
The agreement stipulates that they will dismantle the tariffs for vehicles which weigh more than five tonnes after five years .
However , for vehicles which weigh less than five tonnes , which are all standard vehicles , the 10 % tariff will be dismantled in three years .
What is the reason for this two-year time lapse Commissioner ?
I would also like to receive more details regarding any updates on this aspect you mentioned .
What is the point of correcting these problems ex post when the whole reason for having a safeguard clause is to anticipate possible negative consequences ?
( DE ) Mr President , the EU should only conclude free trade agreements with countries which show full respect for human rights .
It seems fundamental to me that the core labour standards of the International Labour Organisation should be implemented and , above all , complied with .
The labour clauses in the contract are good , but they do not go far enough .
There have been cases in Korea , in particular in recent months , in which there have been fundamental breaches of trade union rights , such as the right to collective bargaining and the right to freedom of organisation .
Throughout the negotiating process , the European trade unions and , in particular , the unions in the metal industry , have highlighted these cases , specifically with regard to the problems to be expected in the automotive sector .
The case of Opel in Antwerp has been mentioned several times .
To reiterate , operations have not only been moved because of overcapacity , as the management has repeatedly claimed , but primarily in order to relocate production to South Korea .
Who will benefit from this ?
Is it possible that this is an advance effect of the free trade agreement ?
Another sector with problems which has not received as much attention is the shipbuilding industry .
In its ten-year plan which forms part of an act of state , Korea has made it an objective to ensure that more than 90 % of the companies supplying the Korean shipbuilding industry are based in Korea .
This makes the situation for European competitors and , in particular , for the employees in the industry , very difficult .
( Question on the basis of Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Regner , thank you very much for this opportunity .
You have referred to the situation with Opel in Antwerp .
I would like to ask you whether you agree with me that Opel has been in serious financial difficulty for several months , that the company could produce far more cars than it is currently doing and that Opel 's poor economic situation cannot be caused by a free trade agreement that has not yet come into force .
( DE ) Mr President , of course , it is true that there are serious economic problems .
That is very much the case .
However , the company management and , in particular , Mr Reilly , have breached a delta agreement .
Under the terms of this agreement , the Opel site in Antwerp was given the assurance that SUVs would be produced there .
These cars are now not being manufactured in Antwerp , but in South Korea .
As far as I see it , this is , in very simple terms , a case of moving existing operations from Opel in Antwerp to South Korea .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr De Gucht , I have three questions for you .
My first question concerns the need for fair competition conditions .
The fact that employees ' rights in South Korea are restricted means that there are unfair competitive conditions , which include the question of collective action .
Paragraph 314 of the South Korean Criminal Code refers to the crime of ' disrupting operations ' .
This is used to prevent strikes and to limit the rights of trade unions , for example , in the case of Ssangyong .
I would also like to know why we are concluding free trade agreements with countries such as South Korea and Colombia which have the most problems with the standards of the International Labour Organisation .
Therefore , my first question is this : How do you propose to use the free trade agreement to ensure that there are no unfair competition conditions in South Korea caused by restrictions on employees ' rights ?
My second question relates to the problems in the car industry , which several other speakers have also referred to .
It is very important in this case that there are sensible safeguard clauses .
General safeguard clauses are currently in place for major market disruptions and for the duty drawback system .
I am not able to understand this fully .
Mr De Gucht , perhaps you could explain the safeguard clauses to me in simple terms .
I would particularly like to know who can trigger them and when .
My third question concerns the new contractual basis for our cooperation introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
This includes approving safeguard clauses and implementation as part of the codecision process .
Can you guarantee that the free trade agreement will not be put into force until Parliament has approved this procedure and only after Parliament has exercised its rights and adopted the safeguard clauses ?
( NL ) Commissioner , I am sure you agree with me that free trade agreements are not concluded for ideological reasons , but because we are well aware of the impact that they have on society , both socially and economically .
You , yourself , referred to a number of impact studies , but I have never read an impact study that sets out what the impact is , sector by sector , on employment .
Many people have already spoken about the automotive sector .
Well , we , both I and my home region , but also still your region too , to an extent , Commissioner , have discovered , in the meantime , what that impact is .
The Opel car plant in Antwerp is closing down , and the trade unions there - and these are people who have been working on this for years and years - are absolutely convinced that this trade agreement is a very important part of Opel 's much talked-about business plan , a plan which we simply do not get to see and which lies at the heart of the decision not to build the SUV in Antwerp .
I have two questions for you about this .
Do you know what the impact of this agreement is on employment , the effect on employment for each economic sector ?
If not , are you prepared - and I want to press you on this - to have an impact study carried out at this point , in order to ensure that we , in Parliament , have the information that we need when we ultimately have to give our consent ?
My second question is , do you intend , in future - with this being the start of your term of office - to consistently carry out this kind of impact study at the social level ?
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome this trade settlement between the European Union and South Korea .
In welcoming this , I would say that , in all agreements of this nature , there are going to be winners and losers .
Unfortunately , in this instance , the Automobile Association seems to be pointed out as the loser , but I would say that , with automobile demand likely to grow over the next 20 or 30 years fourfold at least , there may be an opportunity there .
But the overall question pointed out by the Commissioner of the EUR 19.1 billion advantage to the European Union and EUR 12.5 billion to South Korea is a good deal in my book .
If it was the other way round , we might have cause for concern .
Also , we cannot underestimate the political importance of South Korea psychologically in extending the hand across the oceans to Asia - something which is very important to them - and also , where we are concerned , in re-establishing our place in the world , which was somewhat undermined in Copenhagen .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , this agreement with Korea will be the first to truly implement the Global Europe strategy as an important agreement , and it ought therefore to be particularly exemplary because it will set a precedent .
However , we note that , firstly , there is a problem concerning the information given to Parliament , particularly with regard to the safeguard clauses , then a problem concerning the method used , since we have already been told that it might be possible to implement temporary provisions or temporarily to implement the agreement without even waiting for Parliament 's assent , and finally , a problem concerning the clarity and transparency of the trade framework - this was raised by Mr Rinaldi - since , through the duty drawback , we could in fact have an agreement indirectly concluded with China .
I believe we must be particularly clear about these free trade agreements .
In addition , there is a consistency problem with regard to the aim of developing social and environmental standards .
When it comes to compliance with social standards , we are , for example , a very long way from what the United States has negotiated in its agreement with Korea .
Finally , to be honest , when one looks at the economic situation we are in , with a car industry ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to put a supplementary question to the Commissioner .
We understand that we do not have a clear framework as far as the procedure for any ratification by national parliaments is concerned , but what majority will have to vote in this agreement in the Council ?
Is it a qualified majority or a majority by consensus ?
This is something else I have not grasped and I believe it is important to understand this aspect of the legal basis .
I would also add that I have been surprised by the tone of this debate .
I feel that I have heard many concerned voices and I therefore again call on the Commission for us to work together .
Commissioner , we are sure you will do an excellent job but , in the words of another Korean proverb , ' ask the way even when you already know it ' .
( PL ) Mr President , the free trade agreement with South Korea seems a very good development .
An agreement on a free trade area will lead to a significant growth in reciprocal trade .
Thanks to the elimination of Korean import duties of around EUR 1.6 billion and EU import duties of around EUR 1.1 billion , there will be a significant liberalisation of trade in important sectors of industry and in services .
This concerns mainly telecommunications , environment protection , transport , finance and legal services .
In addition , the free trade agreement will contribute to an increase in transparency on the question of intellectual property protection and public procurement .
Thanks to the agreement , Korea will also honour EU certificates and quality standards .
The agreement is particularly important in the present economic situation , because it will allow for faster development in EU countries .
We realise , however ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , with respect to the procedure - because a lot of questions have been asked about that - obviously , this will be the first time that Parliament has had to give its consent on the agreement as such and also the first time that the safeguard clauses will have to be adopted by codecision .
This has consequences , I think , for the relationship between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
The safeguard clauses are a proposal .
The Commission adopted its proposal yesterday and it will be presented to the Council and Parliament very soon .
Obviously , then , it will be a codecision procedure , so I do not understand the many remarks in which you put questions and express doubts about safeguard clauses .
There will only be safeguard clauses that get your agreement , because it is codecision : it is as simple as that .
So you should not be so worried about it and about ratification by Parliament .
That implies , of course , that there will be a debate in your committee .
I already said during the hearing that I am not going to make a proposal for an early , provisional application unless Parliament has itself pronounced on the agreement , whether as formal ratification by Parliament or by some other procedure that we can establish between the INTA Committee and the Commission .
That remains open and can be discussed , but in any case , Parliament will have the opportunity to give its political judgment on the agreement before any proposals for early application are put forward .
Another question is whether this is a mixed agreement or an agreement which is only about Community competences .
The Legal Service is still preparing an opinion on that , but we cannot rule out the possibility that in the end , we will have to consider this a mixed agreement , which implies that all the national parliaments will also have to ratify it , and which could also have - in reply to Niccolò Rinaldi 's question - consequences for the voting procedure in Council .

So much for the procedure : you will have every opportunity to express yourselves , and we will scrupulously respect this - if we did not do so , I think we would get into trouble !
Member of the Commission . - ( NL ) I will now deal with the issue of Opel .
I understand that it is not just in Belgium , but also in other Member States , that the Opel issue arises .
What I do not understand , however , is when people say ' look , there is a direct link between the free trade agreement with South Korea and the fact that there are plans to make closures at Opel in Europe ' .
Opel announced back at the beginning of 2009 that it intended to cut capacity in Europe by 20 % .
It is true that this can be done in such a way that , ultimately , all the factories remain open , on condition , of course , that Opel also views it as possible , from a business point of view .
It is also the case , however , that the decision to actually produce the SUVs in South Korea came , at any event , after the agreement with Magna had been reached but before the conclusion of the negotiations over a free trade agreement between the European Union and South Korea .
The assertion made by both Mr Belet and Mrs Van Brempt thus does not fit in with the timeline .
The agreement with South Korea was only concluded afterwards .
It is possible , in fact , to argue the opposite case , I would have thought , in other words , that some Member States only agreed to a free trade agreement with South Korea on condition that they knew what was going to happen with Opel .
I think , in fact , that you have to go with this opposite case if you look at the correct timeline as it developed in practice .
Incidentally , I would like to add , for Mr Belet 's benefit , that there is a small mathematical error in the comparison he quoted , where he stated that South Korea exports 15 times as many cars to Europe as Europe exports to South Korea .
This may be related to policies that I was recently involved in in Belgium .
The present figures are that 37 000 cars are being exported to South Korea and approximately 440 000 imported from there .
What is more , your line of reasoning is also faulty , as you are presuming that the two markets are the same size .
If you compare the two markets , you have to observe that the South Korean market , of course , is much smaller than the European one , and that means that you are comparing apples with oranges .
When it comes to market penetration , we actually send the same percentage from Europe to South Korea as comes the other way : approximately 3 to 4 % .
This is what really matters .
Something that I think is actually far more important in estimating the market situation is the fact that South Korean manufacturers have recently opened major factories in Europe , namely in the Czech Republic and in Slovakia , which will be capable of producing around half a million cars between them on an annual basis , so the reality is perhaps that , in future , Korean cars produced in Europe will largely , in effect , be the cars that reach the market here .
What you have there is a clear shift , and so what you actually see across the car market as a whole is that there is a displacement taking place towards the major markets where , in the end , cars can be bought and sold .
As a final thought about what is , in any event , a particularly regrettable situation at Opel - for which , in my view , a solution is ultimately on the way - I think that one must not overlook the fact that the manufacturers follow the customers , and not the other way around , and that that is one of the most important reasons for specific policy decisions in a shrinking European car market also faced with a number of car makers who have found themselves in a difficult financial situation .
I will , perhaps , make one last comment about the tension between bilateral and multilateral negotiations , an issue also raised by Mr Moreira .
Negotiations based on the Doha Round have been taking place since 2001 , which is now nine years , and there is still no solution to the impasse .
I am a great supporter of multilateralism , and I think that we do also need to bring a positive conclusion to Doha , specifically retaining the development elements that it contains .
I believe this also because its multilateral framework also provides the greatest legal certainty for international trade .
I do think , however , that while we await the conclusion of the Doha Round - which I hope will be in 2010 or at the latest in early 2011 - we cannot sit on our hands in relation to the bilateral front .
What I think is very important is that , when it comes to bilateral arrangements , we only conclude agreements that go further than Doha , so as not to undermine what is decided in the Doha Round , insofar as we are setting higher criteria .
That , too , explains the drawing up of the free trade agreement with South Korea .
It is not , in my opinion , of such a nature that it undermines multilateralism .
If we were to undercut the multilateral track , then that would indeed be the effect , but that is not the intention , nor will it be in the forthcoming negotiations .
The debate is closed .
The next session will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 11 February 2010 , from 09.00 to 13.00 and from 15.00 to 17.00 .

The agenda is published in the session document which contains the same name and also on the European Parliament 's website .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23.30 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 09.00 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Framework Agreement on prevention from sharp injuries in the hospital and healthcare sector ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the motion for a resolution by Elizabeth Lynne and Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the EMPL committee , on the proposal for a Council directive implementing the framework agreement on prevention from sharp injuries in the hospital and healthcare sector concluded by HOSPEEM and EPSU .
author . - Mr President , there are over one million preventable needle-stick injuries on healthcare workers each year across the whole of the EU .
Many of those who are injured , and their families , face an agonising wait to find out whether they have contracted a blood-borne infection such as HIV or hepatitis C.
The risks of infection following an accident are not insignificant .
Experts tell us the chances of infection are one in three for hepatitis B , 1 in 30 for hepatitis C and 1 in 300 for HIV .
Take the case of Juliet Young .
Juliet was a nurse who died in 2008 , seven years after contracting HIV while taking blood from an infected patient in a London hospital .
Juliet accidentally pricked her thumb on the needle after it slipped when she was taking a sample .
Or the case of a dental nurse working in a prison who was pricked by a needle that was used on an inmate who had hepatitis A , B , and C and was HIV positive .
Imagine the agonising wait that she had ; she has now discovered that she has contracted hepatitis C. This nurse , and many others like her , are continuing to campaign on this issue .
I first became involved in 2004 when I visited a hospital in my constituency at the instigation of Health First Europe , and then on World Aids Day on 1 December that year I hosted an exhibition with Stephen Hughes in this Parliament .
Healthcare workers from across the European Union visited us , visited the Parliament , desperate for our help .
Those of you who had the opportunity to meet with those nurses and other healthcare workers could not have failed to have been moved by their plight , and in 2006 we passed a Parliament resolution on protecting European healthcare workers from blood-borne infections due to needle-stick injuries .
This resolution called on the Commission to submit a legislative proposal to amend Directive 2000 / 54 / EC on biological agents within three months .
This proposal never came , but Stephen Hughes and I did not give up the fight .
I personally have amended many reports and resolutions calling for action , spoken in plenary on this issue a dozen times and tabled countless parliamentary questions .
Following meetings with Commissioner Špidla , we were told in 2008 that a proposal was being prepared by the Commission and we were on the brink of achieving this .
However , at the last minute , this was blocked as the social partners promised they would try , at long last , to reach an agreement , much to our frustration .
A comprehensive agreement on the necessary requirements was eventually reached by the social partners in the summer of 2009 .
My resolution supports the agreement wholeheartedly .
The Council must adopt the proposed directive urgently so that the Commission can ensure that it is implemented effectively and without delay .
Healthcare workers across Europe are depending on us .
Our healthcare workers cannot wait and should not continue to be placed in danger .
It is really time now to act decisively .
author . - Mr President , this is an important piece of health and safety legislation .
Liz has outlined some of the background to it .
It has been a long time in the making - six years from the first meetings we had , as she has mentioned .
It is good to see Commissioner Andor here this morning , but it is a pity , in a way , that Commissioner Špidla is not here .
We have often criticised him here in this Chamber , but we could have congratulated him this morning for eventually taking the initiative to bring forward this proposal on needle-stick injuries , sharps injuries .
We took a while to persuade him to act .
His services , in fact , were the people who kept advising that he should not act , that the directive agreed in 2000 on the protection of workers from the risks arising from exposure to biological agents , combined with the risk assessment elements of the 1989 framework directive , were enough to prevent these sorts of injuries , but eventually we persuaded those services that , with one million injuries per year , clearly something was wrong .
We needed specific legislation to address this problem , as they have in the United States and in parts of Spain , and it works there very effectively .
Eventually the Commissioner agreed to act and in 2008 , as Liz has said , did draft an amendment to the 2000 directive , but then HOSPEEM and EPSU , the public service unions , signalled their desire to formulate an agreement .
They formulated that agreement .
I am glad that they have .
It is a good agreement , but it is a little ambiguous in certain parts .
This is why I have tabled an amendment which has been agreed in the Employment Committee , to seek the publication by the Commission of guidance to accompany the directive to ensure the smooth and uniform transposition of this directive into law in all Member States .
We fully support the Commission 's proposal for a directive , and we understand that the agreement from the social partners cannot be touched .
We cannot amend it .
Council cannot amend it .
It is their agreement .
However , the most important part of the agreement , clause 6 , which covers elimination , prevention and protection , unfortunately includes some ambiguity regarding risk assessment and precisely which preventative elements need to be implemented by employers and when .
If this ambiguity is not clarified , then we risk seeing dramatic variability in the application of the directive .
It is for this reason that we are requesting that the Commission produce implementation guidelines to aid employers ' understanding of the risks and necessary preventative measures to ensure a consistent application of the directive .
Needle-stick injuries are the most common and most dangerous form of medical sharp injuries .
Whenever a hollow-bore needle is used on a patient there is a risk of a needle-stick injury that could lead to a serious infection of a healthcare worker because the hollow-bore acts as a reservoir for the patient 's blood or other body fluids .
There is a huge body of independent evidence that has proven that the introduction of improved training , safer working practices and the use of medical devices incorporating safety-engineered protection mechanisms will prevent the majority of needle-stick injuries .
All of these things are necessary , not just one or two - all of those things are necessary .
Studies have also demonstrated that failure to implement any one of these three elements results in a significantly reduced impact .
Similarly , attempts to implement safety-engineered medical devices only in certain areas or on certain patients would be neither practical nor effective .
In those countries where there is existing effective legislation such as America , Canada and parts of Spain , it is clearly mandated that all three of these elements must be implemented to prevent needle-stick injuries .
It is no coincidence that all are the same in this respect .
So that is the ambiguity in clause 6 that we are seeking to overcome through the publication of guidance .
Liz has mentioned the trauma that people affected by needle-stick injuries face .
I have met people during the six years that we have worked on this subject who have suffered needle-stick injuries , and I would really emphasise that trauma .
I met a doctor who gave up medical practice because of a needle-stick injury .
I met a person who has HIV as a result of a needle-stick injury .
I have met people who turned out not to be infected , but only after months of uncertainty as to whether they were infected or not .
I have also met garbage collectors and prison officers who have suffered needle-stick injuries .
They are not covered by this agreement .
That is another area that we need to think about for the future .
Nevertheless it is a good agreement , and I think if we have good guidance to accompany it to ensure uniform application across the European Union , we will all have done a good job and hopefully we will radically reduce that figure of one million needle-stick injuries per year .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank Parliament for its work on this issue .
In particular I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Lynne , for her excellent work in drawing up the motion for a resolution on the Commission 's proposal and for her efforts over a number of years to improve health and safety at work for workers in the hospital and healthcare sector .
I am aware that this is a long-standing concern of this House .
Parliament 's resolution of 24 February 2005 on promoting health and safety in the workplace called for a revision of Directive 2000 / 54 / EC on biological agents at work .
Again , in July 2006 , Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the Commission to submit a proposal for a directive amending that directive .
In response to the European Parliament , the Commission initiated a two-stage consultation of the European social partners , in accordance with the Treaty provisions .
In response to this consultation two European social partner organisations acting in the hospital and healthcare sector , the European Hospital and Healthcare Employers ' Association and the European Federation of Public Service Unions , negotiated with success a framework agreement in July 2009 .
As you know , the Commission proposal aims to implement this agreement .
We all know that injuries caused by needles and other sharp instruments are one of the most common and serious risks to healthcare workers in Europe , in particular in certain departments and activities , such as emergencies , intensive care and surgical operations .
I am more than happy that your resolution recognises that the Commission 's proposal incorporates the major points in Parliament 's resolution of 6 July 2006 .
It was indeed the Commission 's wish to have these points in the agreement .
I also agree with you that the entry into force of this agreement will represent an important contribution to the protection of workers active in the hospital and healthcare sector .
With this agreement , and hopefully the forthcoming adoption by the Council of the proposed directive , workers in the hospital and healthcare sector will benefit from an integrated approach , establishing policies in risk assessment , risk prevention , training , information , awareness-raising and so on .
Such measures , which are also minimum requirements , are not only much welcomed but above all absolutely necessary .
Let me just conclude by thanking you once again for supporting the Commission 's proposal , which I hope the Council will adopt very shortly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been said , needle-stick and other sharp injuries are among the most common risks faced by healthcare workers in Europe , and they therefore represent a serious problem both for the healthcare sector and for society in general .
The aim of this Commission proposal is to allow the Council to implement the framework agreement signed by the European Hospital and Healthcare Employers ' Association and the European Federation of Public Service Unions .
The main aim of the agreement is to ensure greater protection for workers against the risk of injuries caused by all sharp or pointed objects used in medicine .
This agreement therefore represents an important step towards an increase in safety within the hospital sector .
As we all agree , the consequences of sharp injuries can be extremely serious and can cause the spread of diseases such as viral hepatitis and AIDS .
That being said , I must stress the need for an integrated and , at the same time , realistic approach to this problem .
In this respect I believe that the administrative , financial and legal constraints deriving from the agreement should not be excessive and therefore should not be such as to harm the development of small- and medium-sized enterprises operating in the healthcare sector , or else these enterprises could have serious difficulties in complying with the terms of the agreement .
Just as commendable , moreover , is the anticipated - to ' anticipated ' I would add ' desirable ' - option for the Member States to adopt more effective provisions and measures than those contained in the agreement with the aim of protecting workers .
Lastly , I call on the Commission to oversee the application of this agreement and to regularly update Parliament , which often focuses on this issue , so as to ensure that the agreement is monitored properly and that the need for any future amendments is examined in depth .
Mr President , I would like to begin by also congratulating my colleague Mrs Lynne for the excellent work she has done in our committee , for her ability to reconcile all points of view and for the work that she has carried out over such a long time .
I congratulate Commissioner Andor .
It is your second day Commissioner and you have made a good start to your job faced with your responsibilities .
Furthermore , there is now also a second directive relating to microfinancing which has been of concern to this House for some time .
You will also have the honour of resolving two problems in two days ' time which will open up great possibilities for many Europeans .
I also thank Commissioner Špidla for the help he has provided on this matter .
You have already been made aware , and I am not going to waste too much time in reminding you , that the framework agreement is a very important legal instrument for health workers .
They are affected by more than one million accidents each year , which also implicate serious health risks , such as viral infections , hepatitis C , AIDS and so forth .
However , this is not only of significance to health workers but also to hospital patients and their families .
Essentially , millions of Europeans will be better protected by this instrument .
Thus , we have achieved this following a long journey which this House embarked upon by knocking on the doors of the Commission and the Council , and we must remember the excellent work done by Mr Hughes throughout this long process .
Perhaps I can briefly explain why the socialist MEPs are very pleased today .
I feel that today is a day to mention a few things .
Firstly , the importance of health and safety in the workplace .
It is crucial to create a work environment which is as safe as possible for workers , for families and for citizens .
In human terms , we have already referred to all the implications of these types of injuries for workers and for citizens , but there are also implications in economic terms .
A few days ago in this House , the Bilbao Agency spoke to us about some of the campaigns it is carrying out to promote health and safety and it even revealed economic studies which demonstrate that in Australia , for example , accidents and illnesses account for more than 6 % of GDP in the national economy .
What is the price paid for a lack of social security ?
What is the price paid for a lack of hygiene and safety in the workplace ?
It is therefore an investment in human capital , but also an investment in civilisation and economic terms .
Secondly , the importance of prevention , as prevention is better than cure .
Action must be taken before incidents occur so as to prevent them .
Prevention , which is a complex issue , requires increasing awareness , information , training and supervision in relation to each of these tasks .
Thirdly , it is vital to also mention at this stage the importance of social partners , the importance of trade unions .
Without them this framework agreement would certainly not exist and neither would there be any kind of prevention .
Sometimes people criticise trade unions and say that they are a cost to society but they forget the huge benefits which they provide , as they are the ones behind the introduction of such important policies in the workplace such as those within the framework agreement .
Finally , I must mention the importance of this House , which must defend its position before public opinion and before other Community institutions , because without Parliament this framework agreement would not exist , and the importance of Parliament 's cooperation with the Commission and the Council has also been exemplary .
I appreciate the Spanish Presidency 's support and I hope that this will serve as a good precedent for a new phase of cooperation between our institutions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I was not going to take my speaking time on behalf of the group but I thought I could actually split it and come in afterwards but apparently , on a resolution , that is not the case ; so I was informed this morning that I was coming in now .
It does give me the opportunity to thank all the shadow rapporteurs whom I did not thank before ; also to again thank Stephen Hughes , because it was Stephen and I in 2004 that actually went round the hospitals with John Bowis , who was a Conservative MEP .
The three of us from the political parties went out to the hospitals to find out for ourselves , and I think that was what was so important .
In this place we have to be driven by what is actually needed by the people on the ground and by listening to nurses and doctors and healthcare workers , it was important to take their views into account .
Stephen mentioned implementing guidelines , and I would like to find out really whether you do know whether the Commission is thinking of bringing forward any implementing guidelines for this ; I think it is very important that we have these .
Also , I was wondering whether you knew of the timetable that the Council was thinking of because it is absolutely important that we get the timetable through very quickly because after all those healthcare workers have waited so many years .
We do not want any more needle-stick injuries unnecessarily during that waiting time .
We have had too many over the last few years .
Also the point which has already been made that although this is for the health sector only at the present moment I would like to see it extended to other sectors like the prisons in particular .
I think it is very important that prison officers are protected as well .
There are so many things that are important for those particular workers but one of the key things for this is recapable needles .
I think along with all the other issues in the resolution it is very important that those healthcare workers are not subjected to unnecessary needle-stick injuries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I too would like to thank Stephen Hughes and Liz Lynne for their work on this and indeed to welcome this action , although we would like to have seen it earlier .
As has been pointed out , the USA has had legislation in place since 2001 .
We can now see such legislation in certain parts of the European Union , and at last we are catching up , but , of course , not before many people will already have been affected by this problem .
In terms of the risk , the World Health Organisation estimates that , while 90 % of exposures to this risk are in the developing world , 90 % of reports about occupational infection occur in the United States and the European Union .
We know that there is a major issue of under-reporting sharps injuries : estimates range between 40 % and 75 % and that is huge .
Therefore I think we should welcome the fact that , in the social partners ' agreement , clause 11 talks about the duty to report under a no-blame culture .
But I think we also need to ask why people are not reporting .
Presumably part of it is that they do not understand the risks or that they fear the consequences - not least , perhaps , to their future employment - of reporting such an injury .
Indeed in some places we have reports of ineffectual follow-up , in other words , even where people do report , nothing very much happens .
Certainly they are not getting even the medical support that they need , let alone the emotional support - or indeed , in some cases , alternative employment , if it is considered that , when they have contracted something like HIV , there may be a risk to patients .
We have research which shows that health workers working outside hospitals are more likely to be dissatisfied with the response of employers .
People have spoken about the scope of this action .
Of course it covers the healthcare sector , and we are very pleased that the agreement covers trainees and subcontractors .
I am not entirely sure whether that includes cleaning staff , and I would welcome some clarification on that .
But it does not yet cover workers in other professions at risk , so we hope Member States could look at that .
The training obligations are extremely important , and I hope Member States will take this seriously : both the giving and receiving of training should be mandatory , as should induction for all new and temporary staff - because I think there is a feeling that if you train people once you never have to look at that issue again .
At the moment there is a lack of training even where employers have training policies in place .
An issue was raised about the cost .
There are estimates that training and preventative measures , including safer devices , account for about a third of the cost of dealing with sharps injuries .
That is an important saving in cash-strapped times , as well as being an important issue both for the people concerned and employers , who may indeed find themselves at risk of legal action if they are not taking action to prevent such injuries .
Ladies and gentlemen , the agreement on prevention from sharp injuries is historically the first agreement between sectoral social partners .
In view of the fact that there are estimated to be more than one million cases a year of sharp injuries in hospitals in Europe , we do not need convincing here that this is a step in the right direction , as it should be possible to prevent these injuries through proper adherence to the agreement .
In practice this will help to create a safe working environment and to protect health workers from blood-transmitted infections caused by sharp injuries .
Although we can see certain ambiguities in the examples or in the definitions , I believe that all steps will be taken to obtain as much information as possible from the social partners , all of the provisions have been clarified and the Council has therefore adopted the agreement as a whole .
I would like to emphasize at this point that the agreement between employers and employees is in its way a completely unique European legal instrument , which at national level has no parallel in most Member States .
This form of self-regulation , where those affected by a given problem themselves agree in the form of a legal regulation on its resolution , is in my view a model example of European regulation .
It is not the same situation as with CO2 emissions , tax harmonisation or the standardisation of public services , where companies and their employees must passively comply with whatever we and the Member States throw at them , and at great cost too .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking both rapporteurs for the magnificent piece of work they have carried out in preparing this document .
I am also delighted as a doctor that here in the European Parliament we are aware of the urgency of the need for health workers to be better protected from injuries caused by sharp objects and that the regulation responds to this .
I am very uneasy , of course , about the very slow progress of the Commission .
Five years have passed now since the European Commission was first informed about this important issue and almost four years since the European Parliament adopted a resolution requiring a legislative solution to the question of proper protection for health workers in the European Union from blood-transmitted infections .
As a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in the previous parliamentary term I worked together with my colleagues Stephen Hughes and Elizabeth Lynn and others on this resolution and I am disappointed that there has been such a long delay .
I recommend that the measures proposed in the directive are adopted as quickly as possible .
I would like to call for the greatest possible levels of protection and prevention for health workers to be guaranteed as soon as possible .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Lynne , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to tell you how delighted I am this morning that we have agreed this proposal for a directive on the prevention of sharps injuries .
We have here a real health issue , which we must regulate as quickly as possible .
We all know the importance and the dramatic consequences of this type of injury .
I feel I must let you know , Commissioner , that I am confident you will provide a rapid solution for this agreement , which will take us several steps forward on this issue .
I should like to thank Mrs Lynne for all her work .
I should like equally to thank Mr Hughes , because it is our responsibility as MEPs to see to it that our fellow citizens are protected .
They are healthcare professionals , of course - we have spoken a lot about them .
They are cleaners - you have mentioned prison officers - but I should also like to mention people working in the school environment , in all areas of medicine in schools .
However , well beyond this , I consider that it is a question of educating all our fellow citizens , who must not make healthcare workers or those workers that subsequently handle blunt objects take unnecessary risks .
I must say that , along with the rapporteurs who have taken up this issue , we in the European Parliament will be ready and willing to ensure that these texts are implemented by all Member States , and we shall need to have a regular update on their implementation .
This is truly our commitment , our responsibility , and it is something that should be really popular and shared by all .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the older members of Parliament - as this is my first term of office - and my fellow members Mr Hughes and Mrs Lynne and the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs , because I have come in on the tail end of work on an issue which , in a way , also concerns me personally .
My husband is a doctor and , a few years ago , he was infected by a needle .
So I know full well the anxiety experienced by the family of a hospital worker injured by a sharp object .
The days spent waiting for the results were extremely difficult .
I should therefore like , once again , to say thank you for the work which has been done and to express my satisfaction at the fact that , for the first time , we are seeing an association of employers and an association of workers joining forces and agreeing , thereby enabling us to arrive at this motion for a resolution .
I feel that the European Union really is achieving its objectives and is now taking decisions with its citizens , for its citizens .
I remember something which other members have repeated , but I think it is important for us to say it and to always remember it : that a million sharp injuries occur each year .
I cannot overemphasise the role played by the European Parliament , which has been working earnestly on this issue since 2005 .
Given , on the other hand , the lack of staff , a lack which is particularly acute in Greece , I would point out that we really must ensure that this resolution , this directive is applied very quickly .
This is a decision that will also make a practical contribution to the social objectives of the European Union , which include increasing employment .
I would remind the House that the European Commission recently told Parliament , through its re-elected President , that one of the sectors in which it aims to invest are white-collar jobs .
So let us save lives both literally and metaphorically , by creating valuable jobs in these very difficult economic and social times .
To close , I should like to wish the new Commissioner every success in his job and , if I may , say the following : our honourable and experienced colleague , Mr Cercas , said earlier that he hopes that you will enter and proceed with the ' right ' foot .
I hope that you will enter and proceed with the ' left ' foot and I say that because the approach which will wear the social face of Europe on the outside is very important .
We need to focus on the workers , the European people need that .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too will share a personal experience .
I have been working in hospitals for 15 years , and for a time I was in fact a healthcare worker in a critical area : the operating theatre .
I myself have been pricked by potentially infectious needles and instruments .
Therefore , as Mrs Rapti was saying , I can still remember the anxiety I felt when awaiting my test results , but above all how I went through the so-called ' window period ' between the potential contamination and the hypothetical outbreak of disease .
Precisely because of this experience , I believe that we must vote in favour of this resolution , which finally gives legal force to the agreement in safety and protection terms by establishing minimum standards for all healthcare workers .
The healthcare sector accounts for 10 % of the European Union 's labour force and , to be more precise , there are an estimated 1.2 million cases of accidental sharp injuries each year , with the result that healthcare workers gradually become demotivated and very often leave the healthcare profession .
Moreover , the World Health Organisation estimates that 2.5 % of cases may seroconvert to HIV and in 40 % of cases to various forms of hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
Precisely because of the numerous serious risks that are presented all too often on a daily basis , the healthcare profession is considered unattractive , so much so that it has suffered from a shortage of staff in recent years .
Moreover , as has already been mentioned here , the cost for the individual healthcare services that have to deal with the stressful situations to which healthcare workers are subjected during the various monitoring periods , and of the diagnostic tests which , as a protocol , last for at least six months from the time of the accident , is considerable , and then there are the costs associated with the professionals who have unfortunately contracted the disease .
To conclude , in order not to underestimate the problem , when the risk of an accident can be avoided or reduced , it is necessary and right to take every preventive measure available .
In particular , it is the employer 's duty to introduce these measures , and it is the worker 's duty to comply with them .
( PL ) Mr President , we are talking about a problem which has , indeed , grown to be one of the most significant in the area of healthcare .
I will mention some statistics here .
In the European Union , around a million of these unfortunate sharp injuries occur annually .
In the United States , it is estimated to be a matter of around 380 000 , but the Americans themselves say this figure is an underestimate .
Of course , we must stress that this mainly concerns healthcare workers , but there is another aspect , too : we are also talking about patients who are also at risk from this .
In these cases , and we have to be honest here , we are faced with the problem of the huge sums which hospitals are having to pay in compensation .
It is clear , as other speakers have already said , that prevention is of absolutely fundamental significance here .
For prevention is always significantly cheaper than treatment .
The resolution , in my opinion , is fully deserving of support .
It is an answer to expectations expressed by the healthcare sector , and its importance is enhanced because the problem is growing .
The problem of compensation is also growing , and claims are being made by healthcare workers as well as patients .
Indeed , the financial aspect is not insignificant , either .
My political group , on whose behalf I speak , supports the motion for a resolution .
We think this is how we can respond to what is , in fact , a certain challenge of our time , and also meet the needs of consumers and workers in the healthcare sector in the countries of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , I take the floor today to thank all the rapporteurs and everyone who brought about this debate .
Sometimes we say that Europe needs to get closer to its citizens .
With this debate , we have certainly managed to do so .
I was talking to a friend of my own age , a newly-qualified doctor , and when I told him about this debate , he said to me , with a great deal of pleasure , that this was absolutely crucial and that we should try and explain exactly what we were doing to everybody in Europe .
It is important to prevent and to inform those working in hospitals about the risks they run .
It is indeed crucial that we explain to everybody that , when they work such long hours , when spaces are sometimes confined , when patient numbers are very high , it is crucial for these people to be able to take , at the very least , the most important measures needed .
We need healthy staff in hospitals so that we , as patients - at some point - can benefit from their care and the best possible treatment .
( DE ) Mr President , the objective of our policy should be to create an environment which guarantees the highest possible standard of living for the citizens of the European Union .
One key challenge that we face in times like these , therefore , is maintaining and creating jobs .
However , we should not be able to neglect our duty to ensure that these jobs do not make people ill or put their health at risk .
That is why prevention , healthcare and job security are essential .
I strongly believe that the implementation of this directive , which is actually long overdue , will create the right conditions for making jobs safer in every area of healthcare , where staff are confronted with these risks on a daily basis .
I think that it is in the interests of all European citizens that we make this a reality as soon as possible .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to say I am glad that this proposal enjoys such broad support in Parliament .
I regret that the process lasted longer than many of you expected , but I would like to say that I am absolutely convinced that social dialogue has to play a role : we have to respect the opinion of the social partners .
This not only enhances the legitimacy of a decision , it also helps with its implementation , because those who participate in the creation of a new rule are more interested in its success .
This is very important .
We are already aware that there is a working document between the social partners concerning clarification of the framework agreement and also its implementation , so we hope - and I think that we can trust - that this will play a significant role in finalisation in the Council : this will be an answer to some of the concerns about implementation .
Apart from that there is also an interest in the longer term follow-up .
This is also very important in order to monitor how successful this new directive will be .
I would like to draw your attention to the text which says that the signatory parties shall review the application of this agreement five years after the date of the Council decision if requested by one of the parties to the agreement .
In other words , it is very important that the monitoring of implementation and of changes in the occurrence of such injuries should be the starting point , should any of the parties wish to use this opportunity .
Finally , let me say , on what is just the second day of the new Commission - as a few speakers highlighted in their messages - that it is indeed very important that the Commission pays more attention to the forgotten people in Europe , those age groups or professions which cannot easily speak for themselves : they have been sometimes ignored or sidelined in earlier times .
The healthcare sector is clearly an important sector ; we have to give it a lot of devotion and attention .
It is not only that workers in the hospital and healthcare sector are exposed to sharp injuries and infections , we all know that they also work very long hours .
So we have to take a kind of comprehensive approach when considering groups like this , which are very important , especially in times of crisis when the expected fiscal consolidation will affect the conditions these people work in .
This is why this should be very high on our agenda , as it is on my personal agenda .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I am sure we are all grateful to the initiators of this debate .
Let us hope that things improve .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 today .
Online gambling in relation to recent ECJ rulings ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on online gambling in relation to recent ECJ rulings , by Malcolm Harbour , Andreas Schwab , Evelyne Gebhardt , Cristian Silviu Buşoi and Heide Rühle , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection - B7-0235 / 2009 ) .
author . - Mr President , first of all it is a privilege on behalf of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection to welcome our new Commissioner Michel Barnier for the first time to what I am sure will be many interchanges across the floor of this House , and particularly because he has moved seamlessly from his seat over there to his seat at the front in two days .
Commissioner , we are very pleased to have you here .
Secondly , on behalf of the committee , to have the chance essentially to put on record with this question our concern about the developments of online gambling , and indeed the gambling sector overall and some of the many uncertainties that are arising about the whole legislative regime for gambling within the internal market .
I know you will have a considerable in-tray already , Commissioner , but we hope very much that this will be an item that will be close to the top of your in-tray because it is an area which my committee has been very concerned about over the last five years .
We have done a number of own-initiative studies and questions about it and indeed the author of our last major report , Mrs Schaldemose , will be speaking later and so we have a sustained interest in this topic .
As you all know , the Member States have also been meeting together regularly at Council level on various reflection groups about how to tackle the issue about the growth of online gambling in relation to our own countries ' gambling activities .
I think I should make it clear first of all that this question does not in any way presuppose a new liberalisation of gambling markets or indeed not necessarily any new initiative in that direction .
But the fact remains as you all know that the intense and growing popularity of online gambling is certainly also putting pressure on many national monopolies and existing schemes that may be state owned or state controlled , which raise very large amounts of revenue but are of concern to Member States .
What we are saying to you is that , in conjunction with this work that has been going on , there have been a number of references to the European Court of Justice ; you will be aware of the details , and colleagues may talk about that later .
I am not going to go through those , but from our perspective we see that the inconsistencies of some of the approaches to the Court of Justice are not in fact helping but if anything making the situation more complex and opaque than it was before .
We also know that your services have issued a number of infringement cases in gambling issues , not all of them online , but many of them also relate to the whole question of freedom of operators to go and establish themselves in other countries .
All of these things now mean that it is absolutely the right time for the Commission to be collating this information , looking at the process of infringement proceedings , examining the issues raised by the Court of Justice judgments and coming out , first of all , with a clear strategy or clarification about where we are going to move forward and starting to deal with some of those inconsistencies .
From a consumer protection point of view , regulators also need to know where they stand about dealing with online gambling .
Clearly , it can be regulated and it must be regulated - and , indeed , there are many good instances where online gambling providers are clearly committed to providing the tools and the controls to deal with problems of addictive gambling and so on - and , of course , there are issues about fraud and about problems there which we have also debated extensively in our committee .
This is a consumer protection issue as well as being an internal market consistency issue .
Finally , I think we must also respect our citizens and the fact that many of them do want to access online gambling .
I do not think there is any intention whatsoever to try and ban that - indeed it would be practically impossible - but there are major inconsistencies there .
In some countries , for example , it is apparently illegal to take part in an online gambling contest with a company outside your own country .
That cannot be right .
Another inconsistency which has been pointed out by one of my constituents is that if a British citizen accesses the British national lottery online from Spain and wins a prize , it will be illegal for the lottery to pay them in Spain .
There are these inconsistencies that we have to tackle for the good of our citizens and the good of consumers .
Commissioner , that is the context of this question .
You will hear lots of good contributions and interesting views from my colleagues , but I hope that you will make this one of your top priorities in your new role .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you can imagine the great pleasure it gives me to return here just 48 hours after the investiture of the College - for which I thank you - and to continue my work with you , Mr Harbour - and I say this in particular to the members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection - in a different manner , and most likely in a different place , but in the same spirit .
I wish to make three points by way of response at this stage , before listening carefully to what you have to say .
Let me start with your first question .
As you say , the Commission has initiated infringement procedures against a number of Member States in the area of the cross-border provision of sports betting services .
The Commission notes that , in four of the nine infringement cases - that is in Denmark , France , Italy and Hungary - amendments to domestic legislation have been proposed in response to the infringement procedures .
The Commission will continue to work with all Member States concerned to resolve the problems identified in these infringement procedures .
In general , these procedures remain open , but it is for the new Commission to decide how to proceed with these questions .
The second point , Mr Harbour , is the recent ruling of the European Court of Justice in the Portuguese case , where a long-established state monopoly exercises strict control over gambling .
According to the analysis carried out by the Commission 's legal service , this decision will fundamentally change neither the development nor the assessment of the infringement procedures in this area .
Every case has been evaluated according to the evidence presented by each Member State .
Following recent Court rulings , the Commission notes that the Court always requires , in conformity , moreover , with established case law , that any possible restrictions should , firstly , be justified by valid considerations of the public interest and , secondly , should be necessary and proportionate .
This includes the need for the restrictions to be appropriate , coherent and systematic .
It does not therefore follow from the Santa Casa case that the Court has given Member States greater leeway to impose restrictions .
The Court made very precise reference to the operating methods of the Portuguese monopoly , to its very long history and to the very specific circumstances of that country .
For point three of my first speech , I should like to stress , ladies and gentlemen , that the Commission has not ruled out alternatives to infringement procedures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to start a constructive debate on this question with the European Parliament , but also with the Member States and the parties concerned .
I note that there has been no consultation with Member States on this question since the latter chose in 2006 to withdraw gambling from the scope of the Services Directive .
I shall therefore be listening to Member States and I have decided to follow closely the proceedings of the Council working group .
I know that on the initiative of Mrs Schaldemose , Parliament adopted a report on 10 March , even though a number of Members supported an opposing resolution .
As far as I am concerned , Parliament 's work is a good starting point for opening a genuine debate on a potential European solution to this complex issue .
We must undertake a closer examination of the reasons why Member States restrict online gambling services .
In this context , we must , of course , deal with the social aspects , notably the problems of addiction associated with gaming , and I have decided to do so .
Ladies and gentlemen , the College has scarcely been in office two days , and we have not yet adopted our work programme .
Starting from today , I want to carry out this consultation exercise by listening very carefully to everything that each of you has to say .
It - I refer here to consultation - is an exercise in relation to which there are , of course , several possibilities .
In particular , one such possibility that I am prepared to consider is a green paper on this question .
I should like to thank you again for your interest in this important subject and for the contribution you will be making to the Commission 's work that I shall be undertaking .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would like to say how pleased I am that you , Commissioner , have just made it clear that you wish , not only to consider a targeted analysis of the case-law in the Liga Portuguesa case , but also to raise the issue of how the Council working group might respond appropriately to the increase in online gambling .
In the context of this oral question , of course , we are concentrating only on online gambling .
My understanding of the ruling in the Santa Casa case is that , although the European Court of Justice reminded Member States that the gambling market is totally unlike any other market , Member States were still required to agree on rules which would be uniform throughout the European Union .
Up until now , no constructive attempt has been made to do this within the Council , although the Council was , in fact , adamant that it would address the issue itself .
That is why the Commission and Parliament have to work together to make progress in this area and to ask critical questions .
Secondly , I would like to add that I am not persuaded by the arguments put forward by Member States as regards ensuring consumer protection in the gambling market .
Member States claim that , when it comes to online gambling ( and this applies to the Liga Portuguesa and Santa Casa cases , as well ) , they are capable of implementing the objectives of consumer protection and efficiently tackling any attendant crime on their own , without any European involvement .
If you turn this argument on its head , however , the logical conclusion would be that we are in a situation where Europe is much less capable than individual Member States of finding appropriate solutions to the more unfortunate criminal activities which happen on the Internet and other things which take place online .
I find that to be a rather odd conclusion and do not believe it to be the case .
My view is that we will only be able to find a solution to online gambling if we adopt uniform cross-border regulations which safeguard the interests of Member States based on their partially historical structures , but which , as the Committee Chair has pointed out , also place the interests of consumers at the centre of our efforts .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for the information you have given us but , to be honest , I am not entirely satisfied .
The previous Commission set itself the quite clear objective of liberalising the gambling market .
The European Parliament has made it clear , time and again , that this cannot be the right approach , because it was the European Parliament , rather than Member States , that , for example , removed gambling from the scope of the Services Directive .
We took the view that it is not just any other service , that we must ensure that we introduce safeguards which will protect our citizens from organised crime and that we require clear rules to that end .
Nonetheless , the European Commission continues to bring Member States before the European Court of Justice , and it is time that the Commission ceased this practice as it keeps losing cases at the Court .
You simply have to face this fact .
I would , therefore , welcome it , Mr Barnier , if you put what you have just said , that is , that a different approach is needed in this area , into practice because we cannot proceed with things remaining as they are now .
In response to your point , Mr Harbour , I would argue that the rulings of the European Court of Justice have been very consistent and not at all contradictory .
In its judgments , the Court has stated , time and again , that Member States have the right to introduce clear rules , so that we can truly verify whether or not citizens are protected against crime , and that Member States are not under any obligation to open this market up .
Nor are they under any obligation to allow market operators from other Member States to operate on their territory , as long as they make sure that their controls are strong and effective .
That is what we want to see from the European Commission , that it has finally grasped this and acted accordingly .
However , this also means that we have to pay particular attention to online gambling , because the Internet does not recognise any barriers or borders and , of course , because our citizens have access to gambling sites .
We need to think about how we can shape controls and rules in this area , so that our citizens are protected .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , if what you are calling for is further development and harmonisation of the internal market , then we need to have a common set of rules .
There are three aspects to online gambling which ought to be considered in this debate .
How can we best protect the interests of our citizens and consumers ?
How can we best prevent fraud and criminal activity ?
How can we best protect our citizens from harm ?
The European Parliament resolution of 10 March 2009 on the integrity of online gambling has indicated methods and ways to proceed with regard to this issue .
Now , as before , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe endorses the principles concerning the integrity of online gambling contained in Parliament 's resolution of 10 March 2009 .
In accordance with a ruling of the European Court of Justice , each Member State is free , under certain conditions , to regulate online gambling itself and the resolution of 10 March stresses that emphatically .
National rules are better suited to combating match-fixing fraud , although this type of fraud cannot be eliminated entirely , as demonstrated by some recent examples in Germany .
It has to be said , though , that gambling markets are much better regulated at national level , according to the tradition and culture of the country concerned .
Players are offered better protection against addiction , fraud , money laundering and match-fixing if they can play through major online gambling service providers , who always , by definition , operate across borders .
We cannot regulate everything according to the internal market concept and particularly not the prevention of underage gambling or gambling addiction .
Online gambling provides increased opportunities for corrupt practices , such as fraud , match-fixing and illegal betting cartels , as online games can be set up and dismantled very rapidly .
Illegal offshore betting operators present a particular problem in this regard , as it is almost impossible for them to be regulated or controlled .
Profits from gambling should primarily be used for the benefit of society in order to promote amateur sport , amongst other things .
It is best to leave this to the competence of national administrations .
Continuous funding , for culture and professional and amateur sport , for example , gives individual Member States some justification for permitting gambling .
However , a precondition for that is that the risk of addiction must be highlighted and proactively combated .
As the full impact on consumers of the specific forms of gambling services offered online is not yet known , we need to take urgent action to fill this knowledge gap .
It is essential in this context that Member States really do fulfil their tasks .
Market surveillance is also key , when it comes to online gambling .
If we in the European Parliament can agree that Member States have the right , under the principle of subsidiarity , to regulate their gambling markets according to their own traditions and cultures , we also then have to ensure that this is actually happening , through efficient control and market surveillance .
Mr President , having listened to the two previous speakers , there is not much left for me to say .
I would just like to clearly reiterate that our group fully supports Parliament 's motion for a resolution , but that we also wish to question the earlier assertion that the rulings of the European Court of Justice have been ambiguous .
On the contrary , I think that the ECJ rulings have been very clear indeed .
We also very much welcome your saying that you wish to initiate consultations with Member States .
Perhaps I should add that a consultation would be better than an infringement procedure .
Consultation is the right way to solve this problem , taking into account national particularities and for finding a solution for the consumer .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I speak as a former Minister in the UK responsible for gambling controls , so , when we talk about a Europe of free trade and a Europe that opposes protectionism , a Europe which opens markets and tears down trade barriers , of course I am very much in favour of that .
Some of our colleagues , who stand up here and call for a more open Europe , are also the same people who are supporting the maintenance of monopoly structures for the gambling industry .
I might say that monopolies - or they might say I should say - that monopolies are better at controlling and treating the problem of gambling which has been discussed this morning .
That is very interesting , because a lot of the data certainly does not support that argument .
The arguments for protectionism and monopolies in the gambling sector are self-serving ; more control and then more money for national governments .
This is not the open Europe or the transparent Europe that I want .
It is the Europe which says , ' do as I say , not as I do ' .
There is no reason why private gambling providers operating under high levels of regulated protection in one EU Member State should not be allowed to operate in others .
There is no reason why a tightly regulated but open market will not provide an equivalent , if not a higher , level of protection to citizens as any tightly controlled state monopoly .
As we wait for that , the European Court of Justice 's verdicts continue to roll out .
They must be getting a bit sick of the issue in Luxembourg - or , speaking as a lawyer , perhaps they are not quite so sick of it - but above the deafening silence that has come from the Commission so far , it does seem to me that it is now time for action .
The degree of legal uncertainty must be ended .
Can I just say that I think it is important for Parliament to signal its renewed willingness to tackle the issue and to send a strong signal to the Council and Commission that we should not hide away from this .
With a new Commission we do hope for new impetus .
I have great faith in you , Commissioner Barnier .
I hope that you will note the advice that you receive and begin to work out a strategy to ensure that online gambling can become a legitimate part of the internal market with , of course , appropriate regulations in place .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) ' Gokken is dokken ' ( to gamble is to cough up ) is a well-known saying in the Netherlands .
It means that gamblers usually lose .
In addition , gambling is addictive . For young people , in particular , it constitutes a real threat .
If anyone has a romantic notion of gambling , then I have to disappoint them .
Essentially , it is a billion-euro business that is all too often associated with criminal activities .
Therefore , legislation is in force in the Netherlands to combat gambling in easily accessible facilities frequented by large numbers of young people .
However , online gambling - often cross-border in nature - has made it all the more accessible once again .
In this specific case , therefore , rather than relying on the free market , we must not just allow Member States to take restrictive measures but actually encourage them to do so .
In my opinion , the oral question that prompted this debate still relies rather too heavily on market forces .
In particular , I am not convinced that it is possible to speak of ' responsible ' gambling on the Internet .
In my opinion , online gambling should be curbed as much as possible .
The European Court of Justice has recognised that Member States must have scope for taking action , and so I appeal to the Commission not to attempt to lower the level of protection by means of European legislative proposals , but rather to encourage Member States to issue rules affording high levels of protection .
I also call on the Commission to desist from referring Member States to the Court , as Mrs Gebhardt said , but rather to encourage dialogue on the best possible protection .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( SK ) As regards the issue of online gambling , I would like to mention two areas in which I see several unresolved problems .
We are striving to ensure that communications between people are as open as possible .
That also implies open access to the Internet for children and young people .
In Point 16 of its resolution of 10 March 2009 , the European Parliament states that it is parents who bear the responsibility for protecting underage children from online gambling .
Ladies and gentlemen , I ask you , what kind of nonsense is this ?
Who creates the legislative framework , who creates the rules for such businesses ?
Is it parents or someone else ?
We are the ones that are responsible for this kind of business , we create the legislative framework and we create the laws , so it is governments and parliaments that are responsible for protecting children from gambling .
At a time when pornography and gambling come into our homes in 3D format , parents have no hope of protecting their children from these influences or of protecting them from being drawn into such activities .
I therefore think that it is a fundamental duty of the Commission and of the European Parliament to create a legal framework and not to support those who run such businesses through their inaction .
Rather , they should be supporting those that elected them and to whom they are accountable .
Another problem I would like to mention is that of controlling the flow of money .
In various countries money from gambling and that kind of activity is given to support sport , culture and education .
If we are to lose money flows from individual countries to the Bahamas and tax havens then I would like to ask whether some of this money could be brought back to support sport in the various countries .
Because if we operate and play games of chance via the internet then the profits are created elsewhere and not in the countries the players come from .
This issue also remains unresolved and inadequately supervised , and in my opinion there is a real need for the European Commission to wake up and start working on framework rules for this kind of activity .
We have to create the necessary conditions so that , on the one hand , we do not put the health and education of children at risk and , at the same time , we do not miss out on the financial resources that go into gambling .
- ( CS ) The development of online gambling makes it possible to circumvent Member State laws and to launder money with almost no control at all .
For the internal market there is a question mark over the monopoly position of the gambling companies and another question mark over the murky financing of professional sport , precisely on account of its links to gambling .
It increases the risk of addiction , especially for young people .
The European Court of Justice , in view of the public interest , acknowledged the right of governments to ban or to restrict online gambling .
Although online gambling has no borders , its regulation differs in every Member State in terms of levels of taxation , accessibility , checks and the level of legal responsibility of operators .
It is not enough , moreover , to monitor the quality of the official gambling and lottery companies - movement of money must also be monitored .
Effective controls are no longer possible without an agreement on common rules for all 27 Member States .
We therefore asked the Commission last year to propose a framework European regulation for online gambling .
I firmly believe that there should also be a ban on advertisements for online gambling which target young people .
Exposing children to the influence of advertisements for online gambling is the same as exposing them to unlimited supplies of alcohol , cigarettes , drugs or other addictive substances .
The Czech Republic is unfortunately the furthest behind in the Union in terms of regulations .
Not only does it not restrict advertising of this kind , but it also fails to rule out the combination of gambling houses and pawn shops in the vicinity of schools .
I expect that this report will give the Commission fresh impetus to negotiate the measures essential for harmonising the regulation of online gambling with regard to the public interest of EU countries .

( DA ) Mr President , welcome to Parliament Mr Barnier and good luck with your job .
I am actually very pleased to be standing here today debating online gambling with you , because during your hearing in Parliament you placed particular emphasis on your view that the internal market should be there for the citizens and not the other way round .
Here we have a good opportunity to demonstrate this in practice .
Let me start by saying that I support the initiatives that you mentioned .
They were a little vague , but it sounds sensible to draw up a Green Paper , to get lots of studies going , to gather data and find out about this area in a way that provides us with an overview of how things stand at European level .
However , I would also like to remind you of the political realities .
Whilst it is true that there was also a minority opinion when my report was adopted in March , the clear majority in Parliament supported my report , just as there is a very great deal of support in Council for clarification - but at the same time we must ensure that it is up to the Member States to define how they wish to regulate the whole area of gambling .
What we need in the area of online gambling is , of course , to find out how we can protect our citizens , investigate the social costs of gambling , and so on .
I would have liked to have heard a somewhat clearer answer , however .
You have only just taken up your post and are still new , but I would like a slightly clearer answer as to whether your line will be to drop the cases concerning treaty infringements and to enter into a much more constructive dialogue with Parliament and the Council so that we can establish how to deal with this .
I therefore suggest you stop letting the European Court of Justice decide the cases ; let us take political decisions concerning these .
Is that the line you want to take or not ?
That is what I would have liked to have a very clear answer on .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome this timely debate on online gambling and in particular , on the problems relating to underage gambling and vulnerable consumers .
It is in the interest of both the public and of consumers that leadership and clear and definite direction be shown when tackling this issue .
I raised the issue of gambling with the Commission at the beginning of last November , and the reply I received stated that the Commission supports the Safer Internet Programme , information centres and helplines in the Member States .
These provide information to parents about the dangers children could encounter on line - including online gambling .
As it is , however , online gambling is a hidden problem and it is a problem that is growing .
With online gambling as opposed to conventional gambling , there is a clear problem of a lack of physical supervision .
There is no responsible or immediate management present to ensure that the gambler is of age and acting legally .
The security checks and safety procedures on online gambling sites can be overcome ; borrowed or stolen credit cards can be used by minors and identities can be faked .
For vulnerable consumers gambling on the Internet is usually conducted in isolated settings and experts in this area point to the increased problem of acting on impulse and the potential for unchecked and reckless gambling and because , with under-age gamblers , the traditional safeguards of conventional gambling are not present .
With online gambling it is more difficult to determine a problem gambler as it takes time , responsibility and resources to identify who is playing , who is paying and who has a problem .
Clear direction is needed at all levels in order to tackle this issue so that definitive steps can be taken to tackle the problem of under-age gamblers and to ensure the interests of the most vulnerable consumers are protected .

( NL ) Mr President , there are approximately 120 000 gambling addicts in the Netherlands , which represents nearly 1 % of our population .
Gambling addiction leads to serious social problems , such as broken homes , money problems and crime .
Therefore , Member States should make every effort to combat gambling and the associated problems with maximum force .
Mr President , what is striking is that some Member States have a completely legal gambling market .
In addition , the gambling industry would have us believe that the gambling market is a normal sector of the internal market and thus need not be subject to restrictions .
This beggars belief .
Member States should not be facilitating any markets that promote social misery .
Unfortunately , many people cannot resist the lure of gambling .
For this reason , the Dutch government has decided to take ownership of the gambling market and allow only a State monopoly on gambling .
Although I would prefer not to see casinos going up anywhere in the European Union , I still consider this the least bad solution .
Mr President , the European Parliament must issue a very strong call to those Member States in which gambling is permitted to strongly discourage that market wherever possible .
( EL ) Mr President , the question indirectly calls for new Community legislation .
However , given that even the European Court of Justice has laid down the limits and preconditions under which the Member States , through their national legislation , can stipulate how online gambling is to be regulated , there is no need to call for European legislation .
Furthermore , the Court ruled in the Schindler case that gambling has certain moral , religious and cultural overtones , harbours a high risk of crime or fraud and may have harmful consequences on the individual and on society .
That is the most important point .
It is precisely on these grounds of public interest that this sector should remain under the control of the Member States , which know more about its peculiarities and how to handle them .
Moreover , this is endorsed both by the study prepared for the Commission by the Swiss Institute of Comparative Law and in the 2009 report by Mr Schaldemose adopted by Parliament .
This report concludes that an approach solely within the framework of the internal market is not appropriate in this highly sensitive sector and calls on the Commission to pay particular attention to the views of the European Court of Justice on this matter .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start with the European Court of Justice ruling , because the possibility for a Member State to prohibit private operators from offering online gambling services highlights the need to standardise a market that is highly profitable , but just as highly risky , for consumers .
Therefore , in the absence of any European harmonisation of gambling activities , each country is free to choose its own level of protection .
It is often impossible to identify where the application of such a restriction begins and ends .
In fact , while the Commission has launched a series of infringement proceedings against some countries - which I would point out also include Italy - for having violated the principle of the free movement of services , the European Court has , on the contrary , upheld Portugal 's restrictive decision .
In this context , the European institutions have the fundamental task of guiding the gambling sector through a regulatory process that is fully harmonised among the Member States at EU level .
It is necessary , therefore , to go beyond individual economic interests and to ensure a significant level of protection of consumers , and in particular of children , who are the main victims of crime and fraud in such cases .
- ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in the midst of a conflict between two policies that are dear to the European Union : the protection of consumers and public order on the one hand , and the freedom of movement and provision of services on the other .
According to the case-law of the Court of Justice on this matter , the Member States should maintain their autonomy and legitimacy in regulating the activity of providers of online gambling and gambling games .
This is a sensitive area that impacts upon societal values regarding deviant behaviour related to gambling and also upon national traditions of directing the sums received from this market towards the financing of social works .
Over the last few years , the case-law from Luxembourg has formulated a coherent and consistent line of judicial thinking that should lead the European institutions and the Commission , in particular , to adopt a more explicit position . This involves the creation of a regulatory framework , which takes account of the universal concerns of all the Member States in terms of the prevention of cross-border organised crime , which uses these types of games as a way of expanding , as well as in terms of providing proper protection to consumers who are vulnerable to this type of online gambling .
Commissioner Barnier , we look forward to the new Commission , which is now taking office , dealing with this matter as a priority on its agenda .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , gambling has traditionally been strictly regulated in most countries of the EU .
The situation has , of course , changed since the Internet became the largest gambling den in the world .
It is a fact that technical developments related to gambling operations have progressed very rapidly throughout the world and the relevant legal arrangements are in the meantime incapable of providing a sufficient response .
Cases related to online gambling are frequently referred to the European Court of Justice , which clearly shows that the interpretation and application of Community laws in the area of gambling are ambiguous .
Internet gambling is , moreover , viewed as a ' grey area ' of law .
In my opinion , we must respect the fact that every state has issued gambling licences within its own jurisdiction .
At the same time we agree at a general level that national legislation must not overstep EU principles on business and the provision of services within the EU framework .
However , this means paradoxically that Czech law , for example , does not have to allow Czech firms to obtain a licence to operate online gambling but the Czech Republic cannot prohibit foreign gambling firms from operating on its territory .
We cannot accept such a situation , never mind the social , health and safety risks associated with online gambling , or the related tax issues .
( FI ) Mr President , as you well remember , Commissioner Barnier , the European Parliament was being consistent in its policy when it opposed the inclusion of gambling games in the Services Directive , as gambling games are not services as such : they are associated with the risk of addiction and the social costs that go with it .
The integrity of sport is also something that the European Parliament thinks is worth protecting , especially now that , with the Treaty of Lisbon , we have the competence to attend to this issue .
The more unregulated gambling is , the more sport just becomes a means of accumulating profits and the more it becomes prone , for example , to criminal activity in the form of money laundering .
The Commission needs to propose a solution that takes account of Parliament 's consistent policy of keeping gambling within the competence of the Member States , on account of its special nature .
At least a dozen cases have come before the Court of Justice of the European Union , the latest being the Liga Portuguesa case .
Nevertheless , it is not right that these cases should only make progress in the form of court decisions or as a result of infringement proceedings .
We need to have a policy decision on these matters , but one that does not result in harmonisation , because the Member States are responsible for the social costs and other adverse consequences of gambling anyway .
There needs to be a logical and comprehensive policy on gambling , because online gambling is merely a facility , and in itself it does not mean that any policy on gambling will be a crossborder policy .
The increase in online gambling is not a force of nature that advances inexorably .
There are a lot of products that online shops cannot sell across borders , so the online gambling companies should also respect the law in the various Member States .
Commissioner , I would like to encourage you to produce a green paper on gambling .
That would certainly also provide us with the means to fight against online gambling services coming from outside Europe and the problems caused by gambling .
Mr President , I would like to thank the previous speakers for their contributions and my colleague , Christel Schaldemose , for her work on this subject .
As previous speakers have said , gambling is not like any normal service .
The negative consequences of gambling cannot be more highly emphasised , as many colleagues have said this morning .
There are two internationally recognised scales which can measure problem gambling .
One is called the Diagnostic Statistical Severity Index and the other , the Canadian Problem Gambling Severity Index .
This was used in the UK and it is estimated that , in the UK alone - and a Dutch colleague said one per cent of their population is affected - it is something along the lines of 236 000 to 284 000 adults who have a gambling problem .
What would this number be across the European Union ?
When you think about it , if this green paper is coming forward , I would like to see the Commission getting some proper statistics - a study in fact on the effects of gambling and online gambling on EU citizens .
I think this would be a very useful piece of information to inform our debate and to have at our fingertips .
Regarding the point about the ECJ rulings , when you look at the words , ' in order to prevent operations of games of chance via the Internet for fraudulent or criminal purposes ' and the prevalence of cartels in the single market , highlighted by the competition report , we need to ensure that online gambling companies do not use registering in a different country from the one in which they operate as a front for hiding illegal practices .
I look forward to hearing further from Commissioner Barnier .
I wish you the best of luck , Commissioner , in your new role .
Mr President , I want to add my congratulations to Commissioner Barnier .
Commissioner , this is not the easiest topic to start off in your career in the Commission but I dare say that your predecessor , Mr McCreevy , would not mind me saying that he enjoyed the odd flutter .
He enjoyed race-going and obviously was a man to place a bet .
Clearly there are two schools of thought on this issue .
However , Parliament 's view is quite clear from its resolution of 10 March 2009 , and I think it is worth quoting three lines from that resolution , which states that ' Member States have an interest and right to regulate and control their gambling markets ' .
It also very clearly states that ' online gambling operators must comply with the legislation of Member States in which they provide their service ' , and that ' a pure internal market approach is not appropriate in this highly sensitive area ' .
The problem for us as legislators , and for Member States , is that the market is way ahead of us : developments in this area have overtaken existing legislation and will continue to do so .
Whether we like it or not , people enjoy gambling .
Personally I would rather buy shoes , but others do other things for their kicks .
I absolutely concur with those who have very clearly spoken about the problems of gambling , whether online or otherwise .
There are huge social issues involved where people who have an addiction go beyond what they should do .
But remember also that Member States promote lotteries , and perhaps that is a legalised form of promoting a possible addiction .
So there is no clarity on this issue but , once again , the problem for the European Parliament , for the EU in general , is that there is no consistency across Member States , and yet our citizens are accessing services outside their own country , and they want to do that .
The green paper would be most welcome : it is a big challenge for you to pull together the information on this issue .
I think the problem is that there is a huge gap in information and knowledge , and it is up to the Commission to come forward with something to deal with that issue .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is said that politics is a game , sometimes even a game of chance , but gambling is not actually a business or service as such .
It is associated with a vast number of social ills that attract criminal activity .
Gambling addiction will all too often and too easily put an individual in a financial predicament , which can also result in very serious mental health problems .
Echoing the message in my colleague , Mrs Stihler 's speech , I would like to mention that in 2008 there were an estimated 40 000 people in Finland with a gambling problem .
If there were the same number of people proportionately at EU level , it would mean that there would now be more than 35 million in Europe with a gambling problem , and that is a huge figure .
I therefore think that Member States must in future have the right to decide themselves how they organise gambling in order to minimise any potential psychological and financial damage .
We need strict rules , regulation of the market and public agency monitoring .
I would finally like to stress how important it is for us to consider the protection of those consumers who are especially vulnerable and the dangers of gambling addiction and compulsive behaviour , and to make a real effort to fight against organised crime , which tries to profit by it .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , congratulations , Commissioner , and welcome .
Everyone has seen how the online gambling market has boomed over the last few years , capturing economic and media attention .
This is a phenomenon that involves new social groups and that is characterised by poly-consumption .
Technology makes it easier to access and enables an increasing number of consumers - often young people , who are generally more familiar with computers and the Internet - to become involved .
The dream of changing one 's life through gambling often has disastrous consequences , and many families are dragged into a negative situation from which there is often no means of escape .
Moreover , there can be no underestimating the serious harm caused by the lack of social contact and interaction of online gamblers .
The loneliness and the basic invisibility of gamblers characterise a generally unacceptable addiction .
Gambling is a vice that appears still today to be largely hidden .
In my previous role as the chief executive of a public health authority , I opened a specialist department for pathological gambling .
The proposed intervention model has proven successful because the treatment combines the therapy aspect with that of prevention , research and rehabilitation .
We need to intervene by adopting a common position and ensure that all addictions are subject to a robust form of governance .
This has not been the case : I am referring to drug abuse , alcohol abuse , tobacco abuse , food and Internet addictions .
I regret that the question put by myself and a further 42 MEPs has not yet been referred to Parliament in plenary because of opposition from the left .
I therefore wonder how much interest the Commission really takes in those who have a proven problem with drug addiction or another proven addiction , and how important a role the fight against drug trafficking plays in the Commission 's programme .
( EL ) Madam President , the reason why we feel secure in Europe , the reason why Europe has been going for so long is , I think , because it has always respected national sensitivities .
The perpetual dilemma which arises , as to whether Europe or the Member States have the first and last word , is a major issue and a perfect example is gambling , especially online gambling .
The Internet is an exciting place , but it also harbours dangers which are very difficult to control .
At the same time , the principle of competitiveness , which is the pillar of the internal market , cannot ignore primary issues of respect for national public interests .
I think that what is needed in this balance is clearly set out in both judgments by the Court which , on the one hand , understands and defends the concept of public interest , as safeguarded by national traditions and , on the other hand , formulates objections to disproportionate measures which ultimately work at the expense of the citizen .
Knowing the consultations being carried out at present in the Council , we are waiting to hear how the Commission will work to safeguard national autonomy of action and create an effective basis for cooperation , so that the question of habit and the question of fraud can be combated .
To close , may I congratulate you Commissioner and say that I believe everything you have said in this Chamber .
Hearing you say that you differ on the letter at the moment but not in spirit is something that I shall wait to see in practice .
Good luck .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , welcome , Commissioner .
It is nice to see you here and to see you sitting in that particular seat .
What we are de facto dealing with in this area is , amongst other things , the implementation of the social market economy regulatory framework .
We are in a state of tension .
On the one hand , we need to go further down the market road , as we have to implement the principles of the internal market . On the other hand , we cannot abandon our sense of responsibility .
It is for this reason that we have to set certain limitations on the gambling market .
We must accept our responsibility .
We cannot allow everyone to do whatever they please in the gambling market , any more than we can in the financial market , and then have society picking up the tab .
What we are dealing with are questions of education , money laundering , criminality and freedom in gambling .
We have to look at these things together .
Nor do we have any clear definitions , either .
We are all talking about gambling , but there are many different types of gambling , and there are different definitions .
I , therefore , welcome the announcement of the green paper , because it will enable us to approach the definition issue , the problems and the variety of individual national customs at the same time .
A pure internal market approach will not get us anywhere with these issues .
However , we should not use one approach to the exclusion of the other .
We need a regulatory framework at EU level , so that we do not end up discussing this every year .
The Member States and the various operators are all involved .
Working together , we should not undermine the law of the Member States , but ensure legal certainty in the European market .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are aware of the differences that exist between the various regulatory frameworks of the individual countries , and we also know that various interpretations of European and national case law are currently leading to a large number of infringements and disputes within the Member States .
The lack of a European Union policy is no longer sustainable in the light of the challenges posed by the cross-border nature of online gambling services .
Moreover , the rapid spread of the Internet and of electronic trade in recent years has given rise to an increase in the supply of online games and to the consequent emergence of cross-border issues , which remain unresolved .
For this reason , I am convinced that the European institutions should rise to the common challenges , such as the protection of consumers - and more specifically of children - and the prevention of crime and fraud , but also to the challenges concerning the fight against the illegal and unauthorised supply of services , which the national governments alone cannot cope with .
The Commission must therefore respond to Parliament 's requests and strive to obtain a European regulatory framework .
It must do so by showing the necessary determination .
Commissioner , your good will is not in question , and that is why I say to you that the consultation is a good idea and that the green paper is also a good idea , provided that it is used to identify the correct legislative framework and is not just an end in itself .
The old Commission very often drafted too many green papers and white papers without any decisions being taken .
However , I believe that you realise , Commissioner , that we need decisions and not just words .
Madam President , looking at the positions that the European Court of Justice , the Council , the Commission and Parliament have taken so far on gambling and betting , I would draw the following conclusions .
Practically all Member States and Parliament reject the application of the country-of-origin and mutual-recognition principles in this particular and sensitive area .
The Court accepts that , as it explicitly expressed once again in its judgment last September .
For the Commission this judgment means that it loses one of the key arguments that it has used in all infringement cases .
Member States are free to set their own policy objectives on betting and gambling and define in detail the level of protection they deem appropriate for their citizens .
The Council and Parliament have been working hand in hand for years .
In 2006 and 2007 they both agreed on the exclusion of gambling and betting from the Services Directive and the Audiovisual Media Services Directive .
The Schaldemose report last year built on the work Council had done under the French Presidency and the same line has continued also under the Swedish and the Spanish Presidency .
In the Schaldemose report I was responsible for the EPP line and I share her view .
Commissioner , I would like to ask you this : do you share the view that the Commission should finally start helping the Member States in their fight against all illegal - in other words unauthorised - gambling offers , rather than consume time on questions that have been answered already ?
If so , how will it be tackled ?
( PL ) Madam President , there is no doubt that the market in online gambling in Europe is developing very dynamically .
Indeed , over 40 % of the world gambling market focuses on Europe , generating growing profits .
Over the last four years , these incomes have almost doubled : from EUR 6.5 billion to EUR 11 billion .
These statistics allow us to say that this phenomenon is going to continue to spread , both at the supra-national and cross-border levels .
Development of the services and Internet market and changes in consumer attitudes require a reaction on the part of the European Union .
The lack of Community regulation of online gambling is only one example where the institutions are not only failing to keep up with social changes , but are also failing to react to the needs of the changing common European market .
The dynamically developing gambling market , which is based on cross-border contacts and transactions , needs common and clear regulations , in order to minimise the risk associated with fraud , money laundering , match-fixing and addiction .
Clear and transparent principles should be the basis of operation of the single market , and we should , above all , protect European consumers from these threats .
We should inform consumers of the possible negative consequences of online gambling .
Young people , as we said in the resolution in March , are not mature enough to differentiate concepts such as luck , chance and the probability of winning .
We need to identify the risk of gambling addictions developing in young people .
Increasingly often the Commission is not managing to keep pace , and not only in this matter , with the exceptionally rapid development of the Internet and various kinds of online activity .
Is one of the reasons for this not the fact that the Commission is composed entirely of people who grew up at a time when this electronic world of online entrepreneurship was only the subject of futuristic novels ?
The Commission must initiate work on a thorough report analysing everything related to the problem of honesty in gambling and all the legal and social consequences associated with this .
What is needed is a clearly defined European code of practice , which sets the highest standards and will be able to distinguish between what is honest , sporting competition in games and dirty gambling .
( RO ) The regulation of the gambling market in the European Union is a delicate issue , regardless of whether we are talking about conventional or online gambling .
The online gambling sector has expanded in recent years and is now an area where huge profits are made .
There are those who speak out in favour of banning gambling , while others believe that this ban would result in an increase in these activities without any kind of regulation in force .
Both the European Union and Member States share common objectives in their efforts to improve the regulation of gambling activities .
They want to protect minors , find a solution to the problems of addiction , introduce suitable supervisory measures regarding transparency and rules on advertising , not to mention prevent addiction and excessive online gambling .
With a lack of any harmonised legislation in this area , Member States are free to set their own policy objectives in this area and define the required level of protection .
Although the aims seem to be the same , resolving the issue of regulation in this area is far from easy .
However , we cannot deny the reality of the situation - gambling is an important economic activity which does not entirely comply with the rules of the internal market .
With no restrictions provided by any technical barriers , these activities can be accessed across borders and generate profits amounting to billions of euros .
The rulings of the European Court of Justice do not bring any closer the positions of those with differing views on the right way to enforce regulation .
The Commission continues to face a paradoxical reality between Member States ' jurisdiction to regulate this area and the complaints lodged by gambling providers against the restrictions imposed nationally .
I am not an advocate of online gambling .
I would say more that I am against this activity .
However , I feel that we need to start with the reality that these games exist .
This is why we have to draw up harmonised legislation which will not only regulate the activities of economic operators , but , most importantly , will also provide measures to support consumers .
We must ensure that online gambling is handled in a responsible manner .
We must protect minors and those who are vulnerable .
We must also prevent addiction and avoid organised crime .
( HU ) First , a warm welcome to Commissioner Barnier , and I would like to wish him all the best in his efforts .
Ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to sum up what I would like to say in three main points .
First of all , in this age , when experts say that our world is dominated by mass media and the Internet , one cannot really discuss gambling and especially online gambling ignoring the relevant social , cultural , healthcare and mental effects involved .
It is also clear , as indicated by the decision adopted by Parliament a year ago , that online gambling has obvious harmful effects on society .
It is sufficient to mention the effects related to the development of addictions , organised crime and money laundering .
We should not forget about the toxic effects of sports betting either , as even now Europe is affected by a terrible match-fixing scandal , unfortunately associated with this issue .
Secondly , in my view we have got the wrong end of the stick if we think that the regulation of online gambling is a free market issue .
This is primarily a consumer protection issue .
In my opinion , regulation should focus on consumer protection issues .
Last but not least , allow me to make two proposals .
A common regulation is required at European level , a regulation based on consumer protection and focused on prevention , to prevent the development of addiction , the association of online gambling with organised crime , and the match-fixing scandals jeopardising fair play .
Last but not least , there is a need for the European Union to initiate a regulation which reaches across and beyond the borders of the European Union , as online gambling is a global issue , and I believe it is an issue which we must also address .
Madam President , like so many areas of activity , gambling has benefited from advanced technology .
There are upsides and downsides .
The upside is that it facilitates the punter and it makes it easier to get and to place a bet .
It is a huge revenue earner for the Member States and we have digressed into huge areas .
It used to be just racing and sports , but now we have got a huge number of other areas , for example political predictions .
As we say in Ireland , you could bet on two flies going up a wall .
So we have a huge advance in terms of the areas covered by gambling .
The downside is that we have fraud , match-fixing , social and domestic chaos , gambling addiction etc .
It has been estimated that , in the UK alone - as Gamblers Anonymous say - there is something in the region of 600 000 people who are addicted to gambling and who are members of Gamblers Anonymous .
We have the same problem in Ireland and it is a common problem throughout the EU .
I think we have got to look at the ECJ ruling in terms of saying that it is up to each Member State to fix its own rules and regulations .
We need a common policy because gambling transgresses borders . It goes right across the entire European Union .
I think we have got to revert to the excellent recommendations made on 10 March 2009 , which are worth looking at again .
For example , Members call on the Member States to cooperate closely in order to solve social and public order problems arising from cross-border online gambling .
Secondly , we need to protect consumers against fraud and there should be a common position to do this .
Thirdly , there needs to be a common regulation in relation to advertising promotion and the provisions of online gambling .
Last , but by no means least , in relation to credit we should have a maximum amount of credit and , certainly from the point of view of age , there should be a definite age restriction .
Mr Panzeri said earlier - and he is right - that we talk a lot here about resolutions and recommendations and they are all very commendable but , at the end of the day , what we need to do is to translate them into action . Otherwise , they are mere aspirations .
So we are talking about action and we are talking about the timetable .
That is the reason why I am looking forward to the Commission 's reply .
( LT ) Probably no one would argue with the fact that gambling , like other forms of addiction , causes serious social problems that affect not only the gambler , but the whole of society .
It is a complex problem .
With the rapid spread of internet access in our globalised world there has been a significant rise in a new form of addiction , an addiction to online gambling .
In the fourteen years since 1996 the gambling market has grown dramatically .
Just as the market grows , so too do the general revenues from gambling in the world .
Until we establish a common European Union system for the regulation of online gambling , the only people happy to see these figures will be the representatives of the online gambling business .
The European Court of Justice has said that gambling services can take advantage of freedom of movement and that the Member States should regulate these themselves , taking into account their values and traditions .
Lithuania , for example , is still one of those countries of the European Union in which online gambling is banned .
However , the free movement of services ensures the opportunity to gamble , to have free access to online gambling and even if we ban gambling in the whole of the European Union , we still will not be protected from gambling registered in other parts of the world .
Therefore , it is necessary to establish a common European Union system for the regulation of online gambling , taking into account the protection of risk groups , with particular attention to the protection of minors and control of transactions .
On the subject of minors , it is not just gambling with money that they become addicted to , but often games which are aggressive in character and have aggressive content and this is also a great problem .
This situation is almost identical to the question of CO2 emissions that we have debated so often .
The Internet has no borders , so if we have different online gambling rules and provisions , it will be like the climate change problem ; much talk and , sadly , few results .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to put a question to the Commission in the context of the questions asked by my colleague , Mr Nitras , who is unable to be present , today , due to problems he has encountered in getting to Strasbourg .
Firstly , I would like to ask the Commission if it could comment on recent legislative changes in Member States in the context of joint rulings of the European Court of Justice .
Secondly , does the Commission still envisage taking legal measures to introduce common frameworks which could regulate transactions associated with online games of chance , having regard principally to consumer protection and the fight against gambling addiction , and also to the growing presence of organised crime in a system which is not properly verified and controlled ?
In relation to this , does the Commission agree that , despite the common EU regulations in force today , Member States are still not able to moderate the gambling of their citizens , in spite of the use of bans , for example ?
In this area it seems that legal regulations are not adapted to the current situation and the developing Internet service market .
In relation to this , my question is as follows : what measures does the European Commission intend to take in this area to set down , perhaps , common legal frameworks , which would be the same for all Member States ?
( NL ) I should like to congratulate Commissioner Barnier on his appointment as Member of the Commission , and also to warmly welcome him here , as there is a great deal on the agenda .
The Services Directive , or ' Bolkestein Directive ' , which was discussed here , expressly excluded gambling .
I find this regrettable , as it means we did not dare to recognise that it constitutes a problem for consumers , and I think this was instigated by governments who were only too willing to continue to see it as a monopoly for Member States .
The result has been a legislative hotchpotch that is currently leading to a great deal of legal uncertainty .
This is regrettable , and behind it is a lack of the courage , including on our part , to look into problems .
After all , having a problem but not looking into it is like burying your head in the sand as ostriches do .
Yet these are real problems , as the organisations providing gambling services are constantly on the lookout for new openings .
Our current legislation is based on physical borders , but we reached the age of virtual borders long ago .
In my opinion , therefore , we must ensure a European approach to online gambling , introduce clearer legislation , involve the providers in this , and ensure that consumers are protected and organised crime precluded .
This also means , however , that we must dare to let go of the situation where governments retain a monopoly on the basis of the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) ruling that ' monopolies are permitted as long as you conduct a restrictive policy ' ; this is getting completely out of hand .
The ECJ also states this regularly , and I believe we must have the courage to take hard-law measures that eliminate the excrescences and the abuse of gambling ; not only for the benefit of our citizens but also in order to preclude organised crime .
I hope this proves successful , Commissioner Barnier : you have a huge task ahead of you and I wish you the very best of luck .
Perhaps - and this is my final comment , Madam President - it is already quite something for you to hearten Parliament by actually looking closer into the implementation of the Services Directive ; after all , I have heard many positive reports in this regard .
( DE ) Madam President , in case C-42 / 07 , the European Court of Justice examined whether Portugal had infringed EU law by prohibiting online gambling .
Portugal had banned companies from providing games of chance on the Internet .
The companies affected by this ban , such as BWin and Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional , went to court and fought their cases all the way up to the ECJ .
The main argument was that , in so doing , Portugal had infringed the freedom to provide services and that , ultimately , any entrepreneur should be allowed to provide services across borders .
In addition , every EU citizen should be free to receive services , which is a passive form of freedom .
In terms of its content , however , the freedom to provide services also includes a prohibition on discrimination , which means that the State is not allowed to put foreign service providers in a less favourable position than domestic ones .
On the other hand , the freedom to provide services also contains a prohibition on restrictions , which means that any action which is not in itself discriminatory , but is intended to obstruct the entry of foreign companies into the market , is , of course , prohibited .
Interestingly enough , the ECJ rejected this , saying that the freedom to provide services may be restricted insofar as it jeopardises the public interest , as it is necessary to combat fraud , guarantee consumer protection and prevent addiction to gambling .
Addiction to gambling is a major problem right now .
In Germany alone , 200 000 people have been officially categorised as addicted to gambling , and young people are increasingly falling prey to this addiction .
One study has found that people start gambling as early as 13 .
On the other hand , and we are familiar with this problem , private operators who comply with stringent requirements and have appropriate consumer protection procedures in place are categorically excluded from the market while , on the other hand , state-owned gambling monopolies are allowed to avoid Community competition , which gives them a greater advantage in the market .
I hope that this very difficult and polarised situation will be taken into account in the creation of a new regulatory framework and that the Commission will incorporate these key issues that I have raised .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to wish Commissioner Barnier well in his work , because we need some good work to be done .
Gambling , by its very nature , has psychological implications for individual players and affects the cultural and behavioural aspects of individual societies .
Given the risks that gambling entails , the recent European Court of Justice ruling , which grants each Member State the right to set its own rules governing online betting and gambling , is sensible .
The ruling concerning the Liga Portuguesa confirms that the European Union is regulated internally by 27 different rules , on the basis of which each State has decided to legislate .
This position goes entirely against the application of the law of the internal market , and against the gambling sector and harmonisation at European level .
Supply that is not rigorously regulated would have a negative impact on the needs and the behaviour of individual EU citizens , and here I am specifically referring to the most vulnerable groups and to young people .
We are asking you , Commissioner Barnier , to take steps to produce a regulatory framework that will clarify the responsibilities of , and establish common principles and a code of conduct for , operators , with the aim of protecting all those European citizens who have a passion for online gambling .
( SL ) Commissioner , I wish you every success with your new portfolio .
Gambling is a contemporary form of addiction .
We all know it ; it is a kind of escapism for the modern man and woman .
Nevertheless , online gambling is a fact which we politicians have to face and for which we have to find the best possible solution .
On the one hand , we have to protect the principles underlying the European Union , such as the free movement of services , and on the other , we have to protect consumers .
What direction should we take though ?
If we place too broad competences in the hands of national Member State administrations , it seems to me we will not eliminate all the disadvantages of online gambling .
Nor will we eliminate money laundering or other associated criminal activities .
Most of all , we will fail to eliminate monopolies , because dedicated operators will of course achieve precisely that role within their national boundaries .
I am against protectionism when it comes to gambling and wish your green paper could in fact solve this problem for everybody 's benefit , for the benefit of consumers and national administrations and for the benefit of the principles underlying the European Union .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , here we are dealing with a matter of great importance in the defence of the interests of citizens and in protecting against the risks of fraud that are common in gambling , including online gambling .
The Member States must maintain their autonomy and total legitimacy to legislate in the area of controls on gambling , according to the traditions of their own countries and ensuring a level of protection that is more appropriate for consumers and the interests of citizens , including investments in social areas , as happens in Portugal .
For these reasons , there can be no room for the application of the rules of competition and of the freedom to provide services here .
We are not dealing with a normal type of service , we are dealing with a game that has serious implications in citizens ' lives .
We therefore hope , Commissioner , that you will bear in mind this position in the measures that will be developed , acknowledging the Member States ' complete legitimacy to continue legislating at this time .
( GA ) Madam President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to say a few words about this major international issue .
Gambling - and online gambling in particular - is the hidden addiction and , unlike the other major addictions of drug and alcoholic abuse , there are no obvious physical manifestations of the disease .
Secondly , online gambling is also the new generation addiction and it is particularly prevalent among young people who are far more digitally savvy than their parents and are therefore beyond detection and consequently protection .
I welcome , therefore , the imminent publication of the green paper , which needs to address three things : firstly , to establish the facts on how widespread gambling is - as an example , in my own town of 10 000 people there were only two betting shops a few years ago but now there are 18 .
Secondly , having established the facts , we need an education programme for young people , parents and educators , and , thirdly , legislation which will apply to all countries .
GA I wish you the best of luck in this important work , Commissioner .
( DE ) Madam President , in the debate on whether online gambling should be the sole preserve of monopolies , whether it should be made subject to licensing or whether it should be banned altogether , I think that we should not forget that the increase in gambling addiction has been very dramatic .
As we all know , croupiers in casinos receive psychological training in order to spot players with addictive behaviour .
If need be , they can be banned from playing .
Since the immense boom in the amount of online gambling on offer , however , the addiction problem has , indeed , been increasingly moving to the Internet .
It jeopardises people 's relationships , work and health and , in no time at all , they can accumulate thousands of euros in debt .
Protecting young people is another problem related to this issue .
However , banning young people from gambling will not get us anywhere .
One study has shown that one in ten students in Hamburg between the ages of 14 and 18 illegally plays for money on the Internet , whether in the form of online poker or sports betting .
Nor should we forget that , besides the tragic fates of those affected and of their families , it also results in costs to the public purse .
Commissioner , allow me first of all to welcome you , since I have not opened the debate and , moreover , to give you the floor to reply to these numerous questions .
Madam President , thank you for your words of welcome , and thank you to every one of you for your good wishes and your encouragement .
As you have understood - and , I have said so before this Parliament - I begin this new task that President Barroso has entrusted to me with great determination and resolve .
I shall even remain a little idealistic .
I believe that creative ideals do exist , especially when it comes to the European project .

The question that Mr Harbour put very clearly just now , and the questions from Mr Schwab , Mrs Gebhardt , Mrs Rühle and Mr de Jong , in particular , all amount to this : will the European Commission , at this time , show resolve and initiative , and will it do so , moreover , by using methods other than infringement procedures ?
Ladies and gentlemen , make no mistake .
Of course , I have been in office for 48 hours .
So , please give my colleagues and me time to work and to present things to you in a serious manner .
However , it is about a new approach that I really want to speak to you , and I do so for a reason that is very important to me .
As several of you - including Mr Karas , and Mrs Gebhardt and Mrs Figueiredo a moment ago - have said , this does not concern a service like the others .
It is for this reason that you are right to expect this new approach from the Commission , beginning with the consultation I have just proposed to you .
Currently , Member States are free to choose how they approach this question , as long as they comply with the Treaty .
All Member States believe that gambling must be regulated with care , in view of the risk it poses to society , a risk that Mrs Schaldemose 's report - which I have read with great care and interest - describes in explicit detail .
The Council 's work has also brought to light the significantly different opinions , traditions and practices that exist .
What I have noted is that since they chose in 2006 to withdraw gambling from the scope of the Services Directive , the Member States have not been consulted by the Commission on a European initiative .
It is this , therefore , that is going to change .
For my part , my teams and I will be following the efforts of the Council working group very closely .
I also know that many Member States want to see the scope of the draft directive on consumer rights restricted .
I confirm that the Commission does not rule out solutions other than infringement procedures .
To find the right way , I am going to publish a policy document .
I myself used the words ' green paper ' , but for that I need to check the content and the scheduling of the Commission 's work programme and to discuss it with my colleagues .
However , we shall be publishing a policy document in order to structure future discussions on this question .
That question , ladies and gentlemen , is assuredly one of a new and meaningful kind of European coordination .
Of course there is an economic dimension , but I repeat that it is not the only one as far as I am concerned .
There are other serious issues that pose just as great a challenge to the public interest .

Mr Creutzmann , Mr Kirkhope , Mr Paška - I cannot name everyone who has spoken , but I have made a careful note of what the various coordinators of your groups have said on your behalf .
One of these questions , one of these challenges , is cross-border crime .
Is it possible to fight this sort of crime without taking a European approach ?
I think that it is impossible .
What is more , if we do not adopt a European approach to online gambling , we will not make progress in establishing an internal market for e-commerce .
As far as online gaming is concerned , the very least we must do is to strengthen cooperation between national authorities regulating gaming in Europe .
This is , moreover , certainly one of the issues being studied by the Council working group , which is why , on this issue as on others , the Commission will be working with the Member States .
I believe that , in addition to listening to the opinion of the Member States , as I shall be doing , I shall continue to listen to what is said in the European Parliament , as I have done this morning , even though I have clearly understood that there are on the various sides of this House different opinions that are not always consistent , because I am aware of what Parliament 's majority line is .
I shall listen to Parliament and to all interested parties as well as associations within the context of this consultation on better European coordination .
In any case , that is what I shall be proposing to my fellow Commissioners in the coming days .
I have spoken of challenges and trials , Madam President , and I shall finish with them .
Of course , among the issues faced by society is the question of addiction , which is extremely important and which has been highlighted in your report , and there is the question of minors .
We must have strict limits , so that minors cannot gamble ; all the Member States are working on this question , but in a disorganised manner .
That is why , on this point , I believe that there must be European coordination .
To do good work , one must first properly understand , and that is also why I accept the request many of you have made for the Commission policy document to contain figures and reliable statistics , in addition to the figures quoted just now .
I am therefore going to endeavour - and this is what Mrs Stihler and Mrs McGuinness have just requested in particular - to ensure that , in addition to clear policy directions , which means not only words but also proposed decisions , the Commission document above all contains as accurate a diagnosis as possible of all these issues .
May I say one last word , Madam President , on a subject that is also connected to this question of gaming , and that is the financing of sport .
I say this , moreover , as a person who has devoted 10 years of his life to organising sporting activities .
We are a few days away from the opening of the Vancouver Olympic Games , and I have the honour of being the joint chair of an Olympic Games organising committee .
I therefore know that the organisation of great sporting events costs money and that , somewhere , financing networks are linked to gaming .
It is for this reason , moreover , that many Member States that finance sport through gaming wish also to safeguard national practices or legislation .
The Commission is currently carrying out a study on the financing of sport in order to better understand all these concerns .
There will also be a conference to be held next week in Brussels , and in the policy document that I shall present to you we shall also refer to these networks which finance events and sport through gaming .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have listened to you very carefully and I am very grateful to you for the diversity and quality of your speeches .
I shall continue to listen to you .
In addition to and together with Parliament , I shall be consulting all interested parties .
Therefore , on the basis of this policy document , which , subject to the agreement of the College , will probably be a green paper , I shall make an appointment with you , no later than this autumn , so that we may achieve this goal of being more consistent and of establishing this marvellous form of coordination at European level .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for that full and encouraging reply .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
At the very outset , I would like to draw your attention to the significance of online gambling in today 's world .
In the debate which is currently taking place , we are dealing with several matters which , in my opinion , should be resolved as quickly as possible , ideally at Community level .
In its ruling , the European Court of Justice stated that regulation of gambling law is a matter for Member States , and that they are tightening up regulations in this area .
Not only in Poland , but also in other countries , voices are being heard which say that we should significantly limit opportunities to gamble on the Internet .
In my opinion , this is a step in the right direction , and is intended to lead to the introduction of clear and uniform legislation , including principles for keeping the Internet safe .
On the other hand , online games of chance are often played outside the territory of a single country .
This gives rise to serious consequences , not only legal but also financial .
The question as to which jurisdiction should apply , and to what extent it should apply , remains unanswered .
I am of the opinion that since one of the European Union 's fundamental roles is to ensure the security of its citizens , it should introduce regulation at EU level , and also ensure its effective implementation .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 and resumed at 12.00 )

Statement by the President

Mr President , just to announce that Written Declaration 0054 / 2009 on the transportation of horses for slaughter in the European Union has achieved the required amount of signatures .
Can I thank everyone else for signing it .
It is brilliant news for us .
Dear colleagues , today marks the 20th anniversary of Nelson Mandela 's release from prison in South Africa after serving 27 years of a life sentence imposed by the regime in 1984 .
( Applause )
As you perhaps know , Mr Mandela was the first winner of the Sakharov Prize when Parliament instituted this prize in 1988 .
Marking this 20th anniversary of the release of Nelson Mandela from prison , Jerzy Buzek , the President of the European Parliament , said : ' Nelson Mandela is an inspiration and remains in the hearts and minds of so many people throughout Europe , Africa and the entire world .
Nelson Mandela 's name will forever be linked to the fight for freedom , justice and democracy .
Nelson Mandela 's fortitude in demanding integrity in democratic life , human rights and reconciliation in relating to past adversaries has set the highest of standards for us to follow and aspire to .
( Applause )
' Nelson Mandela 's continuing fight and charitable work to defeat HIV / AIDS means that he remains a ray of hope for millions of people around the world .
' Twenty years on , we uphold Nelson Mandela 's message that : " it 's in our hands ” . '
) , chairman of the delegation for relations with South Africa . - Mr President , I will be very brief indeed because the House does not want to be detained .
As you rightly said , 20 years ago Nelson Mandela was released from prison after serving 27 years of political imprisonment .
The world watched as he took the final stretch on his road to freedom .
It was a day that changed South Africa and , arguably , changed the world .
He founded a modern new South Africa .
That he did it with no anger , resentment or bitterness displays that he is a statesman head and shoulders above so many others .
He is , I believe , a living example , in that we are either imprisoned by our history or liberated by it .
With his liberation , he liberated a country , sent apartheid to the dustbin of history and led South Africa to a multiracial democracy .
We salute him .
( Applause )
1 .
Amendment of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1085 / 2006 of 17 July 2006 establishing an Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) (
2 .
International recovery of child support and other forms of family maintenance (
3 .
Community Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity - Progress (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( HU ) I would like to say only a few words .
On the one hand , I would like to say thank you for the assistance received from shadow rapporteurs during these very tough negotiations , for the assistance of the committee , and what is very important , for the assistance of the Spanish Presidency .
When negotiations stalled , the Spanish Presidency put them back on track at the beginning of this year .
The compromise is essentially that the Council approved the text for the microfinance instrument adopted by Parliament at first reading , which was important for a quick launch .
The other important part of the compromise is that EUR 60 million is reallocated from PROGRESS and EUR 40 million from the margin , while financing instruments of up to EUR 20 million can be reinstated in PROGRESS upon recommendation of the Commission .
I would like to ask the Council to read the text of the communication made in this matter , and it would be important to publish this when the text of the agreement is published in the Official Journal .
We will have a very important crisis management tool in our hands .
I would like to ask everybody to help ensure that this information reaches Member States , so that more people in difficulties can use this instrument to launch businesses .
I can promise on behalf of both the committee and myself that I will monitor the launch and subsequent operation of the programme .
We truly hope that it will be a success .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I think it is important that , on behalf of the Commission , I make the following statement , which Parliament asked for .
The financial contribution from the European Union budget for the facility , for the period 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2013 , has been set at EUR 100 million , to be partly financed by a reduction of EUR 60 million in the Progress programme .

When presenting its draft budgets , the Commission will leave a sufficient unallocated margin under the expenditure ceiling of Heading 1a , whereby the budgetary authority - the Council and Parliament - may decide to increase the amount of the Progress programme by a maximum of EUR 20 million over the period 2011-2013 , in conformity with point 37 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management .
4 .
Agreement between the EU and the USA on the processing and transfer of Financial Messaging Data from the European Union to the United States for purposes of the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I propose that the House refer Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert 's report back to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs in accordance with Rules 63 and 175 of the Rules of Procedure .
We heard the Council and the Commission yesterday .
Both asked that Parliament grant them extra time , so that they can answer the requests that we personally formulated on the interim agreement .
Parliament is right to call the Council and the Commission and the United States to account .
It is our responsibility - even more so with the Treaty of Lisbon - and we must assume it .
Parliament is right to put personal safety and privacy on the same footing , because there cannot be one without the other .
By asking you to postpone the vote slightly , the PPE Group is not questioning Parliament 's demands or authority .
It is asking for the ball to be put back into the Commission 's , the Council 's and the US 's court for a very short period of time .
In fact , my group proposes that Parliament limit the time granted to the Council by demanding that the required information be supplied to us next month , not in May as requested by the Council .
That would enable us to reach a definitive opinion in March .
That is not unrealistic , especially as we learned yesterday evening that Commissioner Malmström was undertaking to propose a new negotiating mandate for the final agreement next week or by the next mini-session in Brussels , which is to say in 10 days ' time .
A new mandate in February and Parliament 's vote in March , that is what we are proposing .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to support the EPP 's proposal for postponement on the vote .
I believe that this is a sensible and rational course of action ; the House may have new powers but we must exercise them in a measured and responsible way .
The Council has tried to appease Parliament , perhaps not sufficiently yet , but they have also apologised for their mistakes during this process .
So I think we should now take some time to cooperate and work together on moving forwards and towards a new long-term agreement as well .
I believe it is in the best interests of the House 's reputation , the future of our international agreements and the security of Europe that we now give ourselves this time .
rapporteur . - Mr President , my recommendation is to vote against postponement as conditions for postponement have not been met by the Council .
This House cannot keep falling for fake promises ; the ball was in the Council 's court but it failed to act appropriately and effectively .
The Council has known about this problem for over two years and has done nothing in that time to deal with it .
By withholding our consent on the interim agreement the security of European citizens is not being compromised .
Targeted transatlantic data exchange will remain possible ; the rule of law is crucially important though currently our laws are being broken and under this agreement with its provisional application they would continue to be broken .
Parliament should not be complicit in this .
Finally , the last point , if the US Administration would propose to US Congress something equivalent to this to transfer in bulk bank data of American citizens to a foreign power we all know what the US Congress would say - don 't we ?
( Applause from the Left )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission would support a postponement of the vote .
It will give the new Commission a chance to create a new momentum on this difficult dossier and it would also give the European Parliament more time to see how we intend to process this further .
The Commission is committed to a very ambitious timetable .
I would like to confirm what Mr Daul said - that the Commission will adopt the mandate for a new long-term agreement on 24 February if you agree to postpone the vote .
I am ready to come to you personally the same day to present the mandate .
The Council will get it the day after in Brussels in order to consider it .
I am sure that the Spanish Presidency will do everything they can to agree to the mandate as soon as possible .
The Commission will then immediately launch negotiations with the US to try to conclude them as soon as possible .
We will , within those powers , keep the European Parliament fully informed at all stages of the process .
My goal is to achieve a new agreement with very ambitious safeguards for privacy and data protection .
I think we can build trust on both sides of the Atlantic for tracking financing , but of course this has to be done while fully assuring the protection of civil liberties and fundamental rights .

( DE ) Mr President , I have a supplementary question for the Commission , that is , Mrs Malmström : Am I correct in my understanding , Mrs Malmström , that , in your capacity as Commissioner , you support the postponement of the vote of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ?
May I ask why you did not support these requests during your six-month stint as the Swedish Presidency 's Europe Minister ?
If you had , we would not have had to discuss the postponement today .
Would you like to answer , very briefly ?
( The Commissioner declined to do so . )
( Parliament rejected the request to refer back to committee the report )
5 .
Proposal for a Council directive implementing the Framework Agrement on prevention from sharp injuries in the hospital and healthcare sector concluded by HOSPEEM and EPSU (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes . )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Venezuela
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Venezuela .
author . - Mr President , Members of Parliament have been extremely worried about the recent clampdown on the freedom of the press by the Venezuelan regime .
As you know , media freedom is one of the foundations of a democratic society .
It certainly includes the right to receive information from multiple pluralistic sources .
Recently there have been attacks on media freedom by President Hugo Chávez .
In August last year he ordered the closure of 34 radio stations through a refusal to renew their licences .
This January President Chávez ordered off the air RCTV International and five other cable and satellite TV channels who failed to broadcast his official speech .
Furthermore he has described using Twitter and the Internet to pass on anti-government information as terrorist activities .
We protest against the death of two Venezuelan students who protested against this shutting-down of the free media ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , freedom of expression is not a virtual right which can be agreed on without taking into account the political and social reality of a country .
Freedom of the press to express critical views on the government or politicians whether they are presidents , pro-government or of the opposition , is the most important guarantee that people can have .
This is about access to information from pluralistic sources so that the right to vote is a genuine one .
Unfortunately , the reality in Venezuela is that following many antidemocratic acts by the government of President Chávez against the opposition , it seems that it is now going to put an end to the press .
We are not just referring to the recent case of RCTV International on which the Venezuelan audiovisual authority imposed a retroactive law but also to the fact that since 2009 , 34 of the most popular radio stations in Venezuala have been closed down .
In addition , Globovisión , which still maintains an editorial line independent from the government , is being put under pressure to change this .
Let us not forget that the most perverse way of eliminating the media is to initiate self censorship .
Following the shut-down of 34 radio stations , the government of Hugo Chávez officially announced there was a list of other stations which are about to be closed down as well : a list which nobody is aware of because the procedures are not open , and a list over which a great deal of uncertainty hangs , the sole purpose of which is to promote self censorship .
All these violations are taking place without the competent courts responding to the proceedings being filed before them .
In a country where a universal principle such as that of non retroactivity is not respected , where the judicial authorities do not respond to any appeals unless the President tells them to , there is no rule of law and there is no separation of powers .
Democracy simply does not exist .
Unfortunately , this is the Venezuela of today .
Mr President , I am sorry , but the motion for a resolution on Venezuela tabled mainly by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is a practical joke cobbled together in order to exploit the urgency debate for political purposes and to try to discredit Mr Chávez .

I will resume because there is no point in wasting time .
Four national stations have failed to comply with their statutory registration requirements .
They have been temporarily suspended and are currently complying with these requirements and I hope that they will be quickly put in order .
In a joint motion for a resolution with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , my group reiterates its unequivocal support for freedom of expression and plurality .
I am surprised , however , at the very varied view that the PPE Group has of that freedom of expression .
Was it not you who voted against the resolution on the freedom of the press in Italy in Berlusconi 's defence ?
If you want to make fools of yourselves today , be my guest .
There will be plenty of you at voting time , make the most of it .
Mr President , I also have two problems regarding Venezuela .
One is of form and the other is of substance .
On the point of form , I must say that our fellow Members in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , who for some time now have been actively abusing this urgency session on breaches of human rights in order to hold a party political debate , are creating a complex situation .
It is quite legitimate for them to want to carry out party political activities .
However , this is not the right place .
If they want to make statements of support for their friends or , if anything , criticise governments which they do not like , this is not the time or the place .
However , let us take this urgency session in which we are discussing breaches of human rights and democracy a lot more seriously , because , if we do not we are going to lose all the credibility that we currently have , and this is clearly difficult to regain at international level .
There are many flagrant cases of violations of human rights in Latin America .
Let us also be more consistent .
Do we want to discuss human rights in Latin America ?
Then let us talk about Colombia and Honduras .
How is it that those issues never come to be discussed here in plenary ?
Why do we always have this problem and yet in a case like today 's , which is merely an administrative issue , we get this kind of presence and support ?
This is unacceptable .
It is unacceptable because , I insist , we are losing all credibility and all legitimacy to be able to express an opinion on these types of cases .
Let me be very clear .
I am not a Chávez follower .
I am in favour of freedom of expression , even for those whose opinions are radically opposed to mine , be it here , in Italy or in Honduras .
However this is not today 's debate .
The problem being dealt with today is essentially an administrative matter , a matter related to internal order in Venezuela , a matter which is being resolved and what is more , has even been resolved according to information we have .
Therefore , there is not even a case .
There is no point .
If we wish to continue ridiculing this urgency session , then let us continue along these lines and we will just end up never discussing anything at all because we will have no credibility whatsoever .
Therefore , I urge members of the PPE Group to let us take this urgency session a little more seriously , or it will no doubt end up being completely pointless .
author . - Mr President , let me first emphasise the utter hypocrisy of the right-wing groups in this Parliament which condemned the Venezuelan government for the temporary withdrawal of broadcasting facilities for Radio Caracas Television ( RCTV ) and pretend to be champions of the freedom of the press .
These are the same groups that stand for a system in Europe where the vast majority of the media is controlled by billionaires and major private corporations , who use this control on the one hand to reap massive profits for themselves and on the other hand to spew out pro-capitalist propaganda , pro-market and pro-neoliberal propaganda ; who , in the context of the present economic crisis , vilify and abuse public--sector workers , for example , relentlessly pushing an agenda that it is working-class people who must pay for the crisis , and vilify without end those working class organisations that dare to disagree .
Bringing the issue of RCTV into the human rights emergency resolution today is a major abuse of that procedure .
By the way , most of the media outlets in Venezuela are in private ownership , actually , including powerful media corporations which conspired to overthrow Hugo Chávez in 2002 , who happens to have been elected and re-elected many times by the people of Venezuela .
The reality is that the EPP in this Parliament has the same agenda as the coup conspirators : they want to overthrow Hugo Chávez 's government because this government has not carried out the bold dictates of world capitalism implementing privatisation and deregulation across the board , and they want no opposition to the neoliberal agenda .
Yes , the working class in Latin America in general rise up in opposition .
No , I am not without some sharp criticisms of the Venezuelan government .
Despite massive support from the majority of the Venezuelan people , Hugo Chávez , in fact , has not decisively broken with capitalism and led a movement to genuine democratic socialism .
There is a trend towards bureaucratism in certain senses .
Finally , co-thinkers of mine on the ground , in the Socialismo Revolucionário Group for example , are fighting these trends and fighting for workers ' rights and genuine socialism , which means , by the way , that the media would not be controlled either by capitalist interests or by bureaucratic interest but open democratically to all sectors of society .
Mr President , it is , indeed , here , in the European Parliament , that we should be talking , today , about what is happening in Venezuela , where a dictator is breaking the law , eliminating the opposition , closing independent television stations , expropriating businesses and closing a variety of institutions .
This is the place .
They are evident violations of human rights .
However , there are still other matters , because his rule is not only destabilising the situation in his own country , but it is destabilising the situation in the region .
Provocative action against Columbia , support for FARC guerrillas - these are facts which could actually lead to a real conflict in the region .
Columbia is a strategic partner of ours .
Let us support and be with Columbia at this time , when the country is being attacked so strongly by Chávez , and is being induced , deceitfully or provocatively , to intensify the conflict in the region .
This is our obligation , and if those attacks and the provocation intensify , the European Union and the European Parliament will be obliged to stand by Columbia , to be with Columbia and to support Columbia in a conflict with Venezuela which , I fear , may soon begin .

Mr President , it is always the same : for a better tomorrow , to abolish inequalities , to liberate the people from oppressors and tyrants , to end poverty and destitution , to use the country 's wealth for the good of the nation - someone takes power .
This is the objective of every revolution , and also of those people who , using the mechanisms of democracy , take up the position they dream of , such as president , only the next day to throw away their slogans about liberty , democracy and society .
From that moment on , they are guided by only one motto : ' once we have power we will never give it up ' .
Dictators achieve this objective using the same methods : censorship , secret police , prison for those who think differently , breaking up and dividing opposition forces and complete control of the media .
A kind of founding charter , a symbol of exactly that kind of thinking in the 20th century was , for example , Lenin 's suppression of the uprising of the heroic Kronstadt sailors .
This diagnosis is also true , today , for Venezuela .
Media freedoms are of essential significance for democracy and respect for fundamental values .
The European Commission should take appropriate action .
A few members of our group have actually already given their position , and I also agree that the Venezuela question or freedom of expression is not only relevant in Latin America but the whole of Europe and throughout the world .
If we were to examine violations of freedom of expression in detail , I believe we would find that the problem exists in some European Union Member States .
I definitely support the idea that this matter has perhaps been added to the agenda rather too quickly and that we have far greater problems , and greater crimes , not just in Latin America , but in other states and therefore I believe that today this question has been overstated .
Mr President , I agree that much more serious problems than this exist , but it is my duty , for the sake of consistency , to also denounce what is currently taking place in Venezuela .
I voted in favour of the initiative on Italy .
A few days ago , I was here denouncing a case which took place involving the shut-down of the only Basque language newspaper in Spain , in the Basque country , and today I am here to denounce the closure of Radio Caracas in 2007 and the shut-down of 34 radio stations in 2009 .
I wish that they were only administrative problems and the rights of these media bodies would be restored .
However , it concerns me to hear that President Chávez equates the new social networking sites with State terrorism and to see how the Internet is under serious threat .
It is my duty to defend people 's rights , to defend freedom of expression , to defend the media 's right to provide free and pluralistic information , because this means defending citizens ' right to information with total freedom .
( DE ) Mr President , we know that Venezuela is one of the most oil-rich countries in the world .
We also know that this country has enormous hydroelectric power potential .
Nonetheless , as we all know , the population of Venezuela is suffering the consequences of years of mismanagement .
For decades , this country has not been able to invest its oil revenues in sustainable development or in developing infrastructure .
The pegging of the national currency to the US dollar was probably another counterproductive move .
Recently , President Chávez has tried to overcome this problem by depreciating the currency and getting public debt under control .
However , the nationalisation of banks , expropriation and the temporary closure of food shops will probably not be sufficient to ward off the threat of runaway inflation for long .
President Chávez is pursuing a dirigistic economic policy , a centrally planned economy similar to those of other authoritarian regimes , which is undoubtedly and inevitably doomed to failure .
The situation is likely to worsen even further , which will probably happen if food producers , who have been forced to produce food at fixed , non-market prices for years , attempt to rise up in protest at some point , wherever possible .
I must also express my criticism of the fact that , in this precarious situation in which Venezuelans suffer from power cuts , water shortages and a deplorable economy , President Chávez has bought over USD 70 million worth of arms for the National Guard .
This does not augur well , in particular in the context of the continued protests following the closure of a broadcaster critical of the government , in which students and opposition members have time and again clashed violently with the security forces .
Since , as we all agree , human rights are of particular concern to the European Union , we must make it our business to help .
We must act , not only in cases involving violations of human rights , but also in exploring possibilities which could improve the conditions under which the population of Venezuela lives , without directly intervening in this country 's domestic affairs .
Much diplomatic skill and sensitivity is required for this task .
I hope that the European Union is in a position to do that .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am somewhat surprised that , in this House , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) stands accused of forcing this topic , which , although urgent , is probably not to the liking of any member of the Left majority of this House , onto the agenda .
I doubt that they constitute a majority in this House .
I simply had to ask that question .
Like all the other groups , our group is also perfectly entitled to raise this matter .
Even though Mr Chávez , who is currently in power , might be some kind of chum of yours or of the previous Spanish Presidency-in-Office , we still simply have to ask what action is being taken in this regard .
I am quite amazed that somebody like Mr Chávez can possibly say things like ' Twitter is a terrorist system ' .
I am sorry , but anyone in this day and age who describes Twitter as a terrorist system is living in another world , back in the stone age .
Let me tell you this , as well : We , the PPE Group , will not be cowed by this accusation .
We denounce violations of human rights everywhere .
I personally denounce human rights violations when it comes to freedom of the press .
On that score , let me just say that Venezuelan journalists are spoon-fed and dictated to and that judges are thrown into jail if they release someone who has been wrongly arrested .
As Europeans , we must have the courage to speak out against such practices .
I will not allow Mrs de Keyser and others in this House to pin this accusation on the PPE Group .
Like anyone else , we are perfectly entitled to designate violations of human rights and freedoms , whether in Europe or anywhere else across the world , as topics worthy of debate .
Mr President , the Venezuelan government has unjustly tried to limit free expression and pluralism in the media and on the Internet .
These desperate attempts to censor information and expression remind me of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 's behaviour .
In fact President Hugo Chávez calls Mahmoud Ahmadinejad a friend - and with friends like these , who needs enemies , one might wonder .
Yet the fact that Chávez considers Twitter and text messaging as acts of terrorism shows us that he considers people and the free flow of their ideas and opposition as his enemy .
I am a user of Twitter and text messaging , I have to confess , but in Europe , thankfully , we consider free expression a fundamental and universal right , including on the Internet .
Limiting digital avenues to expression , information and the exchange of ideas is testimony to the Venezuelan government 's fear of its citizens and their call for an end to violence and oppression .
The successful mobilisation of citizens can be seen in the example of Oscar Morales , who set up a Facebook group called ' A million voices against the FARC ' with the hope of collecting one million people online .
He soon mobilised 12 million people to protest on the streets all over the world calling for an end to FARC 's violence .
This movement was fuelled by citizens using technology as a vehicle .
Trying to limit this vehicle is not only unjust , it will also prove ineffective .
Mr President , press freedom and free democratic government are the foundations of the EU .
For Hugo Chávez , the pseudo-dictator of Venezuela , they are simply obstacles on his path to absolute power .
He is a demagogue , not a democrat , and has ruined the Venezuelan economy .
Yet , still , this House has its fair share of Chávez apologists , like Mr Higgins : perhaps because Chávez reflects their virulent anti-Americanism and their resentment of the success of President Uribe in neighbouring Columbia .
It is lamentable that other political groups on the Left refuse to join with us in the political mainstream of the House in condemning the increasingly arbitrary and serious affronts to basic freedoms perpetrated by the Chávez regime .
His response to a TV station critical of his rule was simply to take it off the air .
It reminds me of a similar situation in the PRC - China - where the Communist regime tried to stop a European company from broadcasting anti-Communist TV programmes .
Chávez has , therefore - unashamedly - identified himself alongside China 's authoritarian and hard-line rulers .
His closest friends internationally are dictators Castro , Lukashenko and Ahmadinejad , which speaks volumes .
My group , the ECR , supports the Venezuelan people in their efforts to bring genuine democracy to that country .
Mr President , the democratic and human rights situation in Venezuela is in constant decline and we have to fully recognise this .
We should also be reminded today that Venezuela has been recognised by various human rights organisations as the country with the worst freedom of press situation in Latin America .
Lieutenant Colonel Chávez has failed in governing Venezuela in many respects but he has remained in power only by suppressing the opposition , gaining control of the media and manipulating the electoral process .
I would like to react to some colleagues who have already spoken in this Chamber before me and to say that our responsibility , our mission , is to support the Venezuelan people facing persecution , human rights abuses and arrest by their President .
( RO ) In my view , Hugo Chávez has adopted all the worst possible aspects of totalitarian socialism from the last century .
I do not mean by this his attitude towards foreign investments which is also , of course , a major issue for as long as it is completely random .
However , I do mean his attitude to freedom of the press and what is represented by pluralism , because Hugo Chávez is attempting to copy pluralism , simply by closing down radio stations which refuse to broadcast his long-winded speeches and creating public stations to simulate pluralism .
Copying pluralism is not the same as accepting pluralism because democracy cannot operate on the basis of a caricature of pluralism .
People close to Chávez have already been appointed .
He is nothing short of a dictator because he hates pluralism .
I therefore believe that socialists should not defend him .
One of the victims of the recent demonstrations was actually a socialist student .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to endorse the view presented here , on behalf of my group , by Mrs De Keyser .
There is no doubt that there must be no toleration for violation of media freedoms .
We are , certainly , seeing disturbing events in Venezuela .
I think , however , that we should be very careful about forming unequivocal , categorical and final judgments .
In my opinion , we should be given an answer to a fundamental question : the stations which were closed down - were they all closed down for political reasons , or were some of them closed down because , in fact , they did not meet legal requirements ?
I think an answer here , and understanding what is pure politics and what is legal fact , would have great significance for the position of our House .
( FI ) Mr President , it is rather puzzling how some of my fellow Members here think that it is not fitting to speak about one of the world 's most corrupt countries .
President Hugo Chávez 's opponents are still sitting in prison cells , sentenced on what are clearly political grounds .
Is it not the case that to defend this state of affairs means an embarrassing humiliation with regard to one 's own ideology ?
The Venezuelans are also having to endure completely unnecessary power and water cuts in what is Latin America 's most energyrich country .
The closure of radio and television channels and the violent suppression of student demonstrations speak of a totalitarian regime .
Why , therefore , should we not react ?
As the media have to operate according to the law , they should not be closed down unless the authorities are left with no other option , and only after all the legal means available have been used .
Accused people must also be given the chance to defend themselves and appeal against their convictions .
If the Venezuelan government is committed to the rule of law and human rights , it must protect and respect freedom of expression and appreciate the joys of that crucial input that criticism and openness bring to a constitutionally governed country .
( ES ) Mr President , although it is merely an administrative issue for certain people , for others it is much more .
We are talking about freedom .
I know that for some people freedom must be defended in certain ways and in certain places .
However , I also know that for some people , true freedom , their own freedom , is one that is imposed by certain dictators whom they defend and in some cases they even encourage and not the freedom of people like us who defend this word to its fullest extent , who believe in free media and who believe that land cannot be taken by decree .
You should ask the thousands of people from the Canary Islands who have been subjected to this situation in Venezuela .
We are talking about rights , plurality and freedom .
Unfortunately , certain people do not believe in this yet .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission takes note of the draft resolutions presented by Parliament concerning the situation in Venezuela .
You can be assured that the Commission is following this situation very closely .
In this regard , the EU has noted with concern the continued suspension of media , including RCTV International .
We understand that this is an issue that goes beyond purely legal requirements and needs to be regarded within the context of the question of freedom of expression in Venezuela .
This has been a cause for concern and has been given high visibility at international level in recent months .
For example , in November 2009 , the special rapporteur of the United Nations Human Rights Council argued that the proposed special law against media crimes in Venezuela - I quote - ' would involve serious violations of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and would curtail press freedom in the country if it is adopted in its current form ' .
The rapporteur also called on Venezuela to fully respect Articles 19 and 20 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , to which Venezuela is a party and which guarantees the right to freedom of opinion and expression .
You might also recall that , in 2009 , the European Union issued a declaration concerning those problems , because for us freedom of expression and free access to information are issues that are part of the dialogue that we have with the Venezuelan authorities .
We deeply deplore that two protesters died and several persons were injured , including members of the security forces and protestors .
We share the assessment of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights , which has expressed its deep concern over the serious violent incidents which occurred in the demonstrations both for and against the government of President Chávez and which has urged the Venezuelan government to control demonstrations - I quote - ' within the framework of respect for human rights according to inter-American standards ' .
We are closely following with concern the tendency towards political radicalisation .
The September elections are widely seen as a milestone for the future of the country .
In that respect , the EU underlines the importance of these elections being held in a peaceful , transparent and fully democratic environment .
In the context of the dialogue which the EU is leading with the Venezuelan authorities , we have always stressed the importance of fully respecting international obligations and commitments on human rights , including freedom of expression and the press as a cornerstone of democracy and the rule of law .
As you know , this principle is enshrined in the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights that is now part of our treaties .
This puts a specific emphasis on freedom of expression and respect for pluralism in the media , in Europe and also in our international relations .
The European Union , through the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , supports the activities of civil society organisations in this very specific area .
Furthermore we have continuously supported all initiatives aimed at promoting tolerance , spaces for dialogue and mutual understanding .
In the name of the Commission , I would like to assure Parliament that we will continue to follow developments in Venezuela closely .
Our commitment to supporting and strengthening democracy and the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms will be reflected in our cooperation policy and relations with Venezuela , in the future as in the past .
- ( ES ) Mr President , if the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure is to work effectively , the President should look in the Chamber to see who is requesting the floor , something which I have done very visibly so as to speak in the ' catch-the-eye ' in the debate on Venezuela .
You or your services should keep an eye out for those who wish to take the floor .
Mrs Muñiz De Urquiza , it is not physically possible for me to be looking in all directions at once .
I am surrounded by very attentive people here .
Anyway , when I gave the floor to the last Member , I also said ' the last Member to take the floor will be Mr Mato Adrover ' .
If you wanted to protest , you should have done so there and then .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I support this resolution , for I am concerned with the undemocratic measures taken by the government in Venezuela , specifically those curtailing the rights to free press , expression and assembly , as well as with the high level of corruption , as perceived by the people of Venezuela .
Control of the media and of different opinions is typical for totalitarian regimes .
As reported by human rights groups , in January 2010 , the Chávez government threatened to take action against cable providers that aired channels that did not comply with the government requirement to interrupt regular broadcasting in order to broadcast presidential speeches .
As a result , the country 's cable providers stopped broadcasting seven channels .
In 2009 , Chávez forced stations to transmit live 141 speeches , including one that lasted seven hours and 34 minutes .
As regards corruption , the government should fully and effectively implement the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the other relevant instruments , and take seriously Venezuelans ' concerns about corruption - an indicator of good governance in any country .
2 .
Madagascar
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Madagascar .
author . - Mr President , this is indeed a topic for decision .
It is a topic we have to discuss .
There is a political crisis in Madagascar and this brings us to the necessity of responding accordingly to the necessities also of the country .
The power-sharing deal has been negotiated under the auspices of the African Union between the current President Rajoelina and the former President Ravalomanana .
There is the Maputo Agreement and Addis Ababa Additional Act , which remain the only political and democratic solution to the current crisis .
We must not forget this .
The Maputo Agreement foresees the establishment of a national unity government with a transition period of 15 months .
Let me signal as well that , after this fact , there are some specific and local situations that are worrying in terms of the government issuing a decree legalising the export of unprocessed and endangered wood threatening the biodiversity of the country .
This might cause a lot of problems in the future because they can be lost forever .
In this context , we have to remind the Commission and the Member States that to send an election observation operation to Madagascar could be a mistake .
We ask not to send a delegation to this country under the current circumstances , to the elections the current government is organising in March , as these elections circumvent the Maputo Agreement .
I insist : in this framework , under this consensus and on the basis of the agreement in Maputo , we should not follow this observation election mission .
This has to be accompanied as well by full respect of human rights in the country and full respect of democratic principles and the rule of law .
If these conditions are fulfilled then we can talk about this , but in the current situation , in the current context , I think it would be a mistake .
Mr President , problems of instability persist in Madagascar despite the initiatives of the African Union and the UN .
Mr Rajoelina refuses to share power and is removing everyone who opposes him .
He recently affirmed his intention to organise general elections without taking account of the timetable provided for in the Maputo and Addis Ababa agreements .
It is no exaggeration to say that the anti-constitutional regime of Andry Rajeolina has taken over the three estates and is doing its best to take over the media as well .
Unfortunately for Madagascar , the human rights violations by the previous president 's regime have continued after Andry Rajeolina declared himself president of the High Transitional Authority .
The security forces which he directs have frequently intervened in a violent manner to disperse opposition demonstrations and there have been deaths and injuries .
In its report dated 4 February 2010 , Amnesty International shows that parliamentarians , senators , lawyers , leaders of the opposition and journalists have been subject to arrest and arbitrary and illegal detention and that some were mistreated during their arrest , while the authorities have not conducted any enquiries .
Unfortunately , once again , the facts prove that those who take power by force reign with force .
Mr President , there is consensus on this motion for a resolution .
The illegal transitional regime headed by Andry Rajoelina is in the process of plunging Madagascar into chaos .
It is preparing to make free and easy with the forthcoming elections , which he has announced for March 2010 , at the end of a process which has nothing democratic about it and which is taking place outside the Maputo and Addis Ababa agreements .
The illegal nominations of questionable political personalities , the widespread human rights violations and the harassment and arbitrary arrest of parliamentarians , religious leaders and civilians have upset the international community and led it to impose sanctions .
Madagascar 's membership of the Southern Africa Development Community and the African Union has been frozen .
The United States are refusing it the advantages of the African Growth and Opportunity Act .
The donors of the International Monetary Fund have reduced their budget by 50 % , the UN will examine the situation of this country on 15 February and the European Union has , I believe , suspended its development aid , while maintaining its humanitarian aid .
The situation is therefore tragic , catastrophic , for a population living on less than a dollar a day .
We are terribly concerned about this situation and this joint emergency motion for a resolution is proof of our concern .
We support the mediation efforts being made by Joaquim Chissano , the former president of the Republic of Mozambique , and urge the four political groups to return to the negotiating table .
There can be no other solution .
We are also calling on the African Union and the Southern African Development Community to resume contact in order to bring the transitional process to a proper conclusion and we call on the Commission to report to us on the consultation process under way with Madagascar under Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , there is concern in some of the world 's capital cities that our motion for a resolution could lead to an escalation in the situation in Madagascar .
However , our aim is to bring peace to the region .
I refer , in particular , to Article 14 and 15 , which are quite clearly focused on dialogue .
The African Union , the European Union , the UN , neighbouring countries , the Contact Group and , last but not least , France , have all been called upon to play their part in ensuring that the four ( at a minimum ) different political movements that there are in Madagascar can find common ground , that Madagascar does not become a failing state , that it does not drift further towards catastrophe and that , instead , it finds a peaceful and negotiated solution .
However , this will only be possible as long as nobody tries to establish a dictatorship there , nobody withdraws from the peace process and all the parties return to the negotiating table , or otherwise this wonderful , but ravaged , country will have no future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the same is happening in Madagascar as in numerous other countries around the world , towards which the European Union has demonstrated a lack of political power .
This is particularly true in Africa .
One year after Andry Rajoelina illegally seized power , the large island of Madagascar seems to be slipping deeper and deeper into a social , economic and financial crisis which its people did not need .
In fact , this country has become one of the poorest countries in the world , with the large majority of the population there living on less than a dollar a day .
Human rights violations are increasing .
Religious leaders , parliamentarians , journalists and leaders of civil society are subject to intimidation and harassment and are being arrested and thrown into prison .
The international community , however , has been sparing in its efforts , refusing to recognise that this is in fact a coup d 'état and that the government put in place by Andry Rajoelina in Madagascar is in fact a military government .
Madagascar has been suspended from the African Union and the Southern Africa Development Community .
Since 2 February 2009 , numerous attempts have been made , including by the UN and the EU , resulting in the Maputo and Addis Ababa agreements .
However , since November 2009 , these agreements seem to have become mired down as a result of the divisions between the various protagonists and the refusal by some of them to participate in the implementation of these agreements .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left consider that it is time to let the Malagasy people speak and that it is high time that democratic rules were respected .
Andry Rajoelina , the strongman of the regime , prefers to organise his elections unilaterally , without consulting the Malagasy people , in defiance of the aforementioned agreements .
He unilaterally set an initial date for so-called democratic elections in March 2010 , but now appears to be talking about a date somewhere between the end of March and the end of 2010 .
That is why we want humanitarian aid to be strengthened , for judicial proceedings to be instituted and for the European Union to throw all its weight behind ensuring that civil society is involved in the steps taken .
author . - Mr President , if the African Union aspires to have anything like the authority and respect accorded to the EU in international affairs , then Madagascar is surely a case in which the AU should act decisively .
Instead we have seen the usual vacillation and tepid diplomacy following the fall of President Marc Ravalomanana , which is sadly reminiscent of the situation in Zimbabwe .
It is time for the African Union to accept its responsibilities with regard to Madagascar , where political tension and chaos have been endemic for some time .
If the AU cannot bring itself to sort out this mess , then it is reasonably fair to ask why the EU should do so .
However , we should continue to remain engaged with Madagascar in order to facilitate a smooth return to democratic government and to promote reconciliation .
It is vital that those politicians and military officers who have been cited and carried out human rights abuses should be brought to justice .
Targeted sanctions against the illegitimate regime of Andry Rajoelina also offer an effective way to punish those who perpetrate the ongoing instability without harming the overwhelming majority of the Malagasy people , who must be heartedly sick of the tensions and sporadic violence in their beautiful country .
As has already been emphasised , the state of uncertainty and political instability reigning in Madagascar has been going on for well over a year .
While there have been some glimmers of hope at times during the negotiation process , the actions being taken by Andry Rajoelina only serve to hamper the process , complicating the restoration of constitutional order .
I am referring here to the removal of the prime minister appointed after the Maputo Accords , the withdrawal from the negotiation process with the political groupings and the recent decision to hastily organise elections without taking into account previous agreements .
I believe that this is an attempt to create a veneer of legality and legitimise a regime which has come to power following a coup d 'état , which Rajoelina cannot deny .
It is obvious that the only way of ensuring that constitutional order is restored is to fully enforce the Maputo and Addis Ababa Accords .
( DE ) Mr President , I would just like to draw your attention to the fact that all the groups have endorsed this motion for a resolution .
That is as it should be , because this topic is very important .
In contrast to the previous speakers , I would like to say that we must ensure that we do not merely promote freedom of expression and freedom of the press in this country , but that we also actively demand them , now that we are examining ways that we could help things proceed towards a , hopefully , peaceful election .
We have to ensure that we , as Europeans , establish freedom of the press in all areas , with all the financial assistance that is needed to make that possible .
We also have to provide full support and endeavour to act together to provide financial assistance , within the scope of the agreements which we have with this country .
( FI ) Mr President , it is intolerable to follow the situation in Madagascar , where power is in the hands of a person who took over the country using violent means and who rules it in the same brutal manner , and whose position the international community has not recognised .
That is why I am using the word ' person ' and not ' president ' .
The majority of the population in Madagascar live below the poverty line : 7 000 children are suffering from serious malnutrition , and the situation is only worsening with the political crisis .
For that reason , it is important that we , along with the rest of the international community , increase the amount of humanitarian aid to Madagascar .
It is , furthermore , vitally important to investigate and solve the political murders that have taken place , and that must be left to an independent , impartial agency .
Unless that happens , it will be difficult to build trust and take steps towards democracy .
It must be a priority that Madagascar 's four political factions can sit down at the negotiating table to agree on what to do to enable democratic elections to take place this year .
It is also crucial that Madagascar does not conclude agreements on natural resources before it has a government with a mandate from the people .
( DE ) Mr President , on the subject of Madagascar , it is good that we can report that it is not just the European Union that is concerned about this country 's compliance with Article 96 of The Cotonou Agreement , but that the African Union and SADC , as regional organisations , have also taken the position that another coup d 'état in Africa is unacceptable .
For the African Union and for the regional organisations , it is a relatively new thing , not only to make these kinds of decisions , but also to implement them and to take action .
I hope that when the International Contact Group meets again in Addis Ababa , a week today , on 18 February , all the participating parties will fulfil their tasks and powers , and ensure that any agreement reached in Maputo is also implemented .
That is my appeal to all the participants .
Mr President , may I start by highlighting our very great concern about the obstacles which are preventing the Maputo agreements from being implemented .
Since the crisis started and since consultations with Madagascar were opened under Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , the Commission has actively supported mediation efforts by the international community , which have translated into considerable progress but which , unfortunately , have still not resulted in an effective transition process .
We are very worried because , rather than making progress , we are slipping backwards and there is a clear risk of returning to where we started in March 2009 .
You will agree that this may of course result in a deterioration in the political and human rights situation and in clashes between Malagasies .
We have clearly indicated , on numerous occasions , that we reject any unilateral process which results in hastily organised elections that will not bring about a lasting solution to the crisis .
Therefore , to reply to the question raised by the honourable Member , I would note that we are not prepared to support such a process either politically or financially .
The initiative currently being taken by the President of the African Union Commission is our last hope .
We are prepared to evaluate , together with the international community within an international contact group , the response of Malagasy movements and , depending on the situation , to present proposals for decisions to the Council under Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
In the event of a negative decision , this should not affect projects which directly benefit the population and we shall continue and , if necessary , increase humanitarian aid for the vulnerable populations .
Finally , may I assure you , Mr President , of the Commission 's active , patient and persevering commitment to finding an amicable way out of the crisis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
3 .
Burma
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Burma .
Mr President , the situation in Burma continues to deteriorate .
Do we need to recall the abuses by the Burmese government towards its people , the interminable imprisonment of the Sakharov Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi and her eviction on the false grounds of condemning the forthcoming elections ?
The Burmese government has promised a democratic transition in seven stages , ultimately leading up to elections .
However , if these elections are held in keeping with a constitution drawn up by the army , as would appear to be the case , the only thing they will do will be to legitimise five decades of military regime and give the army 25 % of the parliamentary seats .
We call on the international community , including China , India and Russia , to continue to combine their efforts and exert pressure on the Burmese government , both so that it stops the serious human rights violations committed in this country and so that the democratic transition announced does not turn into a political farce .
Mr President , the announcement , in any country , of the first elections to be held for 20 years usually fills us with optimism .
It awakens hope for the introduction of change and for democratisation .
Unfortunately , probably not many of us , and not many of the residents of Burma , believe the elections which are to take place there at the end of this year will be democratic and honest , or will bring about real change .
The Burmese regime is a problem we have struggled with for years .
In our resolution , we condemn numerous violations of human rights and civil liberties , which are everyday events in Burma .
We still do not know what to say to the people of Burma about how to end the regime 's ruthless deeds .
In my opinion , only joint action can bring results .
Joint - whom do I have in mind ?
Who should take action ?
Neighbouring countries ?
The countries which have a lot of trade and exchange with the regime , indirectly financing it , in other words Russia and China ?
The European Union of course , the United States and the UN - with this group of partners we can bring about change .
Mr President , since 1962 Burma has been living under the yoke of a military junta which is one of the most repressive regimes in the world .
The last democratically elected members of parliament were elected in 1990 .
They have all been arrested or forced to resign .
There are 2 000 registered political prisoners , including over 230 Buddhist monks who took part in peaceful demonstrations in September 2008 and who have been in prison ever since .
Several tens of thousands - I should say hundreds of thousands - of Burmese immigrants are living in Thailand , India , Bangladesh and Malaysia in conditions which are often more than precarious and open to trafficking .
Tens of thousands of people have been displaced against their will .
In this sort of situation , journalists are especially at risk .
At least 14 journalists are currently in prison and I should like here to highlight the case of Hla Hla Win , a young 25-year-old journalist , who has been sentenced to 27 years in prison for illegally importing a motorcycle because she dared to visit a Buddhist monastery .
The junta has indeed announced new elections .
Like Mrs De Keyser , I think that their sole purpose is to legitimise the government in place .
We cannot but be sceptical as to the outcome .
Today , we are going once again to energetically condemn the systematic human rights violations in Burma and invite the Burmese government to dialogue and to immediately put an end to the practice of recruiting child soldiers .
We are once again going to ask the Chinese , Indian and Russian governments to exert their influence .
However , Commissioner , I urge you to be our spokesperson to the Commission and the Council , so that the European Union maintains restrictive measures towards the Burmese government because , apart from words , we do not have the slightest tangible proof of democratic debate .
We call on you to evaluate the efficacy of measures taken and to do everything to ensure that the civilian population ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
author . - Mr President , I have lost count of the number of times over the years in this House that we have debated the serious and worsening human rights situation in Burma , but , if we are ever tempted to soften our rhetoric against the brutal military junta , we only have to look around our own Parliament to remember why we need to maintain and increase the pressure on the generals .
I am referring , of course , to Aung san Suu Kyi , the opposition leader and Nobel laureate , whose picture is displayed prominently on Parliament 's premises in both Brussels and Strasbourg .
She has consistently been denied a voice , as have her supporters .
So the least we can do is speak up for them from here and promise them our unswerving support in their mission to bring about permanent democratic change in Burma .
We have also raised the fate of the minority Rohingyas , who are once again bearing the brunt of a vicious campaign of discrimination and persecution by the army , and many have had to flee to neighbouring Bangladesh .
The generals may simply ignore our pleas , but that does not render them any less valuable because , as democrats , we have a solemn duty to denounce such savagery wherever we confront it in the world .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , a few months ago I had the opportunity to visit some of the thousands of refugees , on the border between Thailand and Burma , who are currently hoping to be able to return to their homes .
In some cases they simply hope to live another day .
Whilst there we also met up with some of the opposition groups , among them the National League for Democracy whose leader , as also already mentioned , is the Sakharov Prize-winner Aung San Suu Kyi .
On several occasions , I was urged to observe with great caution and not to support the elections based on a constitutional reform made by the military junta itself , in conditions similar to the present , which undoubtedly violate fundamental rights with regards to freedom of expression and freedom of assembly , which also clearly jeopardises change , transformation and democratic reform in this country .
It is true that there has been some change .
It is true that last year , in 2009 , hundreds of prisoners were released ; however , very few were actually political prisoners .
The serious problem is that there are still more than 2 100 political prisoners in Burma .
Within this context , it is impossible to contemplate free , fair and democratic elections .
It is therefore necessary to first consider that there must be a suitable environment for elections to be able to take place .
Any dialogue which may enable us to improve the situation will be welcomed , but on the basis that these persons are unconditionally released and a guarantee is in place for refugees to be able to return .
In this regard , I must make an explicit appeal to the Commission .
The reduction in funds which are destined for this area and for these refugees is of great concern .
There are urgent needs .
We are talking about hundreds of thousands of people who require our help .
Hence , I believe that it would be a good idea to avoid cutting these budgets .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the human rights situation in Burma has deteriorated dramatically : political repression accompanied by military and sexual violence , children systematically being recruited as soldiers , 2 000 political prisoners .
The first , allegedly free , elections in the autumn of this year are a total farce .
The opposition parties are rightly going to boycott them .
What is particularly concerning is the position of the Rohingyas , more than 200 000 of whom live in refugee camps .
Many have fled to neighbouring Bangladesh and have been brutally persecuted en route .
I very much welcome Bangladesh 's willingness to allow our EP Delegation to South Asia into the country on a fact-finding mission .
We are flying to Dhaka tomorrow , in order to gather first-hand information about the situation in Cox 's Bazar and the Bandarban region .
However , it is already clear that , in order to survive , the persecuted Rohingyas need comprehensive international protection .
The European Union must persist in its denouncement of the Burmese government 's behaviour , until such time as signs of progress in the direction of democracy finally begin to appear .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( LT ) Like my colleague Mr Charles Tannock , I would like to say that in this Chamber which , unfortunately , is always half-empty at this hour , it is not the first time we have debated the appalling human rights situation in Burma .
Not long ago I myself spoke about it .
I would like to believe that following today 's debates the voice of the European Parliament and the European Union will have a greater effect .
Why ?
Because here for the first time we are talking human rights in the world now that we have the Treaty of Lisbon and the posts that go with it - among others , the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Catherine Ashton , approved by Parliament .
Now the European Union has a more effective opportunity to have a direct influence both on the situation in Burma and on the situation in other countries where rights are violated .
On the eve of elections in Burma , I believe that we will only be able to achieve something if we coordinate actions with larger states : China , India , the USA and Russia .
Mr President , to date , the appeals of the international community for human rights to be observed in Burma have , in fact , produced no result at all .
There are still thousands of political prisoners in Burmese prisons , and the army continues to commit assassinations , use torture and make arrests .
The leader of the Burmese opposition , Nobel Peace Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi , has been under house arrest for many years , and has also received a three-year prison sentence .
This is how the junta wants to prevent her from standing in the coming elections .
Burma is also a leader on the disgraceful list of countries where there is frequent persecution of representatives of religious minorities , including Christians .
In accordance with the ideas of the junta , the Karen people , who are Christians , are to disappear completely from Burmese territory .
Last year , Karen refugees fleeing the repressions took refuge in Thailand .
Today , in spite of international protests , the Thai government is preparing for the forced repatriation and mass deportation of over 4 000 Karens , who will then be exposed to further indignities .
It is our obligation , here in the European Parliament , to call for the rights of religious minorities , including Christians throughout the world .
( FI ) Mr President , in terms of human rights , Burma is one of the world 's most fragile countries .
The list of human rights violations is endless and the situation does not appear to be improving .
In our resolution we have raised just a few issues .
I feel that its main purpose is to make it clear that we know and are still keeping an eye on what is happening in Burma .
We also need to express our thanks to Thailand , which withdrew its worrying decision to return refugees to Burma .
Last week I made contact several times with Thailand after it had announced its plans to return these people .
Karen refugees were being threatened with forced labour , torture , possibly enforced conscription into the army , and the placing of land mines in the area which they had fled from .
It was with a feeling of relief that I heard that Thailand had decided to abandon its plans to return the refugees , following talks with human rights organisations and the international community at the weekend .
I hope that the EU , along with the rest of the international community , will be able to offer assistance to Thailand as soon as possible , and look for an alternative solution to the problem of the Karen refugees .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , once again Burma is at the centre of motions for resolutions by the European Parliament concerning human rights violations .
Once again we are speaking out to condemn the situation in this country , which does not seem to be showing any improvement in the way in which it treats its citizens and which is in sore need of democracy in action .
While other countries have made progress over the years , Burma continues to freely violate its citizens ' fundamental rights .
Aung San Suu Kyi , the emblematic leader of the opposition , is still under house arrest , entire populations have been displaced , children are press-ganged into being child soldiers and people who opposed the regime in place are arrested .
There are too many examples to mention here .
We hope that the forthcoming elections will be held freely and that the opposition parties and anyone who wishes to stand for election can exercise this fundamental right .
We also hope that observers will be able to verify that these elections are free and are not tainted by any illegality , such that the military junta uses the ballot box to legitimise itself .
Mr President , the military junta has ruled the country through repression and committing gross and systematic human rights violations .
As an elected representative of citizens , I call for free and fair parliamentary elections in 2010 , to have a legitimate government in Burma .
The current requirement to have at least 25 % of the parliament as members of the military selected by the chief of defence services falls outside any common sense vision about what a legitimate government is .
Second , I note that the government of the military junta signed the United Nations Convention against corruption in 2005 but failed to ratify it .
Ratification , however , should only be regarded as a first step : implementation is the key when it comes to combating corruption .
Corruption brings poverty and impunity .
( PL ) Mr President , if Burma has decided to hold parliamentary elections for the first time in 20 years , this may mean a step forward in the process of democratisation , if the elections , planned for this autumn , are honest .
In other words , they must firstly be general , with every adult citizen being able to vote or stand for election , including Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi and 2 000 other opposition activists who are currently in prison for political reasons .
Secondly , the elections must also include the several million Burmese who , afraid of torture and death , have fled to Thailand , Bangladesh or India .
It should be made possible for them to vote in their original place of residence .
Thirdly , members of the Burmese army should not have a guarantee of 25 % of the seats in parliament , because this strikes at a fundamental democratic mechanism and distorts the election results at the outset .
Finally , the Burmese government must respect the rule of a secret ballot , and must allow the elections to be monitored by international observers and Burmese media .
If these demands are ignored by the government in Burma , I think it will be imperative to continue restrictive measures against the regime in accordance with item 16 of the resolution .
( HU ) The military junta has promised free , democratic elections for 2010 .
It is important for the international community and of course , the EU to continue to put pressure on the junta so that the democratic transition actually takes place .
We also need to make sure that the numerous ethnic minorities living in Burma are appropriately represented at the elections .
This may put an end to the recurring ethnic conflicts .
China is probably best placed to stand up for Chinese minorities , but it would first have to appreciate its own minorities : the Tibetans and the Uighurs .
The EU can only be credible and effective in exerting pressure if it makes sure that minority rights are respected in all its Member States .
As long as there are language laws in the territory of the European Union , and I do not refer to Slovakia only , as long as the law of collective guilt is still being rekindled in the territory of the European Union in a manner which contradicts the facts of the Second World War , and as long as the mere existence of minorities , their mother tongues and their rights are being denied within the territory of the European Union , the European Union cannot be credible when it seeks to exert pressure , and it cannot be successful , either .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the dramatic deterioration in the human rights situation in Burma caused by the military junta is resulting in ever more brutal bloodshed .
The persecution of religious groups , ethnic cleansing and expulsion , the taking of thousands of political prisoners and the torture , abduction and incarceration of political opponents of the regime are the order of the day .
The new constitution , and now the pseudo-elections that are supposed to be taking place , will not , of course , improve the situation in any way .
In fact , EU delegations and Parliament 's self-righteous resolutions will also not achieve anything .
What we should be doing , in politically realistic terms , is marshalling all of the Union 's powers to exert influence on China , India and Russia to add their political weight to the pressure on the Burmese government to improve the human rights situation in this country .
The EU should also call on the countries neighbouring Burma to bring their influence to bear on improving the human rights situation .
( RO ) Someone was saying earlier that we have already discussed Burma in this House .
I think that we need to continue discussing Burma because it remains one of the most repressive and closed societies in the world .
As has been demonstrated by various United Nations agencies and organisations committed to defending human rights , the systematic violation of the individual 's rights continues to be a feature of life there .
The current trend is to arrest people for expressing political views .
Violent acts of repression have also been noted against those in opposition , whether from the student movement or the Buddhist monk community .
I do not think that the organisation of elections can be considered at the moment because , first and foremost , a consultation process is required involving all political parties .
Otherwise , without any free , transparent , inclusive process , democracy in Burma remains a farce perpetuated by the military .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , as Members have very clearly underlined , serious human rights violations are continuing in Burma .
The military government has not responded to international calls to stop those human rights infringements and it has not released political prisoners , including Aung San Suu Kyi .
Pressure has increased on the Rohingya minority to force them to leave the country , and the deterioration of socioeconomic conditions continues .
An estimated 80 % of the population live in rural areas , and severe problems in agriculture and food production are developing .
The EU has several times issued declarations condemning violations of human rights .
The EU has also tightened sanctions and , in parallel , we have pressed the neighbours of Burma / Myanmar - ASEAN , China , India - to use diplomatic pressure too , and some of the neighbours are doing this .
In addition , the EU has strongly supported the United Nations efforts .
These measures have created difficulties for the military government , but they have failed to make it change its behaviour .
Now the military government has promised elections in 2010 as a step towards its gradual exit from power .
We can only judge these elections when the electoral law is published and when we see if clear and fair arrangements are in place for the ballot .
In the meantime , the EU is willing to engage with the present government to persuade it to use the opportunity of the elections in order to change the situation and to start a positive phase in the history of Burma .
By saying this , I make it very clear that the EU does not want to isolate Burma .
We are , in fact , the biggest donors of humanitarian and related assistance to that country .
The bulk of our assistance goes to the countryside - particularly to the delta - which is still recovering from cyclone Nargis .
Assistance also goes to the refugee camps along the Thai border .
We should also know that the report of the United Nations special rapporteur speaks a very clear language .
We back the special United Nations rapporteur and are ready to help him .
But we also know that direct activities on human rights in Burma are hardly possible .
For instance , the EU will not be invited to observe the elections , so we have to utilise indirect measures .
Therefore , human rights are built into all our assistance programmes .
In order to promote our values - human rights development , dialogue - we need to have a very clear message .
Today the united Parliament had this very clear message , and I am sure it will be heard .
I am also sure that we should not outsource our task of reminding Myanmar of its obligations to neighbouring countries .
We have to remain committed ourselves .
We have to engage directly on our human rights agenda with the authorities , and we will continue to do so .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
Burma continues to experience a very troubling situation with regard to human rights , as the Burmese authorities have prioritised their grip on power over the survival of their citizens .
I should like to express my solidarity with respect to the suffering of the Burmese people , oppressed as they are by a military junta that constantly infringes their human rights by means of forced labour , people trafficking , child labour and sexual violence .
It is essential that political prisoners , including the head of the opposition and leader of the National League for Democracy , Aung San Suu Kyi , who was honoured with the Sakharov Prize by the European Parliament in 1990 and the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 , b