Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 23 September 2010 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statements by the President
On Monday , Hungary experienced the greatest disaster in the country 's history .
A spill from a reservoir containing highly toxic red sludge cost the lives of at least three people .
Many hundreds have been injured .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to express our solidarity with the families of those who have died and with those who have suffered .
Ladies and gentlemen , fellow Members , tomorrow is an important anniversary - the fourth anniversary of the assassination of Anna Politkovskaya .
We remember that she devoted her life to uncovering the truth about the situation in the North Caucasus .
We know how important independent journalism is in every society .
We honoured Mrs Politkovskaya 's determination in the fight for freedom of speech and the press by giving her name to one of the rooms in our press centre in Brussels .
While remembering her sacrifice , we do not forget , either , the sacrifice made by others : Natalia Estemirova , Anastasia Baburova , human rights lawyers , Stanislav Markelov and Sergei Magnitsky , and many others .
Those responsible for their deaths have still not been apprehended .
We encourage the Russian authorities to demonstrate full commitment to ensuring the rule of law and to bringing an end to the climate of lawlessness and impunity in the region of the North Caucasus .
( Applause )
On 10 October , we will observe World day against the death penalty .
I reiterate the appeal of the European Parliament for a moratorium on the use of the death penalty to be introduced in all countries of the world .
Death can never be an act of justice .
We welcome the changes in this respect in such countries as Russia , Burundi and Togo , but , unfortunately , death sentences are still being carried out in Japan and the US .
We believe that public debate in these democratic countries can contribute to a change in this situation .
However , we are concerned most of all by the number of death sentences being carried out in countries such as China and Iran .
We appeal to the governments and to the authorities of these countries to stop using practices of this kind .
( Applause )
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 23 September 2010 , pursuant to Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
By agreement with the political groups , I would like to inform the House of proposals to make the following changes :
( The majority of the political groups and , in some cases , even the decided majority , was in favour of these changes )
Wednesday
Addition to the agenda of a new item : statements of the Council and the Commission on the social provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , after the joint debate on biodiversity .
Withdrawal from the agenda of the oral question on containers lost at sea and compensation .
Thursday
Voting time will begin at 11.30 .
Withdrawal from the agenda of the vote on the report by Mr Maňka on the draft amending budget No 2 / 2010 , part 2 , because the Council has not adopted a position on this matter , and so the debate cannot be held .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the EPP always welcomes good and thorough discussions on social topics during our plenary sittings , but they have to be well prepared .
That was the reason why it was initially decided by a majority decision in the Conference of Presidents that the proposal from the Social Democratic group to discuss services of general interest in the Lisbon agenda and public services in the Lisbon Treaty be discussed first in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We are in favour of this because it is a very complicated topic .
I understand that the title has changed and that the Liberals have changed their position , but the substance is still very complicated and we still want this to be discussed first in the Committee on Employment , because it is a very important and complicated discussion .
We do not want to oppose it , but this is the reason why we will abstain in the vote on this topic .
Thank you , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , for your explanation .
This means that this item is entered on the agenda , but that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has abstained from voting .
The majority of the other political groups wanted this item to be included in the agenda .
( The order of business was thus established )
( The sitting was suspended for a few minutes )
Formal sitting - Timor-Oriental
Welcome to the European Parliament , Mr President .
Welcome once again after 18 years .
President of the Democratic Republic of Timor Leste . - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will start by remarks in English , and then I will switch to Portuguese , and then back to English .
I would be able to address you in five of the European languages , but I will not do that because I will get confused myself , so I will stick to two : English and Portuguese .
I am grateful for the privilege to address this august institution , the embodiment of Europe 's rich cultural diversity and its democratic political culture and institutions .
My admiration for Europe and for the institutions you have created , for the road you have walked from disunity , rivalries and wars to unity , partnership and peace , democracy , inclusion and prosperity , as well as for your deep belief in solidarity among peoples , led me as a Nobel Peace Prize Laureate in 2008 to nominate the European Union and the European Commission for the Nobel Peace Prize .
At one end of the globe , there is the overwhelming influence and shadow of the only surviving superpower .
At the other end , there is Asia , with the shadow of two emerging Asian giants looming over the rest of the region .
In between , there can be the European bridge - a bridge that could connect all in a new partnership for peace and prosperity .
This Europe of inclusion extends from the beautiful Atlantic coast that bathes Portugal to the edges of the old continent where Asia begins .
As I speak here , I am particularly grateful to this august institution , to many of its esteemed Members , to the European Commission and , in particular , to its President , our friend José Manuel Durão Barroso , who has stood behind us for over three decades in our long quest for freedom .
As a young politician and diplomat , first as Secretary of State , then as Foreign Minister and later as Prime Minister of Portugal , he was a wise and passionate advocate for Timor Leste , as he was also for Africa , Asia and Latin America .
But I would fail in my duty if I were not to thank the many other Members of the European Parliament , some of whom are no longer here because of the irreversible ageing process from which none of us can escape .
What we found in this institution from all spectrums , from left and from right , was that you gave us a forum when nowhere else gave us a voice to speak .
It was , for instance , the Portuguese Members of the European Parliament from all parties who , in the 1990s , gave a portion of their own salaries to the person who is today our Foreign Minister , Dr Zacarias da Costa .
He was here for five years as a representative of the Timorese resistance , and it was the Portuguese Members of the European Parliament from left and right who every month would give us some financial assistance to keep an office going here in Brussels .
It was also this institution that gave us for the first time anywhere in the world a pass , an identity card , representing Timor Leste in Parliament to advocate the cause of Timor Leste .
So , in coming back here , I come with an immense sense of gratitude to all of you .
Allow me to turn now to Portuguese , and I will address the issue of the Millennium Development Goals , how we are doing in my country , and what we expect the international community to do to assist us and others .
( PT ) Timor Leste was not an independent country in 2000 and only when we submitted our first report on the Millennium Development Goals in 2004 did we set the first targets to be achieved .
In the last three years , Timor Leste has been truly living in peace , which has enabled robust economic growth of more than 12 % per annum ; a 9 % reduction in poverty levels over the last two years ; a reduction in infant mortality and mortality in children younger than five years of age , with the targets set for 2015 even being hit already ; school enrolment increased from 65 % in 2007 to 83 % in 2009-2010 ; and adult illiteracy is being gradually eliminated thanks to a joint programme between Timor Leste and Cuba .
We anticipate the eradication of illiteracy in Timor Leste within two or three years from now .
Around 30 % of the country 's budget is being allocated to public health and education .
This turnaround is the result of aggressive public financing of social programmes such as direct money transfers to older people , widows , the disabled and veterans , as well as determined efforts in expanding cultivated areas and increasing food production .
We are finalising the road map for our 2010-2030 strategic development plan , which will enable us to free our people from centuries of poverty and increase their standard of living to upper middle class level by 2030 .
Regarding the management of our oil resources , I am pleased to be able to note that in its report of 1 July 2010 , the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative classified Timor Leste first in Asia and third in the world as regards the strength , transparency and effectiveness of management of the profits from gas and oil .
Around 30 % of the members of our Parliament are women .
In the executive , we have female heads of key ministries such as Finance , Justice , Social Solidarity , etc . , and a female Public Prosecutor of the Republic .
We have a permanent Youth Parliament , with 130 members who have just been elected across the country .
The young people elected to this Parliament are aged between 12 and 17 .
We always wanted there to be a gender balance in the Youth Parliament . Nevertheless , our expectations were exceeded : the Youth Parliament is made up of 68 female members and 62 male .
Timor Leste is proud to have adopted one of the humanistic constitutions in the world , in which the death penalty is banned and the maximum prison sentence is 25 years : we do not have life sentences .
We have ratified all the main international human rights treaties .
We have already submitted two reports on the treaties to the relevant institutions , and we will continue to invest our efforts in even further reinforcing respect for human rights , for freedom and for dignity for all .
Our constitution recognises the primacy of international law over national laws ; in other words , our laws must be in line with international law .
With your permission , I will now switch to English .
I will now address the issue of climate change - obviously , very superficially , because of the time constraints here .
While it is a fact that the rich and powerful contributed most to the deteriorating world environment , we acknowledge that the advance of science , technology and industries in the last 200 years has brought enormous benefits to all , even if those benefits have been distributed in an unequal manner .
But we in the developing world should not put all the blame on the rich and powerful for the harm done to the planet .
We must acknowledge our share of responsibility in the destruction of our forests , lakes , rivers and seas .
Asia has no less responsibility than the US and Europe to reverse the climate calamity .
We are almost half of the planet 's inhabitants .
This alone means that we put enormous pressure on the land , minerals , forests and water .
To modernise our economies and improve the lives of hundreds of millions of the poor in Asia , we are using increasingly more energy extracted from planet Earth .
Many of the emerging powers of Asia are also now crossing oceans , searching for energy elsewhere - in Africa and Latin America .
Therefore , Timor Leste - working together with the Maldives , two of the smallest countries in Asia - calls for an Asian common agenda on sustainable development anchored on environmental protection and recovery , on land and water management , health and education for all , and on the elimination of poverty and illiteracy .
I have an appeal to the rich and the powerful .
The rich and the powerful should ask themselves whether they have delivered on the pledges made in front of TV cameras and whether past policies have been effective in addressing underdevelopment and extreme poverty .
All too often , leaders of the developing countries are blamed for the lack of improvements in the lives of our people , in spite of the generous development assistance we supposedly have received from the rich .
But donors should also make an honest and critical analysis of the policies .
We know there is a genuine sentiment of solidarity from men and women in the streets - in the US , Europe and Japan - towards their fellow human beings in poorer regions of the world , but donors must also streamline the lengthy , onerous , superfluous , wasteful , redundant and bureaucratic paperwork that drowns and discourages anyone in our countries .
( Applause )
Donors must invest more of every dollar they pledge in rural development , agriculture , food security , water and sanitation , roads , health and education .
To strengthen national institutions and the democratically elected leaders , donors must provide more direct sectoral budget support to enable them to deliver services and development to the people .
It is disheartening that only a handful of rich countries have met the target of 0.7 % of gross national product for development assistance .
At the same time , generous pledges made in the spotlight of international conferences - side by side with movie stars and rock singers - are largely forgotten the moment the Hollywood curtains fall and the floodlights are turned off .
It is even more disheartening to see how quickly tens of billions of dollars are easily found to rescue failed banks , insurance companies , fraudulent real estate agencies and obsolete auto industries , and how tens of millions of dollars in bonuses are paid to incompetents and crooks responsible for the financial debacle - and yet decades of appeals to the rich to increase foreign development assistance have been met with much resistance .
We believe that one wise and fair way to assist countries suffering from the consequences of the financial meltdown is to write off the debt owed by the LDCs and Small Island Developing States and to restructure the debt of the debtor countries that are facing enormous internal and external challenges - such as instability , climate change and extremism - in many parts of the world , particularly in South Asia and the region of the Great Lakes of Africa .
Timor Leste is privileged in that we do not have a single cent in foreign debt , so our appeal to you is not motivated by self-interest .
Actually if you open the economies yearbook of 2010 - the pocketbook version - you will find some interesting data there .
Timor Leste today has the highest surplus in the world as a percentage of its GDP and not a single cent in foreign debt .
Nevertheless , we feel in solidarity with those countries that for decades have incurred debt which they are today unable to pay and which entraps hundreds of millions of people in the world .
If it has been possible to mobilise billions of dollars almost overnight to rescue failed banks and insurance companies , then there must also be the moral obligation and political wisdom to find the much smaller amount to meet the obligations of the developed countries towards the poor in the third world , to ratify some of the imbalances that are pervasive in the world today .
As I speak here today with a deep sense of gratitude to you - to the European Parliament , to European leaders and to all our development partners - I wish with humility also to acknowledge our own failings and our limitations .
We in Timor Leste , and in much of the developing world , should not reverse roles by lecturing the West - in retribution for the West having lectured us for decades - but should also look at ourselves in the mirror and answer our own questions from our conscience .
What have we ourselves done to lift the hundreds of millions of our people from extreme poverty ?
We can do that .
We can all do better , in Timor Leste and elsewhere .
We have made tremendous progress in the last three years .
Our country has only been independent for eight years .
I have shared some of the figures with you , but there are many other areas of achievement that are not quantifiable .
They are not measurable , but they are equally important .
We have been able to heal the wounds of our society , reconcile separate communities and heal the wounds between us and Indonesia with which we share a tragic history of 24 years .
Today , Timor Leste and Indonesia enjoy the best possible relationship of any two neighbours .
We have been able to build bridges with the entire region .
We have established diplomatic relations with more than 100 countries .
These are non-quantifiable , non-measurable achievements .
Our people , in spite of the profound wounds of 24 years of occupation , do not harbour resentment towards anyone .
These are our beliefs and our convictions .
We are determined to live up to the expectations of our people and lead them towards a peaceful and prosperous future .
May God , the Almighty and the merciful , bless us all .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Eighteen years ago , as leader of the opposition in East Timor , you showed great courage and great vision .
Today , you are the President of a free , democratic , independent country .
Congratulations to you , Mr President , and all the best to your country and your people .
Thank you for your speech .
( Applause )
World day against the death penalty ( debate )
The next item is the Council statement , on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , on the World day against the death penalty .
Before giving the floor to Mr Chastel , I will read an excerpt from a letter addressed to MEPs by the children of Sakineh .
This was sent to me through AKI International specifically to coincide with the debate on the World day against the death penalty .
Here is the extract : ' We would like to thank you for your efforts and the attention that you have given to the case of our mother Sakineh .
We would first like to ask for your moral support .
Our only hope remains the international community and , for this reason , we would like to ask the European Parliament to intervene in a decisive fashion with all the instruments that it has available to it , to help our mother .
We beg you not to abandon us and to listen to our request for help .
Lastly , in the hope that primitive punishments , such as stoning and hanging , will be eliminated for ever throughout the world , we send you our warmest greetings . '
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as the President has just said , I speak before this House on the World Day and also the European Day against the Death Penalty on behalf of the high representative , Baroness Ashton .
As you know , the picture of the use of the death penalty in the world is still a mixed one .
On the one hand , the vast majority of states today are in favour of its abolition , either in law or in practice , and it is encouraging to see that the number of such states continues to grow .
Indeed , we are seeing a strong tendency towards abolition and the restriction of capital punishment in most countries .
On the other hand , the number of executions and the procedures in place for using the death penalty around the world are unfortunately alarming : the 5 679 executions reported in 2009 were 5 679 executions too many .
And with 58 countries and territories still using the death penalty , our work is far from finished .
Furthermore , we all know that wherever capital punishment remains in force , there are serious problems with regard to respect for international rules and standards , especially with regard to limiting the death penalty to the most serious crimes , excluding juvenile delinquents from its scope of application and guaranteeing a fair trial .
The conclusion is clear : there is no room for complacency in the matter .
Therefore , we must use every available means , including diplomatic channels and public awareness , to achieve our goal , and that is why the High Representative has made the European Union 's action for the abolition of the death penalty a personal priority .
What does this mean in practice ?
The future European External Action Service will undoubtedly be able to rely on the fact that the European Union is already today the leading institution in the fight against the death penalty , but the service will also stand as our best opportunity for fulfilling our potential .
It will notably strengthen our ability to speak as one , giving us the opportunity to engage and bring together all the instruments available in Europe for the fight against the death penalty .
Moreover , the European Union is also continuing to improve the way that it joins forces with other international and multilateral organisations that work for the abolition of the death penalty .
The resolution calling for a moratorium on the use of the death penalty under the 65th United Nations General Assembly this autumn should reflect progress towards universal abolition .
It should reinforce and extend the tendency towards abolition that we are seeing in every region of the world .
Close cooperation between the European Union and the Council of Europe is another asset in our fight against the death penalty .
In this regard , and as a very specific example , we are going to join our efforts to encourage Belarus to abolish the death penalty , especially by organising joint events in Minsk during this World Day .
Ladies and gentlemen , because we fundamentally believe that the abolition of the death penalty is essential to the protection of human dignity and to respect for human rights , we oppose the use of capital punishment in all cases and under all circumstances , and we will continue to call for its universal abolition .
Universal abolition is , and will continue to be , a key priority of our external action on human rights and so I reaffirm here , on behalf of Baroness Ashton , our determination to keep the European Union at the fore in the fight for the universal abolition of capital punishment .
I must clarify that , on the basis of a proposal from the Conference of Presidents , a debate will take place with only one speaker per political group .
Therefore , it will not be possible to take the floor under the catch-the-eye procedure .
This is a shame , because the debate is very important .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , the European Union is based on values and the respect for human rights , which need to be continuously defended and protected worldwide .
The right to life lies in the very foundation of them .
The World day against the death penalty reminds us that there are still countries in the world that continue in the practice of capital punishment .
It is the reason why we need to continue in our efforts and step up the struggle against this practice .
Robust opposition by the EU against the death penalty puts us in the forefront of this struggle .
Since the European Parliament is the first EU institution to engage in this effort , it is our duty to influence other states in order to reach a universal abolition .
For the European People 's Party , the fight against the death penalty worldwide is a key priority of our external human rights policy .
The EU should continuously raise awareness on this issue and support initiatives which could lead to universal abolition .
Saying that , I would also like to call on the High Representative , the Commission and the Member States to keep encouraging the countries that have not ratified the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to do so .
Those Member States that did not ratify Protocol 13 to the European Convention on Human Rights should do this as well .
I regret to say that Belarus is the only country in Europe which still applies the death penalty in practice .
We should make every effort to change this situation .
Equally , the EU should constantly raise awareness on the abolition of the death penalty , both in bilateral negotiations and in international fora .
In conclusion , the EU has to be an inspiration to the rest of the world .
Only a few days before the World day against the death penalty seems like the right time to reaffirm this as our position .
Belarus , China , Iran , Saudi Arabia and Sudan : what do these countries have in common as regards respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms ?
They continue to share a primitive and abominable practice : the death penalty .
Some countries use this barbarous method in secret , without even making their statistics on capital punishment public , such as China , Egypt , Iran , Malaysia , Sudan , Thailand and Vietnam .
Only one Member State of the European Union still retains national legislation permitting the death penalty for certain crimes under exceptional circumstances , and in this resolution , Parliament is calling on Latvia to take urgent steps to repeal this legislation .
It is Parliament 's view that the European Union should make use of every opportunity to promote abolition of the death penalty , in particular , at bilateral and multilateral summits and meetings , and especially at the United Nations ; when negotiating international agreements during official visits ; or during dialogue with third countries within the framework of external action , cooperation and financial assistance policies .
It is important for the Member States of the European Union to strive for the application of the Resolution of the United Nations General Assembly on the universal moratorium .
The High Representative , Baroness Ashton , should instruct the European External Action Service to actively promote the universal abolition of the death penalty .
There is still a long way to go .
Despite everything , today there are already 154 countries that have abolished the death penalty in law or in practice .
European Union delegations must include an adequate number of officials specialised in human rights and dedicated to pursuing the universal abolition of the death penalty .
I call on the High Representative to promote a system for identifying all EU citizens sentenced to death in any country of the world and to mobilise all efforts to save them from execution .
As regards the EU 's domestic policy in this area , Parliament hopes that the review of European Union directives on the death penalty planned for next year will be brought about quickly .
Externally , the Union must not just comply with its obligation under the Charter of Fundamental Rights to ensure that no one is deported or extradited to a country in which they run the risk of being subjected to the death penalty , but must also make sure that no information sent to third countries within the framework of international agreements on data exchange puts anyone at risk of being sentenced to death .
In this resolution , the European Parliament makes clear its disgust at the most brutal forms of carrying out this type of punishment , such as stoning .
This resolution includes the names of some men and women who are on death row in their countries : may the light of civilisation and compassion save their lives .
This House therefore calls on the Commission to use every means to act and save them .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , it gives me great pride that the European Union , as a community of values where the death penalty is abolished , is strongly committed to act as a global player on the abolition of the death penalty everywhere .
In negotiations with candidate Member States and in our dialogues with other countries , whether it is the United States or whether it is Iran , we consistently push for the abolition , de jure or de facto , of this most inhumane punishment .
The impact of the death penalty in preventing crime is not even proven .
Therefore , its practice is even more contested .
While there should not be impunity for the most serious crimes , the death penalty in and of itself constitutes a human rights violation according to the right to life , as declared in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
We believe in prosecuting crimes under international law , but always under fair trial and with due process .
Too often , this is not the case and , in any case , the United Nations has established that drug-related crimes do not qualify as the most serious crimes .
The United Nations has also spoken out in favour of a moratorium on the death penalty , and this is an important statement .
At the same time , the UN is struggling for its credibility when Iran is among the members of the Women 's Rights Council .
The EU should still speak with one voice and operate more strategically when it comes to addressing important human rights topics , such as the abolition of the death penalty .
Today , the China-EU cultural summit is taking place here in Brussels as we speak .
This important step should be applauded , but at the same time , we cannot overlook the fact that China holds the record for the highest number of death penalties , the true number of which we do not even know , due to a lack of transparency and the fact that certain people are qualified as non-people .
China is beaten only by Iran when it comes to the execution of juveniles , and killing children cannot be justified under any circumstances .
A celebration of culture reminds us of the essential freedom of expression , but too many people across the world are subject to the death penalty and a fear thereof as a result of the words that they have expressed .
The EU should also step up its responsibilities in providing shelter for people from countries that practise the death penalty .
The Shelter Cities programme should become operational as soon as possible .
Madam President , the annual anti-death penalty resolution really is a very impressive example of how much the EU is doing and has done in the struggle to get the death penalty abolished worldwide .
Granted , there are still too many executions - a great many executions - as the representative of the Commission Vice-President has stated .
We should not forget , however , that the global fight against the death penalty is a success story .
There are now only 43 countries that impose the death penalty .
At international level , the EU is one of the most important active players driving this fight forward and also including it in all bilateral relationships , and we cannot afford to scale back our efforts .
Perhaps we should give some consideration to acting in a more targeted way , because different countries and different governments are structured differently and we may need to apply differentiated strategies .
It will be different in Japan , where top politicians are fighting elections and use the death penalty as often as possible .
We need a different strategy there to the one we adopt in Iran or Belarus .
We may have to proceed one step at a time ; for example , by narrowing the circle of those on whom the death penalty may be imposed so as to exclude minors and those with learning difficulties , or by limiting the range of crimes for which the death penalty may be imposed .
In China , for example , people can still be executed for what is purely a crime against property .
These could be steps along the way to our real goal , which is to abolish the death penalty completely .
The EU needs to be somewhat more sophisticated in its approach .
What we cannot do , on any account , even if we take a different approach with different countries , is apply different standards and make different demands of those countries that still have the death penalty .
This year 's anti-death penalty resolution has a particular focus , which is the US .
As an example , I would like to present one case to you here .
This is the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal , who has been on death row for over 20 years .
He is not rich , he is an African American , and at the time of the offence , he was a journalist whose thoughts and writings were politically radical .
Justified doubts and shortcomings have been brought to light concerning his trial .
In this case , I am asking the EU to do everything it can and to use every means at its disposal to ensure that the death penalty is not enforced and that he gets a fair trial .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , whilst I rise under the umbrella of the ECR Group , my comments are entirely based upon my personal convictions .
I welcome the debate that is taking place in this House today , as it is quite clearly a display of our commitment to a fundamental value of our Union .
Last year , at least 714 people were executed by states .
This excludes China , as it will not provide transparency on the issue .
Many of the states that still have the death penalty as a punishment tool do not have the mechanism to deliver fair trials to those that they accuse of capital punishment crimes .
The distinction between those countries that have capital punishment and use it , and those that retain the power but do not actually carry out the death penalty , is not as dramatic as one would first assume .
The figure I stated earlier does not include all those who sit waiting to see what their fate may be , many of whom are actually innocent and have been denied the possibility of a fair trial .
So , whilst we have this debate , it is a very personal one .
It is not just about those who are facing conviction and the death penalty but , along with them , all the many others that are affected , their families and so many other people in society , simply because those people face execution without any opportunity of a fair trial .
We should concentrate on addressing those cases as well .
Madam President , the motion for a resolution that we are debating today sets out our categorical opposition to the death penalty .
There are simply no excuses for States coldly and deliberately exterminating defenceless people in their charge .
The death penalty is therefore a crime in itself .
It is often more than that , however .
When people who have been sentenced to death are waiting for years in wretched conditions , the death penalty is also a form of torture .
When the death penalty is used to make people frightened to rise up against oppression and dictatorship , as we have seen in Iran , for example , the death penalty is also a form of terrorism .
As Mrs Lochbihler quite rightly said , the African-American journalist Mumia Abu-Jamal is today a symbol in the fight for the abolition of the death penalty - ' the voice of the voiceless ' , as he was called when he was charged with the murder of a white police officer in 1981 and sentenced to death .
For nearly 30 years , this man has been sitting on death row following a trial characterised by errors and shortcomings and with racist undertones .
It is therefore also fitting for the motion for a resolution to highlight the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal as one of the specific cases on which to focus in the coming period , among other things , by representatives of the EU taking up the case with the US authorities , the US administration and , of course , the US President too .
This example is no less important because it comes from the United States , which is , of course , the EU 's ally in many areas - in fact , it is perhaps more important , because in the fight against the death penalty , there is no room for double standards .
In the fight against the death penalty , only one standard applies : an unconditional ' no ' to the death penalty .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree on the fact that Europe must use its moral and political influence to further the cause of abolishing the death penalty .
If , however , we are not to remain at the stage of abstract declarations of principle , the European Union really must start using the specific instruments at its disposal .
For example , Europe must remember that many third countries that still apply the death penalty in the most brutal and barbaric ways are countries with which the Union has concluded lucrative economic and trade agreements .
Above all , Europe must remind these countries that , by signing such agreements , they have committed themselves to respecting minimum standards of fundamental rights .
This requirement is routinely ignored , while Europe looks the other way .
Let us then begin to speak clearly about the death penalty with China , Egypt , India , Pakistan , Yemen , Bangladesh , and so on , forcing these countries to honour the undertakings they have assumed in terms of respect for human dignity .
So far , Europe has only preached .
We can only hope that it begins to put its words into action as soon as possible , something that it has unfortunately not yet succeeded in doing in many cases .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for the eighth World day against the death penalty , I have a thought for all those who have not been spared death : for the 200 000 innocent unborn children we get rid of every year in France ; for Natasha Mougel , the young 29-year-old woman murdered a few weeks ago , stabbed with a screwdriver by a repeat offender ; for the four year-old child whose throat was cut a few days ago near my home in Meyzieu ; for the elderly gentleman stabbed in Roquebrune in January by a man who had already been prosecuted for knife attacks ; for the six to seven hundred innocent people killed each year in France and the many thousands of others in Europe and across the world ; for Marie-Christine Hodeau , Nelly Cremel , Anne-Lorraine Schmitt and so many like them , whose only crime was to one day cross the path of a criminal freed by the law after committing a first terrible crime ; for the victims of all the likes of Dutroux , Evrard and Fourniret , whose lives have been wrecked forever if not lost ; for those who were killed in London , Madrid and elsewhere , victims of blind terrorism .
I think of them because no one organises a world day for the victims , but they do organise days for their executioners , who often do indeed deserve death .
In a state governed by the rule of law , and only in such a state , the death penalty is not a state crime .
It helps protect society and citizens against criminals for whom it is sometimes the only means of redemption .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I can only thank you for your interventions as almost all of them back up our actions .
It is clear to me that we agree on the importance the European Union must attach to this action for the abolition of the death penalty .
As I said earlier , and as I repeat once again , the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , has made this a personal priority .
We sincerely hope that with its partners , the European Union will draw a satisfactory result , as I have already said , from the 65th United Nations General Assembly with a resolution that will further strengthen the move for a universal moratorium .
Because we fundamentally believe that the abolition of the death penalty is essential to the protection of human dignity and to respect for human rights , we oppose the use of capital punishment in all cases and , I repeat , under all circumstances , and we will continue to call for its universal abolition .
As I said earlier , the conclusion in the matter is clear : there is no room for complacency and therefore , we will use every available means to achieve our goal .
I have received five motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 7 October 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The death penalty infringes man 's fundamental right to life and there is no justification for it .
Various studies have shown that the death penalty has no impact on violent crime trends .
This is why I wish to stress that Europe and the whole world must take uniform action aimed at the universal abolition of the death penalty in states where it is still frequently applied , as well as against its reintroduction .
As of the end of 2009 , governments in 43 countries , retain this measure , including one in Europe .
The reality of this situation should give us food for thought .
We have the clout to persuade governments and citizens globally to stop using this act of torture , which is unacceptable to states that respect human rights .
This is a priority objective and can only be achieved through close cooperation between states , raising awareness and education .
I welcome the European Parliament 's resolution on World day against the death penalty , emphasising that total abolition of the death penalty remains one of the European Union 's main human rights objectives .
in writing . - The death penalty is the ultimate cruel , inhuman and degrading punishment .
Indeed , let us not forget that the death penalty affects , first and foremost , underprivileged people .
I am opposed to the death penalty in all cases and under all circumstances and would like to emphasise that abolition of the death penalty contributes to the enhancement of human dignity and the progressive development of human rights .
This resolution was timed to coincide with the European and World day against the death penalty , which are both on 10 October .
The EU is the leading institutional actor and lead donor in the fight against the death penalty worldwide and its action in this area represent a key priority of its external human rights policy .
In the United Nations , the EU has successfully sponsored from 1997 a yearly resolution at the Commission on Human Rights ( CHR ) calling for abolition and , in the meantime , to establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty .
I urge the EU institutions to redouble efforts and use all tools of diplomacy and cooperation assistance available to them to work towards the abolition of the death penalty
The death penalty is an irreversible , inhuman punishment that breaches human rights .
It is cruel and demeaning , and a punishment to which an innocent person can be sentenced .
The death penalty has not been proven to prevent or reduce crime significantly .
It is most regrettable that it is still in use in 43 countries .
Prohibition of the death penalty is one of the priority areas of EU human rights policy .
I am glad that on this day , the World day against the death penalty , the European Parliament is taking a tough stand against capital punishment , which should be banned everywhere in the world .
It cannot be regarded as proper justice in any circumstances .
Thank you .
in writing . - As we mark the World Day and the European Day Against the Death Penalty , I recall that this Parliament stands united in its opposition to the death penalty .
This is because capital punishment erodes basic human dignity and contradicts international human rights law .
Studies show that there is no evidence that the death penalty has a significant deterrent effect on crime , while it does disproportionately affect underprivileged citizens .
Despite these facts , there are over 20 000 people around the globe on death row ; dozens of them are European nationals .
From this Parliament , we must continue to oppose executions in all circumstances and support an unconditional international moratorium on capital punishment .
We also need to encourage states to provide accurate and official statistics on their use of the death penalty .
Under our treaties , Parliament must give its consent to international agreements with third countries .
We should keep in mind the stance of these countries on capital punishment when we do so .
in writing . - The World day against the death penalty is an important cause that reminds us of the unfortunate fact that 43 countries worldwide still retain capital punishment .
I agree wholeheartedly with President Jerzy Buzek , who stated at the opening of the plenary session that death can never ever be considered an act of justice .
I welcome the European Parliament resolution reiterating the commitment of the European Union to the abolition of the death penalty everywhere and calling upon the countries applying the death penalty to declare an immediate moratorium on executions .
However , I would like to see the wordy commitment reflected more concretely in the actual policies of the European Union and its Member States towards third countries .
Highlighting the importance of the matter on 10 October every year is worthwhile , but we must go further than this in order to see some real progress .
The European Union must act in a coherent manner and have the abolition of the death penalty on the agenda as an actual priority item in order to live up to its image as a torchbearer of human rights and human dignity .
Currently , 43 countries use the death penalty .
Most death sentences are carried out in China , Iran and Iraq .
China alone accounts for 5 000 death sentences or 88 % of all executions in the world .
There are also EU Member States where the majority of citizens are in favour of the death penalty .
There are even more countries like this in the world at large .
The main argument is that such a punishment apparently deters potential criminals and reduces crime .
However , the statistics tell a different story .
I agree with this resolution because I believe that the instruments of the death penalty belong in a museum .
The strong calls on Belarus - the last country in Europe using the death penalty - to abolish it at the earliest opportunity are justifiable .
There , execution still remains a state secret .
Relatives of those sentenced to death do not know whether or not the condemned are still alive , because the bodies of those executed are not returned to their parents or children .
Although the campaign against the death penalty is already one of the European Union 's human rights priorities , creating the new European External Action Service offers a good opportunity for us to restate the importance we attach to this issue at EU level .
To be able to conduct an effective campaign , it is important for us to differentiate between , on the one hand , the progress made in certain countries and , on the other , the critical situation elsewhere .
Therefore , although we are concerned that the death penalty continues to be applied in the US , we must acknowledge that there has been a 60 % drop in the number of executions in the United States during the last decade .
On the other hand , we must strongly condemn the Chinese Government which has executed more people in 2009 than the rest of the world put together .
I absolutely deplore the fact that , after not having had , for the first time in modern history , a single person condemned to death in Europe in 2009 , the Belarusian authorities have condemned two people to death and are likely to execute them during this year .
In conclusion , I believe , as does President Buzek , that the death penalty cannot be regarded , under any circumstance , as an act of justice .
Use of the death penalty is based on the mistaken conviction that the severity of the sentence deters others from committing crimes .
In reality , it is not the severity of the punishment which determines its importance in prevention , but its inevitability .
Therefore , it is important to have an effective system for the pursuit and prosecution of criminals .
It is essential that those who break the law be aware that they will be apprehended and punished .
In 2009 , the greatest number of executions were carried out in China , Iran , Saudi Arabia , North Korea and the US .
The use of capital punishment has not been observed to reduce the incidence of the most serious crimes .
This is why , during their social development , civilised countries abandoned the use of capital punishment , as they had first abandoned particular forms of it , such as the breaking wheel , dismemberment by horses , burning at the stake and impalement .
For they are practices which unleash the basest instincts and have a brutalising effect on society .
In Poland , restoration of the death sentence is advocated by right-wing conservative parties , who equate government with the intimidation of society .
Such methods cause fear in society and uncertainty as to what will happen tomorrow , and this , in turn , makes them lead to still greater brutality and crime .
Capital punishment , therefore , causes the opposite effect to the one intended .
Therefore , it is essential to educate people properly about this and to make society aware that capital punishment does not solve the problem of the most serious crimes .
The death penalty is outlawed in the Member States of the Council of Europe and hence , in all 27 EU Member States , but it is still routine practice in many countries in the world .
The sad thing is that in many cases , the death sentence is handed down not for common criminal offences but for the consistent , courageous expression of political or religious views or for infringements of cultural customs .
Europe has come to recognise that it cannot enact laws that permit ending a human life by violent means .
The time has come for it to firmly assert this wise recognition and extend it to those countries around the world that do not think this way at present .
Cultural diversity and different world views are a source of enrichment for human civilisation , and no law can justify the practice of the death penalty .
Unfortunately , ' man is not a beautiful animal ' , if I may quote the great Polish philosopher , Barbara Skarga .
There are many among us , citizens of the free and democratic Member States of the European Union , who are supporters of capital punishment .
This is horrifying , but true .
Fortunately , the death sentence is not found in the legislation of the European Union , and no Union government , not even the most populist , can introduce it .
However , the European Union , by its values and the way it upholds them , should be extending its influence to other countries , as indeed it does want to do .
Therefore , it is important that we act at global level .
Perhaps the World day against the death penalty , proposed by the Belgian Presidency , is a step in this direction .
I hope it will focus our attention on this important matter and strengthen respect for every human being , but also that it will strengthen our responsibility for human rights standards in the European Union as well as in those parts of the world where the death penalty is in use .
The European Union has introduced a ban on the use of capital punishment .
This is the end result of a process which has been taking place in the countries of Europe , although the continent does still have many supporters of the death penalty .
I do not think it is the role of the European Parliament to adopt a position on the deterrent effect of capital punishment , particularly because numerous studies which have been carried out recently , mainly at universities in the US , show that the death sentence does act as a deterrent .
Our role is to take care to ensure that our societies are safe .
Regarding currently prevailing law in the European Union , we should remember that just as we demand respect for our decisions , so we should respect views encountered in other democratic societies and not impose our vision of justice upon those societies .
The societies of the US , Japan and South Korea are entitled to establish such laws as they see fit .
We , however , in Europe , should remember that renouncement of the death penalty must not mean indulgence towards the most abominable of crimes , the crime of murder - in such cases , we need severe punishments which are a deterrent and which isolate the perpetrator , such as a sentence of life imprisonment without the possibility of conditional release .
For if we want to live in a secure society , we must have severe laws against those who violate the fundamental human right - the right to life - and who , in addition , are often prepared to violate it again and to kill innocent people .
in writing . - As we move forward with our efforts to fully abolish the practice of capital punishment , it is important to recognise that there are 58 countries worldwide that still utilise capital punishment when sentencing in criminal cases and a handful of others that use it in particular situations such as wartime sentencing .
The European Union has worked diligently as a whole to abolish this inhumane practice and our continued efforts will pay great dividends .
There is , however , work to be done ; we have European neighbours that have not fully abolished this practice and it should remain our focus to continue our efforts toward complete abolition .
It is my belief that through continued communication and resolve , we will be successful .
Although it is clear that this practice violates fundamental human rights , many cultures around the world have laws that are based on other factors such as religion , tradition and control .
These factors make the abolition of capital punishment increasingly difficult , but it is our duty , not only as Members of the Parliament , but as members of the human race , to continue our tireless efforts to bring this practice to an end .
EU action on oil exploration and extraction in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Council by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the implications of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill for the EU : action on oil extraction and exploration in Europe ( B7-0470 / 2010 ) , and the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the implications of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill for the EU : action on oil extraction and exploration in Europe ( B7-0551 / 2010 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Gulf of Mexico has probably suffered one of the biggest environmental disasters of recent years , and we in Europe - in the European Union - must do everything we can to ensure that such a disaster cannot happen here .
I believe we are in agreement on that .
We have four seas adjoining the EU or situated within the EU : the North Sea , the Baltic Sea , the Mediterranean and the Black Sea .
Oil drilling takes place in these European waters .
In this regard , the subject is also an issue for the European Union .
Deep-sea drilling especially represents a particular risk .
That has become evident from the oil well in the Gulf of Mexico .
There are problems here that are beyond our control .
A great many outstanding questions have arisen to which we still do not have answers .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , that is why we are recommending to you in our resolution that it would be appropriate to have a moratorium at least on new applications for deep-sea drilling until such time as we have a complete overview of what is needed and how we can close the gaps and remedy the shortcomings .
I believe that the citizens of Europe expect us to ensure an equally high level of security for all 27 Member States , and thus for all four seas of the EU , and that there is no gap between countries that are already doing a lot - and that should be recognised - and those that are perhaps somewhat more lax in this area .
I am also addressing our neighbouring countries here .
We have a Neighbourhood Policy , and in the Mediterranean , in particular , there are , of course , also drillings by countries that are not members of the European Union .
Commissioner Oettinger , I believe you are taking initiatives - and that is something you must indeed do - to talk to Libya in particular , but also to others , concerning our standards and our approaches .
The question is : would the EU be prepared for such a disaster ?
What control mechanisms and intervention mechanisms do we have in the event of such a disaster ?
We need answers to this too .
We have the agency in Lisbon , the European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) , which was established in the aftermath of a disaster involving the break-up of supertankers .
The agency thus checks the safety of vessels , but not the safety of the seas - in other words , precisely what we have now seen in respect of deep-sea drilling .
In our opinion , it would be a good idea to expand EMSA 's mandate to allow these things also to come within its remit .
That would at least address the problem adequately .
I imagine that new resources would be needed for this .
That is always a problem , of course .
However , if we want to deal with such a major issue , then the resources will have to be found .
I would also like to mention liability for such major events .
What , in fact , is the insurance situation ?
What possibilities are there for getting the funds needed ?
We need to gain an overview of liability and insurance law relating to deep-sea drilling , and that is something we are discussing .
Naturally we also , and above all , need to see how this applies to small companies operating in this field .
Not all the companies active in this area are multinationals ; there are many small companies too .
How will they manage ?
How can they insure themselves ?
Do we need solidarity funds ?
Do we need collective solutions to ensure that those who suffer are compensated - the fishermen and others who are affected by such disasters ?
We also want to know whether the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive , which demands environmental impact assessments for activities on land , also applies to deep-sea drilling and related areas .
There is much we do not know about the high seas .
What kind of working conditions and social standards are effective there ?
After all , the human factor can also play a major role .
We have good technology , but if the human factor fails , then it could result in such disasters .
Commissioner , you have overall responsibility for energy .
Offshore oil has its problems ; offshore wind would be better .
I believe that this debate naturally opens the way for a different energy policy in the EU - and that also lies within your remit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the absence of new proposals from the Commission relating to oil exploration and extraction - an absence which I should immediately like to point out is quite legitimate since the Commission is engaged in ongoing consultations with the industry and the numerous regulatory authorities concerned - I can only reiterate here our deep concern following the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico and its far too numerous human and environmental casualties .
This disaster demonstrates that there cannot be too many precautions in this sector and that we must do everything we can to prevent a repeat of this type of accident .
We can only hope that , as happened after the Exxon Valdez accident in 1989 and the Erika accident in 1999 , the EU and US regulatory framework for offshore oil exploration and exploitation activities will be strengthened this time too .
The aim is obviously not to develop a framework that is so onerous to implement that it makes these activities unprofitable , but to ensure that they are carried out safely , particularly at a time when the earth 's resources are diminishing .
While we have been awaiting legislative proposals , this issue has obviously continued to be of concern for us , and , although like others , we were pleased when the Macondo well was shut down in mid-July and finally capped on 19 September , bearing in mind the scale of the rehabilitation works to be carried out , we believe that this is just one stage in a longer process .
This is why the Presidency wanted Commissioner Oettinger to share his initial assessments with us at the recent Informal Meeting of Energy Ministers from 6 to 7 September .
In our opinion , there are two things we can take away from what he said at that meeting .
First of all , the safety provisions that are already in place in the EU are the most stringent in the world .
Secondly , due to the fact that oil activities come under various regulatory fields , any proposals planned by the Commission will have to cover these various fields : firstly - since prevention is better than cure - we will have to improve the safety standards applicable to all European waters , but we will also have to tighten up the liability regime , strengthen regulatory oversight and step up international cooperation , for example , with our OPEC partners , as we already did in June .
An initial communication from the Commission is expected between now and mid-October , and due to the large number of fields it must cover - which I mentioned just now - it will need to be discussed by several Council configurations and probably by several parliamentary committees as well .
We must not , however , allow the complexity of this issue to be an excuse to postpone our response .
We intend to ensure that this communication is studied as soon as it is received so that it can be tabled at Council level as quickly as possible .
With regard more specifically to environmental protection , the EU already has quite an advanced legislatory framework .
The precautionary and polluter pays principles are fundamental principles of EU environmental policy and are , in fact , laid down in the treaty .
The oil spill disaster caused by that platform in the Gulf of Mexico may also represent an opportunity for the Commission and the Member States to reassess certain aspects of current environmental legislation .
In this context , it should be remembered , for example , that the Seveso II Directive is currently being revised , and that we are awaiting a proposal from the Commission before the end of the year .
I should also like to point out that the Commission is currently examining the EU 's disaster response capacity , with a view , in particular , to its improvement .
We look forward to receiving this communication between now and the end of November .
Finally , I should like to confirm that the Presidency will do everything in its power to ensure that the proposals which the Commission will present to us are taken further .
Madam President , Mr Chastel , honourable Members , we are all agreed on the magnitude of the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico .
Damage has occurred that will have long-lasting adverse effects on the environment , on nature , on culture , on tourism and on fisheries , and these can only be partly mitigated by financial means .
Nonetheless , we should be thankful that we are dealing here with a capable company such as BP , which we can expect to do all that can be done in terms of providing financial compensation where appropriate .
We are in the process of finalising a communication .
In no more than two weeks ' time , the Commission will officially consult on this subject and issue its communication .
I am here today to listen to your expectations , under the general leadership of Mr Leinen and his specialist committee , along with Mr Reul .
I can tell you that we will be incorporating Parliament 's expectations and specialist statements into the communication that will be issued in two weeks ' time at the latest .
A few days ago , we received a statement from BP that at least contained sufficient self-criticism and which also proposed and announced voluntary steps and remedial action that can be taken by the industry .
We are paying close attention to what is going on in Washington , which is currently somewhat delayed by the electoral campaign , but we note that the government in Washington wishes this very serious incident to have far-reaching consequences for US legislation and policy .
We aim to formulate the highest security standards worldwide for the waters within our reach : the North Sea , the North Atlantic , the Baltic Sea , the Black Sea , the Mediterranean and the Atlantic off the coast of West Africa .
We have authority in our own territorial waters , but we are also endeavouring to pass on these standards to areas beyond our borders .
Mr Leinen indirectly referred to Libya .
We are also concerned with drilling that affects our coastlines and seas , but which does not take place directly in our seas .
We are talking about oil , and also about gas .
We are talking generally about offshore exploration and extraction of hydrocarbons and the best possible level of technical security .
We note that the United Kingdom - the UK - and Norway can be assumed to have the most experience as well as high , acceptable standards , and we therefore consider it particularly important to cooperate with the government in London and with the Norwegian Government .
Firstly , we want to check the security precautions for future licences ; in other words , what higher or highest standards are possible for new authorisations .
Secondly , we want to look into upgrading existing rigs , some of which are 20 or more years old .
The standard that was acceptable at that time is not comparable with what is feasible and politically expected today .
Then there is the matter of regular checks .
We need to increase the density of our control network , and increase the frequency and quality of checks accordingly .
There are also questions relating to insurance law , such as the matter of how far we can make comprehensive insurance cover obligatory for companies engaged in extraction so as to minimise and remedy any damage - at least economically and financially - as far as possible in the event of a worst case scenario .
A further matter that concerns me is how we can export our security standards to other parts of the world .
If BP now intends to carry out extraction and build rigs off the coast of Libya , then this gives us an opportunity to approach the European energy industry - namely BP , Shell , Total - and obtain voluntary commitments that they will voluntarily accept and apply the same strict standards that they are obliged to adopt within the territory of the European Union in these neighbouring regions as well .
In specific terms , this means that an offshore oil rig off the coast of Libya that is built and operated by BP , or perhaps a rig off the coast of West Africa that is operated by a European energy enterprise , should and must maintain the same standards as those operated in the North Sea where such standards are enshrined in law .
Overall , then , please give us two weeks .
We are on track to meet the objectives of our communication .
Any other expectations that you , the honourable Members , convey to us today will be taken into account and we will be sure to present legislative proposals for what is set out in our communication in the first half of 2011 .
Madam President , I would first like to thank Commissioner Oettinger for having taken up the reins and for having reacted as soon as the oil disaster occurred .
Naturally , we must take into account the fact that the starting point in the US is different to that which we have in Europe .
Nonetheless , I believe that there is a need to act here in Europe too , and there is a need to carry out a thorough analysis of both the actual conditions in Europe and the legal situation in order that we can make appropriate proposals .
We must bear in mind that the legal situation is , of course , complicated by the fact that we are dealing , in part , with international waters and , in part , with waters belonging to the Member States .
I believe that we must look into the matter of where exactly the Community can act as a community and make legal proposals to improve the situation .
Our starting point must always be to create the highest security standards for people and for the environment , so as to prevent such disasters from the outset .
Nevertheless , I feel that it is important that we continue to explore for oil and gas throughout Europe in order to further diversify our energy sources .
That should remain in the back of our minds .
As I mentioned , however , security must take precedence .
I see three areas in which we can act here .
The first is to look at where we need to change the legal situation in the EU .
The Seveso II Directive , the directive on environmental liability and the third maritime safety package all come to mind here .
These are definitely areas which the Commission needs to address and we look forward to hearing your proposals .
The second is the financial framework .
I believe that insurance solutions would offer the appropriate security to enable financial compensation to be provided following disasters .
A third area is emergency management within the EU .
Is it really necessary for each Member State to maintain the full capacity needed to deal with such disasters ?
Could we not find a means of cooperating here at EU level and strengthen this so as to relieve the pressure on the Member States a little ?
The environmental disaster in the Gulf of Mexico highlighted the lack of safety and security of oil operations .
This heart-breaking tragedy , which claimed human lives and did untold damage to the environment , must also be an important lesson to us in Europe .
I welcome the Commission 's initiative to carry out a test of the safety of offshore oil platforms operating in the territory of the European Union .
However , in order to ensure this fully , it is necessary to take measures on a wider scale .
Above all , the Commission should assess the European Union 's capacity for immediate and effective response to accidents and develop a European action plan .
Current regulation is clearly lacking in content and scope , both in terms of safety and responsibility for damage done .
Huge infrastructure projects are currently being implemented in the European Union whose safety has perhaps not been assessed comprehensively and properly .
This includes the much debated Nord Stream gas pipeline and other oil and gas infrastructure , which is necessary for Europe to achieve energy security , but which must satisfy environmental requirements of the highest level .
The issue of responsibility must therefore be resolved clearly : the polluter compensates for damage done and furthermore , it is necessary to adopt compulsory EU-wide insurance schemes .
In order to avoid similar disasters , particular attention should be paid to preventive measures .
Therefore , in my opinion , the Commission should analyse the establishment of an effective monitoring system , strengthen inspection methods and tighten minimum compulsory EU safety rules .
I agree with the proposals made by our colleagues for the Commission to also provide annual reports , which would allow us to both assess the true situation and take measures in time , as and when necessary .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the Commission and the Member of the Commission for the fact that we will have a communication so soon and will be able to begin to examine in more detail what Europe really needs .

Madam President , Mr Chastel , Commissioner , the Gulf of Mexico incident is a watershed .
As the events taking place at this very moment in Hungary unfortunately demonstrate , Europe is clearly not safe from large-scale industrial accidents .
Our joint task is precisely to anticipate disasters , not to simply wait for them to occur and then muster the resources to deal with them .
What do I mean by ' anticipate ' ?
Firstly , to have suitable , preventive legislation .
No such legislation yet exists .
We need to conduct sound preliminary studies , and I am pleased to hear about the plans to apply Seveso II to offshore platforms .
We also need to carry out sound impact assessments and - this is extremely important - establish a liability system that acts as a deterrent , so that it is in operators ' economic interests to guarantee safety .
Finally , the technical resources must be in place to ensure that any eventuality can be dealt with within a few days or even hours .
This does not mean simply being able to react on paper ; it means being able to react in the real world .
I dare not imagine what would happen if there were a situation similar to the one in the Gulf of Mexico in an enclosed sea such as the Mediterranean that lasted for several weeks or even months .
Of course , we also need - as you mentioned - a fair liability system to compensate damage .
The Environmental Liability Directive , I recall , does not cover economic damage .
That is why I think it is essential for us to do as the US had no hesitation in doing , and introduce a moratorium on new installations so that the conditions mentioned just now can be fulfilled .
This does not mean shutting down current operations , but suspending the issue of any new licences so as to ensure that all public and private stakeholders have the same objective : to establish , as quickly as possible , the legislation and technical resources to protect us from a disaster on the scale of the one in the US .
I think that all these actions would be a step in the right direction ; although I would point out that our common goal is to gradually wean society off oil , not to ensure that we remain dependent on it .
Madam President , I concur with the speech by Mrs Lepage , particularly the last section .
Five months ago , on 20 April , the unthinkable happened , in the form of the terrible disaster in the Gulf of Mexico .
It took five months for the leak to be stopped for good .
Therefore , we , the European legislator , need to ensure that a disaster of this kind can never occur in European waters .
That is why we are holding this debate .
That is why we are taking action .
The resolution on which we voted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety is largely in keeping with the analysis and with the policy and the willingness of Commissioner Oettinger .
Commissioner Oettinger has already appeared in plenary a couple of times to set forth what he stands for and what he wants to do .
Our resolution is much in line with this .
I regret the Council 's stated intention to await proposals from the Commission before reacting .
I had , in fact , expected the Council to react to the proposals being put forward by Parliament in the current debate .
These proposals , of which there are many , are important .
We are , in fact , calling on Member States to establish a moratorium until accidents can be ruled out ; until compliance with adequate safety rules has been ensured .
We want there to be a moratorium until we can be sure that the legislation on liability is fully in order .
We want to look into the situation as regards the supervision of the supervisors .
We want to ensure that steps are also undertaken to decommission installations that are still operational and which may need to be decommissioned shortly .
We want to see the mandate of the European Agency for Maritime Safety ( EMSA ) extended .
We want that organisation to be responsible for marine pollution caused not only by seagoing ships but also by oil platforms in the event of a disaster .
These are all very tangible things that are set out in this resolution .
Mr Chastel , I regret that you are refraining from giving a reaction , on behalf of the Council , to Parliament 's proposals in this House and are awaiting the proposals to be presented by Commissioner Oettinger , the first of which is due as soon as next week in the form of the stress test on the existing legislation .
Hearty congratulations to the Commission , then , and a rather reserved attitude towards the Council .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , the Gulf of Mexico oil spill was a wake-up call for the oil sector .
There is no question about that .
We are all keenly aware of that fact , but let us be careful we do not overreact .
I agree when we say that we must have proper compensation for all those , particularly in the fisheries sector , who lose their livelihood because of an oil spill or any accident of this nature which - heaven help us - I hope does not happen in any of our waters .
We must set up either a compensation fund or an insurance fund to which the oil companies themselves would contribute .
However , when I hear good colleagues like Mrs Lepage calling for a moratorium on exploratory drilling , I really feel that is going too far .
That is an overreaction .
We have 20 years , two decades , of experience in deepwater drilling in the North Sea and off the west coast of Scotland - two decades in which we have exported some of the highest level safety technology in the world .
We have got more than 315 deepwater wells , i.e. wells over 300 metres deep , while some of them have been up to 1 600 metres deep .
It is early days to look at the analysis of what happened in the Gulf of Mexico , but from the evidence , it already seems that if our technology , which we have been using for two decades in the North Sea , had been used there , we would not have had the oil spill , or it would have been contained much more rapidly .
So do not let us suddenly slam the door on one of the safest and most secure industries that we have in Europe , when this year alone , we have already invested GBP 6 billion in exploratory work in the North Sea and off the coast of Shetland .
Do not overreact and send the message worldwide that we in the European Parliament feel that our European industry is no longer safe .
This is one of our great export earners .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Leinen and the Commissioner on their briefing .
I should also like to express my displeasure at the fact that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which is responsible for industry and research , is absent from the resolution .
I would say that , because of this absence , we have paragraphs which are unrealistic or create huge problems for extraction industries .
We said we would control them , not wipe them out .
That is why we absolutely agree with the amendment tabled by Mr Callanan to delete paragraph 17 and I would also note that paragraph 22 puts a financial burden on extraction companies which we should be careful about .
I would further note that there is a major omission in the text : there is no reference whatsoever to promoting research and development in the extraction sector .
We could work with the Americans here and advance research and technology , which will help us to deal with this sort of crisis .
Madam President , the real significance of the Deepwater disaster is being missed .
The real question is why BP is drilling for oil through 5 000 metres of rock , in water 1 500 metres deep , in the middle of a hurricane zone .
The answer is peak oil - the point at which we have used the half of the world 's reserves that were easy , safe and cheap to produce , and now rely on shrinking reserves which are increasingly inaccessible , dangerous and expensive , both financially and environmentally .
Deepwater is merely a symptom of peak oil .
Using it as an excuse for yet another EU power grab will not stop us reaching peak or suffering its potentially catastrophic consequences .
Instead of talking about symptoms , it is time to get serious about the disease : the fact that we have used all the easy oil and are still addicted to the stuff .
In recent months , this reality has begun to dawn on - among others - President Obama , the British Government and the German military .
It is time for the EU to take its head out of the sand , stop obsessing about climate change , and study and address the real crisis : peak oil .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Chastel , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this was a major disaster , and there are various ways of reacting to disasters .
You can rush about taking action and make a new declaration every week , or you can investigate the situation thoroughly and then consider where things need to be changed .
Where the starting point is concerned , for example , it has been established that the situation in the United States is not really comparable with that in Europe .
Commissioner Oettinger has chosen the latter path : to proceed in a sober , objective manner , one step at a time .
That is how you make policy , and it is how you gain the support of our citizens .
I am grateful firstly that the Commissioner has chosen this course , and secondly that he has involved all the committees .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy were jointly involved in plenary and both participated in the discussions with the Commissioner at which we were able to go into the facts in more depth .
Unfortunately , I must point out - as Mrs Tzavela has already mentioned - that the Environment Committee then felt it had to submit a resolution unilaterally .
I consider that to be absolutely unacceptable .
Moreover , rushing out any old hasty document does not serve the end of parliamentary cooperation and does not serve to deal with this issue properly .
We have learned - as , in fact , we all knew - that the Commission is to present a communication next week or the week after that analyses the consequences of what has occurred .
We will then , as the Council quite rightly points out , be able to consider intelligently what the consequences should be .
The Environment Committee felt it had to present a motion for a resolution on this quickly , so now we have been presented with a resolution that I consider to be overhasty throughout .
As far as I am concerned , it contains errors and completely disregards a great many aspects relating to research and technology , as Mrs Tzavela has just pointed out .
Who cares ?
All that matters is to get something out , even if it addresses the matter from only one perspective .
This is absolutely unacceptable .
Moreover , drawing the conclusion that a moratorium should be pronounced is a successful attempt to draw attention to Europe as a centre of industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is no way to go about things .
I am grateful for being allowed to take the floor .
Here at least , one can still speak .
My committee was not involved in the resolution at all .
( CS ) The explosion of the Deepwater drilling platform was most definitely a major disaster .
It was a warning both for the United States and for Europe .
However , there was one warning we overlooked .
At the same time as the ENVI Committee was discussing Deepwater Horizon in the Gulf of Mexico , oil was escaping from the Jebel al-Zayt drilling platform , which is a few kilometres offshore in Egypt , and we learned about the leak from tourists .
We did not even hear about it from the mass media , and when I asked a Commission representative during a session of the ENVI Committee whether he had information on this rather small but nonetheless near at hand disaster , or rather oil leak , he had none .
No one had this information .
Therefore , in addition to the other subjects which fellow Members have discussed here , I would like to mention one more , namely , that it is always necessary to have timely and high quality information which will not be misreported for political reasons , as was the case when the Egyptian Government misreported the oil leak in Jebel al-Zayt .
In my opinion , a moratorium is one of the possible solutions , though we obviously cannot prohibit and restrict the energy industry if it is to supply us with what we need .
It is necessary to have unified safety standards , because European Union standards in the North Sea are very high , but in the Black Sea , they are no longer applied .
Such a divergent approach is unacceptable , and we must ensure that there are unified safety standards to protect the entire European coastline .
( NL ) Madam President , the circumstances in the Gulf of Mexico are not comparable with those in our waters , of course , but I am delighted that the European Union has nevertheless seized the opportunity to examine its own legislation .
After all , this is urgently needed .
There are two very important elements as far as I am concerned .
The first is the controls .
Several of my fellow Members have spoken about this .
These controls are essential .
Even more important by far in my eyes is the element of liability ; and , to be honest , it was rather a shock to me that this is not well organised even in our European waters .
Why is liability so important ?
Sound regulation would be the big stick par excellence to induce oil companies primarily to take a great many measures themselves to reduce the risks - that is why I consider this important .
For that reason , I strongly advocate not granting new licences until that liability has been regulated .


( NL ) Madam President , I should like to address , in particular , my fellow Members , Mr Stevenson and Mr Reul , who say that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety was too quick to react .
Let us be honest ; this disaster happened five months ago and Europe is only now presenting a resolution : that is by no means too quick .
We in the Committee on the Environment have been working on this for a long time .
I should also like to express my warm thanks to the Commission , as it was proactive and admitted that the legislation on liability is not clear and that , quite simply , there are gaps between European and national legislation .
Such things are not regulated properly .
Until we know that this area is regulated properly , we must simply stop any new deep-sea drilling .
This moratorium would apply not to the whole sector but only to new deep-sea drilling .
It is not an overreaction ; it is a very calm reaction .
We are also aware that an investigation is still under way in the Gulf of Mexico into what went wrong .
This needs to come to light and , until then , there should be no new activity .
( PL ) Madam President , catastrophes and very spectacular events , such as the leak in the Gulf of Mexico , are very often the stimulus for general changes in policy and great schemes of regulatory reforms .
However , action which is dictated by emotions is not always rational , so I would appeal for a great deal of caution and care in imposing new obligations on firms , be they in the area of insurance , environmental standards or safety standards , because in the European Union , these standards are , in any case , the highest in the world .
We are at a different stage of development in this area of legislation .
The only consequence of such hyper-regulation can be a weakening of Europe 's competitiveness and a stronger position for the extraction industry everywhere outside the European Union .
The situation is similar in the case of a moratorium on off-shore drilling - such a moratorium will produce effects which are , most probably , completely the opposite to those which were intended .
A moratorium means more ships sailing to European coasts and , therefore , more danger to the environment .
This is why I am appealing , in both cases - in the case of legislation , and in the case of the moratorium - for a great deal of caution .
( PL ) Madam President , this is now the third debate in the European Parliament which shows the great importance we attach to safety in the extraction of crude oil in European seas .
We do not want a repetition of the catastrophe which occurred in the Gulf of Mexico to be possible on the coast of our continent .
In the first three months of this year alone , there were 175 disruptions to the operation of drilling platforms in the North Sea , of which 8 were described as very serious incidents .
In 32 cases , operation of these installations was halted .
Another problem is that these platforms have been heavily exploited .
Of 103 platforms which were commissioned in the North Sea at the beginning of the 1970s , 44 will have reached what is known as technical death in five years ' time , and 26 have already exceeded the permissible exploitation period , but have been given an extension of the right to extract oil .
Installations have also changed owners over the last 30 years , and the new administrators do not necessarily share the same culture of exploitation in terms of safety .
The pressure to maximise extraction does not go hand-in-hand with measures intended to improve safety or with proper risk assessment .
Therefore , we support the Commissioner 's work , which aims to make a thorough analysis of legislation on oil extraction in European seas , and , if the need arises , to introduce new and essential provisions in order to cover the dangers resulting from the extraction of oil at sea and to tighten up the principles of liability in the event of accidents which cause contamination involving crude oil .
It is essential to establish the highest standards of safety for deep-sea drilling in European seas and to apply them to all parties working in European territorial waters .
This must also apply to firms which come from outside the European Union .
We must not allow a situation , for example , if exploitation of deposits in the Arctic is to be undertaken by Norway and Russia , in which one of these countries is going to use technology which does not incorporate the highest standards of safety used by firms belonging to the European Union .
Madam President , as many other speakers have said , the Gulf of Mexico disaster was a wake-up call for the industry .
However , I listened carefully to what the Commissioner said in his introduction and his comments and I agree with the commitments he gave that we need to improve standards , we need to improve quality , and we need to ensure that the EU can be a leader in this field and that we can export our safety systems around the world and make sure that others follow .
I also welcome his recognition in his contribution that , in the North Sea , the UK and Norway are already operating to some of the highest standards in the world .
We in Scotland have had our disaster in the North Sea - in the Piper Alpha disaster , just over 20 years ago , when over 100 people were killed .
That led to a wide-scale review of safety standards which has resulted in the very high standards that we now have today .
I support much of what is in the question that Jo Leinen has led on today , but I do not believe that the open-ended call for a moratorium is proportionate and is a sensible response to the challenge we face .
I hope Parliament will think twice about going as far as that .
( PL ) Madam President , there is no doubt that the safety of the extraction and of the transport of natural materials should be monitored by the European Commission .
A key issue , besides that of optimal safety standards , should also be the preparedness of the enterprises which extract and transport natural materials for emergencies which might cause contamination of the environment on a large scale .
We must not forget the necessary financial resources which should be set aside by firms engaged in this kind of economic activity .
Soon , a gas pipeline pumping huge amounts of gas along the bottom of the Baltic Sea will be commissioned .
I think this is the perfect opportunity to ask if the European Commission has done anything to protect the interests of millions of Europeans who live on the Baltic coast and who might be the victims of an ecological disaster on an unprecedented scale as the result of an explosion or leak from this gas pipeline .
It should also be recalled that a European Parliament resolution drafted two years ago concerning preparation for the ecological effects of this investment has been completely ignored , and the investment is now under way .
What will the European Commission do on this matter so that we will not regret the wasted time when a disaster occurs ?
( FR ) Madam President , the scale of the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico is clearly such that it demands us EU political representatives to ask ourselves questions about the safety of our own oil installations .
In fact , one of the keys to protecting the marine environment is to ensure that oil exploration sites are as safe as possible .
Nevertheless , the idea of a moratorium on current and future oil drilling in our waters is clearly premature and inappropriate .
Premature , because the outcome of the investigation into the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico is not yet known , and some preliminary conclusions confirm that it was due to a combination of behavioural , organisational and technical errors .
Inappropriate because - as has been said several times - different regulations apply in the North Sea , in the Mediterranean and in the Gulf of Mexico .
Is it worth pointing out here the serious economic and social consequences that a moratorium would have , not to mention how it might jeopardise our energy independence ?
Last week , Norway and Russia ended a 40-year dispute and a 30-year moratorium by confirming the principle of a common maritime border in the Barents Sea and the Arctic .
This agreement will , in practice , result in the two countries sharing a hydrocarbon-rich area .
How , then , could the EU executive at the same time plan to ask for these oil activities to be suspended and for them to voluntarily place themselves in a position of weakness from an energy and economic point of view ?
( PL ) Madam President , the unprecedented ecological catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico should persuade the Member States of the European Union to carry out close monitoring of drilling platforms in waters where crude oil is extracted .
We are even seeing the appearance of proposals to introduce a moratorium on new drilling until the risk of danger to the environment has been excluded .
These suggestions are based on the assumption that since sea basins have no borders , an ecological disaster in one of them would affect them all .
Such an approach is in accord with the resolution adopted two years ago by the European Parliament on the ecological hazard to the Baltic in relation to the Nord Stream project .
We hope the European Commission will adopt an equally resolute and judicious approach to monitoring gas investments on the Baltic sea bed and that in doing so , it will make use of all possible instruments .
It is worth considering , too , if support should not also be given to alternative technologies , such as the extraction of shale gas .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard a great deal about this oil disaster and we all saw the shocking pictures on our television screens .
However , did you know , ladies and gentlemen , that in past years , 97 % , I repeat , 97 % of all deliberate infringements of safety regulations by American oil companies were committed by British Petroleum ?
Did you know that in the last ten years , numerous accidents were caused by that company ?
Are you aware that British Petroleum has significantly reduced its safety and maintenance budget in order to maintain profits ?
This has also played a role in the ever-increasing number of accidents .
Mrs Lepage has just mentioned that the most important thing is to anticipate and prevent disasters .
We all know that prevention is the most important thing .
She is right about that .
However , I think the American disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , just like other industrial or natural disasters of the past years or the catastrophic event the day before yesterday in Hungary , clearly proves that natural and industrial disasters can happen anywhere and at anytime .
This is why I believe that compensation for damages , as well as rapid and effective damage control are very important .
We talk a great deal about extreme weather conditions and their consequences and hazards , and how they increase the risk of natural and industrial disasters .
I think this is true , and if it is true , then we have to think ahead .
We must also heed the warning signs , such as the Hungarian disaster two days ago , or the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico in the spring .
I therefore suggest to my fellow Members and to Parliament that we set up a European disaster fund for effective damage control .
( SL ) The disaster in the Gulf of Mexico is terrifying .
It has highlighted a lack of safety standards and an inadequacy in the action taken in the wake of the oil spill .
Although it has occurred in the United States , i.e. under American regulatory requirements and standards , we must all learn some lessons from it and prevent any similar accidents .
In doing that , however , we must take into account what the actual situation is here .
As far as I know , European laws already have mechanisms in place to prevent similar accidents occurring in the Union because they are more stringent and more demanding than the equivalent American laws .
I would therefore argue that we in the Union are in no hurry .
Let us take our time and carry out an in-depth expert analysis of the causes and consequences of the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico .
We can then formulate any new requirements and measures on the basis of that .
I am troubled by some of the wording in the resolution which creates a sense of panic , such as ' as early as possible ' , and I am also against a moratorium on oil extraction .
On the other hand , I do agree that we need to ensure we implement our laws according to the highest standards and that we offer fair compensation in the event of an accident .
Above all , we must also take action outside our own borders .
It does not matter which sea has been polluted ; an American , European or any other sea .
In such cases , the world as a whole will be more polluted and animals and plants will be dying and people suffering on account of the pollution .
We must therefore do the hardest thing of all , which is to attain high international standards , not only tighten regulations within European borders .
Conversely , I think that we must take urgent action in the case of the accident in Hungary because it has taken place within our borders .
We urgently need answers to the questions of what that thick red substance is - is it really hazardous to health ?
Is it really true that it is not included in the EU 's Hazardous Waste List ?
And how should we prevent similar accidents ?
( LT ) First of all , I would like to thank those fellow Members who contributed to the drafting of this resolution , and I would also like to thank the Member of the Commission who gave us much hope and joy with his announcement today of the measures that the Commission intends to take .
And indeed , fears that the resolution is hurried , and perhaps not researched enough ... I still feel that it is the voice of the European Parliament and a message to society , the Council and the Commission .
Some time has now passed since the accident and it is very important that at least the European Parliament is now letting its voice be heard .
I think that as others here have said , it really is very important to review legislation currently in force in the European Union and legislation related to safety and quality standards .
Indeed , we are not talking about halting oil exploration as a whole , but simply about monitoring the situation and determining what further measures should be taken to prevent an accident and disaster like that in the Gulf of Mexico from being repeated .
Personally , I am very pleased with the provisions in this resolution on the responsibility of third countries .
In general , the European Commission and the European Union should strengthen dialogue with third countries as regards certain energy infrastructure projects .
That does not necessarily just mean the Baltic Sea and oil platforms or the Nord Stream gas pipeline , but also the Black Sea , the Mediterranean and conflict situations with North Africa .
I feel that it is very important that third countries are included in this resolution .
( PL ) Madam President , the experience we have gained from the events of recent months , and our concerns over the complicated situation in the fuel market which is a consequence of the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , should drive us to take effective and emphatic steps to protect the environment and , above all , to prevent similar disasters in the future .
All efforts should be geared to increasing the safety of crude oil extraction .
The experts are trying to persuade us that the right preventive measures mean the oil companies have relatively few accidents - yes , this is true .
However , the facts that procedures are being ignored and savings are being sought at the cost of safety mean that catastrophes similar to the one in the Gulf of Mexico might happen in the future in Europe , too .
Worldwide , there are currently around 1 600 drilling platforms in operation , and this number is constantly increasing .
New , ever larger and more powerful oil wells and drilling platforms continue to be opened .
Extraction is reaching into deeper parts of sea basins in areas which are ever further offshore .
Therefore , the significance of classical oil wells is falling , while that of drilling platforms is growing .
Debate on the safety of extraction is inevitable , and a comparison of theoretical safety standards with those which are actually being applied may prove surprising .
It is essential to subject oil firms to additional restrictions and to introduce new regulations which can improve safety .
I know that some countries have already begun inspection of drilling platforms on their own initiative .
The first inspections have already revealed certain breaches of safety norms .
It has turned out that many platforms in the North Sea have been operating in breach of basic safety principles .
I think preventive action should be taken immediately to subject drilling platforms and all sites where natural resources are extracted from the sea bed to suitable regulations and oversight .
It is essential to introduce new safety standards and principles which will have to be followed by all parties which are involved in and jointly responsible for the extraction of crude oil .
The possession of valid certification is a key requirement .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe is quite rightly asking itself whether an oil disaster such as the one that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico could happen in our waters .
Since oil spills have destroyed our coasts and left a lasting impression on us numerous times in the past , we quite rightly believe that the preservation and protection of marine ecosystems , animal biodiversity and the economic sectors of fishing and tourism are of paramount importance .
However , we must keep a cool head and resist adopting an extreme position which the introduction of a moratorium on any further deep-water oil drilling in Europe would represent .
Firstly , because we have very strict safety standards for exploitation and exploration in Europe .
Furthermore , national regulators and oil companies in Europe have themselves pledged to amend the exploitation and safety rules and procedures if the outcome of the US investigation into the disaster so demands .
Secondly , in view of our requirement for energy independence , it would be highly risky , from a geostrategic point of view , to abandon our North Sea drilling operations .
Ultimately , it is the future of our oil industry that we are jeopardising if we shut down its exploration and extraction activities .
How could we justify the consequent impact on employment growth in a time of crisis ?
Madam President , I think we all were shocked at the daily spill that was occurring in the Gulf of Mexico and the environmental damage that occurred as a result of it .
It is only right that , as a result of that , we should be discussing this issue here to find ways to ensure that it will not happen again .
I think a few points spring to mind .
Number one is that the security and safety standards that we have must be rigorously applied so that accidents are prevented rather than having to be dealt with , and certainly there are good standards at the moment which need to be applied everywhere .
Secondly , I agree totally with the Commissioner when he said that we must transport our safety standards throughout the world , because if something happens in the Gulf of Mexico or anywhere else , we are not immune to the fall-out from it .
You cannot put an iron curtain around the waters of Europe and say nothing is going to happen if we abide by high standards ourselves , so there is great need for a worldwide agreement in that regard .
Also , we need a disaster management fund .
This has been mentioned and I agree with it .
People have spoken about a moratorium and certainly , at this point in time , it does not seem to me to be a feasible option , because if we were to do that , there is a grave danger that we could become like a rich man who decides to give away all his money and finishes up having to beg from those he gave his money to .
We would be in the same position , with other countries continuing to explore as they do now without using the rigorous standards that we would be applying .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , following the environmental disaster that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico , it is important for the EU to ensure that its coasts are protected through its capacity for preventing and responding to this type of problem .
The European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) , located in Lisbon , provides aid and technical assistance in the area of safety and maritime protection from pollution caused by ships .
In June of this year , I submitted a written suggestion to Commissioners Oettinger , Kallas and Georgieva to expand EMSA 's powers to create mechanisms for supervising safety on European oil platforms and preventing environmental disasters .
This suggestion would provide an economy of scale in terms of financial , human and technical resources .
I welcome the response of the commissioners , who have shown themselves to be open to considering a review of the EMSA regulation to expand its powers .
I call on the Commission once again to analyse this issue and expand the powers of the agency situated in Lisbon , so as to ensure effective protection for Europe 's coasts .
Madam President , disasters like this should make us think .
They make me think about the Arctic , an area where the EU has no direct jurisdiction but much influence .
Commissioner , you rightly said that EU companies operating outside the EU should export EU standards .
I hope that will happen in respect to the Arctic area .
It is far more challenging and hostile than the North Sea and to me , it is a conundrum .
We , as Europe , champion a move from an oil-based economy and we champion renewables .
Yet indirectly , we are encouraging oil exploitation in the most vulnerable and fragile part of our globe , where the consequences could be horrific .
Maybe we should think quite carefully about what happens in the Arctic .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I disagree with what has been said in this House with reference to corporate protectionism .
At the moment , China is running a race by taking measures , by putting the necessary arrangements in place , by preparing a five-year plan on how exactly it intends to change its industry , by closing polluting industries , because it is competing with us on a huge market , the USD 13 billion clean energy market .
This is a challenge to which we need to respond not with protectionism , but with courageous measures .
Commissioner , yes , you should go ahead with the moratorium , which will be permanent , not temporary , and which will be a new step towards clean energy .
Also , Commissioner , we need to examine environmental responsibility , to which you and other Members referred , and which will need to include the entire exclusive economic zone , because that is the zone in which companies are working .
( PT ) We must learn from the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico and the resulting environmental disaster .
These lessons will surely include more demanding , more rigorous and more regular monitoring of safety conditions on similar infrastructure in Europe , but must go much further than that .
Alarm bells are ringing and they cannot be ignored .
The limits of the world 's oil reserves are reasonably well known today .
There are many things in addition to energy for which humanity is highly - too highly - dependent on these reserves .
These reserves must , therefore , be managed extremely wisely , meaning , above all , that they should be used very sparingly .
We have already called attention in this Chamber to the importance of a plan that aims to manage these resources well and fairly , mitigating their increasing scarceness , and moving towards other sources of primary energy in a controlled way .
I am talking about the Oil Depletion Protocol proposed in Uppsala in 2002 and in Lisbon in 2005 by a body of peak oil specialists .
( DE ) Madam President , if we have learned one thing from the oil crisis , it is that in times of high oil prices , it becomes profitable to develop poorly accessible oilfields and to extract under the most adverse conditions , such as from deeper and deeper depths .
Assuming that the experts are correct in forecasting huge increases in the price of oil , we must assume that even more risky exploration for oil will take place in the foreseeable future .
Although , under international agreements , it would have been appropriate to heighten the security precautions for the extraction of oil from depths greater than 200 metres following the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , as we know , the countries neighbouring the north-east Atlantic were unable to reach agreement .
The depths being worked in the area concerned and the risks are entirely comparable with those in the Gulf of Mexico .
Improving security standards and securing financial liability are matters which must be tackled - all the more so since the Commission is evidently planning a CO2 pipeline network and wants to sell emissions from Europe 's power stations to the oil industry in the North Sea .
We have not yet got to grips with how to dispose of nuclear waste - even though this technology has been in use for decades - and now , all of a sudden , hazardous greenhouse gas is to be disposed of in the North Sea .
In my opinion , it is therefore high time that we thought about security provisions .
( EL ) Madam President , the general perception is that this sort of accident , like the most recent one , and like a series of similar accidents before it , alert us , and especially the rapporteur , whom I congratulate , to the need for certain provisions in connection with the future of all these extractions being carried out now and those carried out in the past .
It is a fact that the level of control of these installations is a very important factor and , as such , it should be increased and carried out at shorter intervals .
It is also a fact that responsibility must be apportioned and that it should be possible to apportion it exclusively .
This will inevitably result in a change to insurance law and , as a consequence , it will also inevitably result in these companies insuring themselves against all factors which may cause damage in the wake of such an incident .
( IT ) Madam President , the disaster of April 2010 is one of the most serious environmental disasters ever to have happened in the world .
If the same thing happened within a closed sea such as the Mediterranean , the lives of tens of millions of European and non-European citizens would be threatened , with no way back .
Yet in Italy - as Lega Ambiente protested with regard to an ill-conceived energy policy - we are seeing an extraordinary increase in research applications and permits granted by the ministry for identifying and extracting oil resources that would be sufficient to cover the Italian energy requirement for little more than one year .
It is obvious that the sacrifice is not worth it .
All this is compounded by concern over the fact that BP has announced an agreement with Libya for offshore extraction just under 500 km south of Sicily .
I hope that the Commission undertakes , through this now imminent measure , to defend life in the Mediterranean against the attacks of multinationals and governments who are complicit and care little about our collective welfare .
Madam President , the resolution is looking at one problem , that of the risks of deep-water drilling , in isolation from the related problem that we are running short of easily accessible oil .
We might already have passed the point at which we have used over half the world 's supply .
Those who would stop or inhibit deep-water drilling must explain how they would find an energy-dense substitute for oil .
Or would they be happy for future generations to be returned to a non-industrial society ?
There is no comparison between the risks of drilling in the shallow waters of the European continental shelf and the waters in the Gulf of Mexico .
The proposers of this resolution are quite right to be horrified by the environmental and other costs of the BP tragedy in the Gulf .
However , they must also be aware of the costs of a moratorium on deep-water drilling .
( DE ) Madam President , unfortunately , none of us can undo the Deepwater Horizon accident .
We must therefore take every necessary step to ensure that such an environmental disaster never occurs in EU waters .
I feel that to do this , three things are absolutely essential .
Firstly , we must make as much provision as possible ; in other words , we must cost in all the risks of offshore extraction .
Secondly , we must ensure the highest level of security and create binding EU minimum security provisions .
Thirdly , we must guarantee the highest standards of environmental protection .
I believe it to be of the utmost importance that we investigate our capacity to react to accidents and that we create a common European and , I hope , worldwide system to avoid such environmental disasters .
Madam President , honourable Members , representative of the Presidency of the Council , I would like to express my thanks for your committed , factual and very numerous contributions regarding the consequences and the measures to be taken .
That applies to your many parliamentary questions in recent weeks that we have had to answer , as well as to today 's debate , which we have followed attentively and will evaluate and take into account in our communication that will follow within the next two weeks .
I agree with many of the suggestions made and add my support to them .
For example , we are having intense dialogue with BP to ensure - and there is a good chance of doing so - that BP not only accepts the highest security standards , higher than those at present , in European waters , but also exports these standards , if I may put it like that .
BP will be prepared to apply the same standards to similar drilling and rigs off the coast of Libya as in the North Sea , even though , under Libyan law , this may not be necessary in order to obtain authorisation and may not be laid down in legislation .
Then we must tackle the issue of where we only want to make proposals for standards to be observed in national law and where we want to create European law .
This will be more limited in the case of oil vessels than in the case of mobile transport , but does not exist at all at present in respect of stationary rigs .
Some have called for us to move out of oil and into renewable energy instead .
We support this too .
Let us not be under any illusions , however .
Our European economy and society will continue to require large volumes of oil for transport for the coming 20 to 30 years at least .
There is no prospect of the aircraft taking you home from Brussels to your home countries - to Madrid , Lisbon , Sofia , Riga or Munich - managing without oil in the next 20 to 30 years .
As members of a mobile community who take flights , we all need oil if Europe is not to come to a standstill .
The same applies to long-distance coaches and buses ; the same applies to transport by heavy goods vehicle ; and , despite the development of electric cars , it will still be true for individual transport , for cars , for a long time to come .
At present , there are just over 200 million cars registered in the countries of the European Union .
If Poland and the new Member States achieve the same density as currently exists in France and Germany , then in 15 years ' time , there will be 300 million cars .
While they may be energy efficient , the vast majority of these will nonetheless run on oil .
In other words , moving away from oil and into renewable energy is a long-term policy , but over the coming 10 to 30 years , demand for oil in Europe will not decline .
Given the need for the vehicle density of some states to catch up , it will instead tend to increase slightly - however efficient we make it .
This is even more true at a global level .
This is why we need the highest level of security possible : for the required extraction of oil for our economy and society , as I have outlined .
We will come back to you on this and I am counting on your support .
I would also like to thank the Member States , who have been very constructive in this area .
Nonetheless , I would urge you to work on your national governments with the same intensity as you have demonstrated here today , so that the Council may also be prepared to pass such legislation on higher standards either unanimously or with a clear majority .
I am not yet convinced that all the Member States are currently prepared for European standards to be passed by you and the Council following proposals by the Commission .
Madam President , I should , in turn , like to thank you for this interesting debate .
Indeed , the speeches at times revealed very different points of view .
I heard what were , at times , diametrically opposed views from the same political group .
This is highly instructive .
I wish to make three points .
Firstly , do we need more legislation to improve the safety of the offshore industry ?
As I indicated in my speech , the assessment conducted so far indicates that stringent measures are already in place - this point has been made .
The Commission , which I should like to remind you has the monopoly on initiating actions , is currently finalising its assessment , but it has already noted that for an industry to be made safer , there first needs to be better monitoring and better enforcement of the existing regulatory framework .
We will therefore see what it intends to propose to us in this area .
Furthermore , as I have already said once today , the Commission is examining the EU 's disaster response capability with a view to improving the safety of the offshore industry , which is an important factor in this area .
In anticipation of legislative proposals , I should like to point out that , unlike what some Members have said today , this issue is clearly still a concern for the Council .
At the Informal Meetings of Energy Ministers on 6 and 7 September , the Presidency asked for the first assessments to be carried out , communicated and discussed .
The second point : can a moratorium be justified ?
Clearly , it is difficult to answer that question directly .
In any event , we think that the first requirement for any given piece of legislation is to actually enforce it .
We also note that the industry does not seem to be waiting for this future regulatory framework to be established ; the industry itself is reviewing a number of safety-related measures at the preventive and operational stages .
Finally , it must be understood that the material situation in Europe is quite different , since most of the drilling in the Gulf of Mexico takes place at a depth of 1 500 metres , which clearly makes it difficult to shut down operations in the event of a disaster such as that which occurred .
Most drilling in Europe takes place at depths of no more than 200 metres , which allows much more scope to act , or , in any case , makes taking action easier .
Finally , Madam President - and the Commissioner just spoke about this - is this accident going to speed up EU energy and renewable energy policy ?
This policy is , of course , already ambitious , but we are going to keep on aiming higher .
The policy will definitely help us to reduce our dependence on oil and , generally speaking , to move towards a low-carbon society .
As the Commissioner has just said , however , we cannot simply wave a magic wand and get rid of oil within the next 10 years .
I am confident that the 2011-2020 energy strategy , which is due to be adopted at the start of next year , will accelerate this transition to an oil-free economy .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 7 October 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Thanks to the non-legislative resolution which was adopted by a huge majority , the European Parliament has sent a very clear signal to both the Commission and oil companies , specifically for them to take the necessary measures to eliminate the current shortcomings in terms of safety standards and liability in the oil extraction industry .
Deep-sea drilling licences must be tightly controlled .
Additional measures are required to prevent oil slicks , real environmental disasters which the European Union cannot tolerate .
Given the ever-growing difficulty in finding oil and the increase in potentially dangerous deep-sea oil production activities , some general consideration must be given to the measures which need to be taken in the future .
The efforts promoting environmental protection must be continued at a steady pace and the European Union must fulfil its role of protecting its citizens and nature , with which we all must live in harmony , by regulating oil extraction activities .
Any oil spills which have happened , even in the past , would have a disastrous impact on the environment , causing damage to fishing or tourism as well .
Consequently , European environmental liability legislation must also include the damage caused to marine waters .
I welcome the view put forward by my colleague , Jo Leinen .
Europe must take a stance on one of the biggest disasters of the century .
The incident involving the Deepwater Horizon oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico and the huge volume of oil spilt into the Atlantic Ocean has , and will have , a major impact on the world 's climate .
The North Atlantic Current is undergoing significant changes in temperature , which will result in lower minimum temperatures in Europe this winter .
The Council and Commission must take precise , transparent action , adopting measures which will guarantee the safety and security of oil extraction operations , as well as a high level of environmental protection and ecological disaster prevention in the European Union .
The European Union must also maintain its position on climate change , while also protecting and facilitating the proper exploitation of oil fields to guarantee fossil fuel requirements .
Parliament , the Commission and Council must collaborate with each other to devise a foolproof action plan .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Commissioner Günther Oettinger for his attempt , on the heels of the American oil platform accident , to analyse whether EU regulations would be adequate to prevent similar environmental disasters .
Perhaps we can conclude that Community rules put more emphasis on post-disaster measures than on prevention .
This deficiency was made painfully evident by a serious environmental disaster .
On Monday , there was a breach in the reservoir dam of a Hungarian alumina plant .
The mud with its highly toxic chemical contents flooded the neighbouring fields and villages .
The disaster caused fatalities and may cause soil and water contamination of an as yet unknown magnitude .
To make matters worse , the heavy metals may cause serious air pollution .
Responsibility belongs to the company operating the plant , but it will hardly be able to compensate for the incalculable damages by itself .
The lesson is obvious .
First , there must be insistence at Community level as well that national authorities enforce the seemingly severe regulations rigorously .
Secondly , the relevant regulations must be strengthened by requiring companies to have adequate insurance coverage even for accidents of this magnitude .
Until we move forward in these areas , the cost of any compensatory damages will be borne by innocent taxpayers .
in writing . - Madam President , The Gulf of Mexico oil disaster serves as a reminder of the inherent risks involved in maritime oil exploration .
The investigations into what went wrong in American waters must be full and rigorous and the EU should pay careful attention to any lessons needing to be learned .
Nevertheless , the calls for a moratorium on all deep-sea drilling in EU waters are premature and wholly disproportionate .
The regulations in place in Scottish waters are not those which were in place in the Gulf of Mexico and we have decades of experience in this industry .
Scottish oil exploration has not been without incident and the Piper Alpha catastrophe showed that some prices are too high in the pursuit of oil .
However , lessons were learned from Piper Alpha and regulations were tightened up .
If further lessons emerge from the Gulf , appropriate amendments can be made .
These amendments should , however , be the responsibility of the democratic institutions of Scotland - and knee jerk reactions from this Parliament are unlikely to solve any problems .
The European Union urgently needs to establish a strategy in order to be able to easily prevent future environmental disasters like the disaster caused by BP in the Gulf of Mexico .
The Deepwater Horizon accident was one of the greatest disasters of recent times , with some 4.4 million barrels of crude oil spilling into the sea over the duration of the leak .
Even the rescue operation was questionable due to the difficulty in deciding which type of technology to use and how to proceed .
Meanwhile , the oil gushing from the bottom of the sea destroyed all living creatures .
In the opinion of British environmental chemists , no other intervention should have been made besides keeping the oil slick away from the coastline .
Marine biologists said that burning some of the oil slicks and using dispersants to get rid of pollutants does more harm to wildlife than the oil spill itself , given the relatively fast breakdown of the type of oil in question .
At this point , I would also like to recall what happened in Hungary a few days ago when several tonnes of a caustic red sludge covered the residents of three communities in Veszprém County after the dam of a waste reservoir burst at an alumina plant near Ajka .
I would like to call upon the European Commission to provide adequate material aid from the EU to assist the victims of the disaster and to help clean up the area .
Thank you .
It is absolutely imperative for us to take every measure we can to ensure that a disaster like Deepwater Horizon will not be repeated in European waters .
The review of environmental as well as of health and safety legislation governing deep-sea oil drilling is a welcome and necessary process .
The Council and Commission must aim to develop a strategy which will ensure harmonisation between the levels of protection across the whole of the European Union .
Otherwise , discrepancies between operation and drilling standards in Member States will enable companies to provide high protection levels only when and where they are forced to do so .
It is impossible to quantify the human , social and environmental costs of the Deepwater Horizon disaster in financial terms .
However , oil extraction operations must be appropriately insured to cover worst case scenarios .
This is the only way to ensure that the taxpayer will not be obliged to bear the cost of clean-up operations , while local companies and communities affected by oil spills can receive the compensation to which they are entitled .
The Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico must stand as a warning for Europe as well .
We must do everything possible to prevent this kind of disaster occurring in our own seas .
I believe that the resolution approved today is a step in the right direction to ensure the protection of marine and coastal environments in Europe .
I also believe it is imperative for the Member States to examine urgently all aspects of oil extraction and exploration in the European Union .
Safeguarding our planet must be a priority , above all , to guarantee future generations a sustainable environment .
We must therefore approve tough legislation in this sector as quickly as possible in order to ensure the application of high safety standards to all existing oil platforms and to limit future extraction .
Contribution of biodiversity and ecosystems to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals - Conference on Biological Diversity - Nagoya 2010 ( debate )
Τhe next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
the oral question to the Council by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity in Nagoya , 18-29 October 2010 - B7-0467 / 2010 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity in Nagoya , 18-29 October 2010 - B7-0468 / 2010 ) ;
the oral question to the Council by Michèle Striffler , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the contribution of biodiversity and its ecosystem services to development and the achievement of the MDGs - B7-0464 / 2010 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission by Michèle Striffler , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the contribution of biodiversity and its ecosystem services to development and the achievement of the MDGs - B7-0465 / 2010 ) .
deputising for the author . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago , I was sitting down with a group of journalists talking about matters that were particularly close to my heart this autumn .
One of these , quite rightly , is biodiversity .
As you know , the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity is shortly to be held in Nagoya , and I have the honour and the pleasure of participating as part of the parliamentary delegation and as co-author of the resolution on biodiversity that will be voted on in Nagoya .
So I was sitting talking to the journalists when I was asked why we permit ourselves the luxury of , say , saving the beaver .
My home region of Lower Austria has succeeded in saving a species that was threatened with extinction and these have now spread out over a wide area - somewhat to the chagrin of farmers and foresters , whose feelings on the beaver are rather different .
While the European Union and many agencies in the Member States work very hard and with great commitment , supported by NGOs , to protect species , this conversation demonstrated once again that many people see the protection and maintenance of biodiversity as something of a luxury .
They ask whether the EU has nothing more pressing with which to concern itself than saving a couple of threatened orchids or animal species .
Does it make any difference , people often ask , whether there are 500 or just 499 different animals to gaze at in the zoo ?
Ladies and gentlemen , for these people , the subject of species preservation and biodiversity is hardly a priority .
Let us be honest ; the subject of biodiversity is nowhere near as high on the political agenda as topics such as economic growth or security .
It should be , however , because we are underestimating the importance of this matter .
The matter of species preservation - and this is my point - is not some kind of charitable institution for a few poor little bugs that we should simply manage to do without .
Do not misunderstand me : species preservation is indeed related to a love of flora and fauna , but principally , it concerns security , labour market policy and migration policy .
For what is often forgotten in discussions of biodiversity is the role that animals and plants play in our ecosystem .
They are nature 's service providers that keep our ecosystem running .
It is thanks to the multitude of different species and their interaction with each other that coastlines are not eroded away , that avalanches do not occur , and that bodies of water are self-cleaning .
We are talking here about an essential element of sustainable development , with their vital goods and services such as providing food , binding carbon and regulating waters - things that form a basis for economic welfare , social well-being and quality of life .
If the species die out , the natural equilibrium is disturbed - triggering a dangerous domino effect .
Replacing the services provided by these plants and animals is an expensive business .
Eventually , certain regions and habitats become no longer habitable or can no longer be used .
As a consequence , these habitats may no longer be able to provide the ecosystem with their valuable goods and services .
Not only that ; the possible further consequences such as unemployment , lack of security and emigration are things we all fear .
Protecting species is thus quite clearly a matter that affects a number of policy areas .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety emphasised this recently , having worked intensely on ascertaining the position of the European Parliament .
I should also like to mention a few figures .
Scientists estimate that replacing these natural services and dealing with consequences such as unemployment and migration would cost 7 % of gross income worldwide .
If that does not astonish you , then here are some more figures .
According to the latest study by the European Commission , 25 % of European animal species are threatened with extinction .
The same study also says that the coastal ecosystems of Europe are constantly being destroyed .
Certain regions that have considerable biodiversity are similarly in decline .
In contrast , areas of manmade development such as industrial parks , residential developments and transport infrastructure have increased by 8 % since 1990 .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you will be aware , the actors negotiating in Nagoya do not always agree on what the conference hopes to achieve .
Developed countries want strong goals , NGOs want ambitious goals , while - not surprisingly - the economic players are happy with realistic goals .
In my opinion , the EU must set the bar high in Nagoya and , just as here in Europe , must work to bring the business community more on board - particularly those sectors and branches of industry that make significant use of biological resources .
The EU can decide whether it wants to be a good example or a poor one .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is October already and many people in Europe have not even heard yet that this year has been designated the International Year of Biodiversity .
Let us together ensure that biodiversity is given the status that it deserves and that it needs if it is to continue to offer its ecological services in the future .
Allow me to repeat an oft-quoted Indian proverb : ' Only after the last tree has been cut down , only after the last river has been poisoned , only after the last fish has been caught , only then will you find that money cannot be eaten ' .
deputising for the author . - Madam President , I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate .
Last week , I chaired Parliament 's delegation to the UN summit on progress towards the Millennium Development Goals .
For the duration of the summit and at each side event , I was gripped by the enthusiasm of my colleagues , governments , international organisations and the people on the ground who are committed to achieving the ambitious targets set in 2000 .
Some progress has been made and there is much we can be proud of , but much more needs to be done .
Access to education is rapidly improving .
Enrolment in education has reached 76 % in Sub-Saharan Africa and 94 % in North Africa .
Access to drinking water is increasing .
By 2015 , 86 % of those living in the developing world will be able to access clean drinking water - up from 71 % in 1990 .
Targets for accessing drinking water have already been met in four regions - Northern Africa , Latin America and the Caribbean , East Asia and South-Eastern Asia .
Access to energy is increasing .
There is near universal access to electricity in North Africa .
However , although progress has clearly been made , there is so much more that needs to be done .
It was put to us by an Assistant Secretary of the United Nations that we really do need ' a dash to the finish ' over the next five years .
One billion children live in poverty , 1.4 million children die each year from lack of access to safe drinking water , and 2.2 million children die each year because they have not been immunised by vaccines that are so easily accessible in the developed world and which we have had for over 30 years .
Goal 7 of the Millennium Development Goals is to ensure environmental sustainability .
Within this goal , there are several sub-targets .
Target 7b is perhaps the most encompassing : ' reduce biodiversity loss , achieving , by 2010 , a significant reduction in the rate of loss ' .
The indicators of biodiversity include , inter alia , the proportion of land area covered by forest , CO2 emissions , the proportion of total water resources used , consumption of ozone depleting substances , and the proportion of fish stocks within safe biological limits .
The reduction in biodiversity loss is therefore a key component of the Millennium Development Goals .
Seventy per cent of the world 's poor live in rural areas and depend directly on biodiversity for their survival and well-being .
The urban poor also rely on biodiversity for ecosystem services , such as the maintenance of air and water quality and the breakdown of waste .
There can be little doubt that biodiversity and climate change will affect the world 's poor first .
It will affect countries like Tuvalu in the Polynesian islands - a country that is merely four and a half metres above sea level - and the Maldives , where President Nasheed held an underwater cabinet meeting this year to highlight the fact that by the end of the century , his country could indeed be under water .
I am calling on the Member States and the Commission to give new impetus to the global climate change alliance and its support facility in order to increase developing countries ' capacity-building and knowledge base on the expected impacts of biodiversity loss and to effectively integrate it into development plans and budgets .
I have also highlighted the fact that programmes aimed at the protection of biodiversity and poverty reduction must address the priorities of the poor and put more emphasis on locally-based environmental management , ensure access to biodiversity resources , land reform , and acknowledgement of customary tenure .
By 2050 , there will be two billion more people on the face of the earth and 90 % of these will be born into what is now the developing world .
If we allow abject poverty to continue in those countries , there will be massive migration from south to north and inequality could well be the cause of a world conflagration .
Many of us did not believe we would see the Berlin Wall come down in our lifetime .
Now we take it for granted that the former Soviet-dominated countries are our EU partners .
The wall of poverty between north and south can also come down and we can make a world that is better and safer - a place where we can have new partners and an environment safe for us all .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the European Union 's strategic objectives for Nagoya are set out in the Council conclusions of 22 December 2009 and 15 March 2010 and will be further elaborated and refined by the Environmental Council on 14 October 2010 .
Three issues stand out , in particular , as priorities for the European Union .
The first is the adoption of the new strategic plan for the convention for the period 2011-2020 .
It should reflect the best available scientific knowledge about the state of biodiversity and provide an effective framework of implementation that is sufficiently ambitious to trigger step-up action by all the parties to the convention .
This is vital if we are to prevent further species extinctions and enable biodiversity to continue providing the essential goods and services that we all depend on , and especially the poor .
The second strategic priority for the European Union is to conclude negotiations on the Protocol on access and benefit sharing as a key contribution to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity beyond 2010 and in line with the commitment taken by all the parties at COP 8 in 2006 .
This is an expectation widely shared by developing country parties to the convention , many of which see it as their top priority .
The third is to ensure that adequate resources are mobilised to enable the implementation of the post-2010 biodiversity policy framework , including the new strategy plan .
The EU as a whole is committed , as part of its 2020 biodiversity target adopted earlier this year , to step up its contribution to averting global biodiversity loss , but I think we can also be pretty proud of what we are actually doing .

Over the period 2002-2008 , the European Union provided over USD 1 billion , approximately EUR 740 million , for global biodiversity annually , largely through the Thematic Programme on Environment and Natural Resources under the Development Cooperation Instrument , but also the EDF , both of which include adequate provisions for biodiversity .
Member States have also contributed significantly to the recent replenishment of the Global Environmental Facility , for which USD 1.2 billion is earmarked for biodiversity .

This represents a 28 % increase compared to the last replenishment , and the new EUR 1 billion MDG initiative announced by President Barroso at the UN General Assembly in New York last month can clearly also benefit biodiversity .
The Commission is currently updating its own biodiversity-related development cooperation figures , using the same methodology as it has used to account for climate-related funding , and we are , of course , encouraging Member States to do the same so that we can present a consolidated figure in Nagoya .
We also need to look at other ways of how we can contribute to enhancing implementation of the Convention on Biodiversity and help developing country parties deliver on their commitments under the convention , in particular , the new post-2010 strategic plan that will be adopted in Nagoya .
We intend to explore ways and means to do this , together with our partners in Nagoya .
Biodiversity loss is not a new challenge to poverty alleviation , as already mentioned .
The 2010 Biodiversity Target was incorporated into MDG 7 already in 2002 and the EU itself has explicitly underscored the important linkages between biodiversity and development on many occasions .
Just last month in his statement during the High-Level Event on Biodiversity at the United Nations General Assembly , President Barroso remarked that our ability to end poverty and hunger and improve child and maternal health depends on the long-term availability of fresh water , food , medicine and raw materials that nature provides .
This is also recalled in the 2010 MDG report , in the EU policy framework to assist developing countries in addressing food security challenges , and in the Commission 's Policy Coherence for Development work programme 2010-2013 , which includes a specific target for biodiversity and accompanying indicators as part of the operational framework to enhance the coherence of EU policies with development objectives .
What is perhaps new is the increasing knowledge and awareness about economics of biodiversity loss and the extent to which this undermines prospects for alleviating poverty in the long term .
The international study of The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity ( TEEB ) shows how costly biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation is to our economies , including the economies in developing countries .
So it is not any more a moral question ; it is actually a question of our quality of life , and yet the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems is not seen as a development priority .
It is hoped that TEEB will go some way towards changing this situation so that more of our developing country partners give higher priority to biodiversity conservation and sustainable use in their development strategies but , even where it is not a focus of action in country and regional support strategies , European development policy nevertheless requires that environment and sustainable management of natural resources be treated as a cross-cutting issue to be integrated into all development activities .
Both the Development Cooperation Instrument and the European Development Fund include provisions for addressing biodiversity .
To conclude , with regard to mechanisms for ensuring the right of access to information and public participation in decision making related to biodiversity , the EU fully supports the draft COP 10 decision on the strategic plan , which urges parties and other governments to enable broad and effective participation in the full implementation of the objectives of the convention and strategic plan .
We also believe that the Protocol on access and benefit sharing should oblige contracting parties to establish domestic frameworks that allow indigenous and local communities to take prior and informed decisions on whether or not to give access to their traditional knowledge .
I would endorse everything said by the authors of the questions and I am truly grateful for their valuable contributions .
Madam President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , the most important thing we shall be asking of you tomorrow in our resolution will be ambitious yet realistic objectives in Nagoya .
The intelligent approach would be to agree measures there that not only safeguard biodiversity but also combat the effects of climate change , help to achieve the Millennium Development Goals - about which a good deal has been said already - and create green jobs , not least in the European Union .
Four birds with one stone - that is what I call value for money .
In order to achieve this , however , the European Union does need to speak with one voice .
I have to be honest with you : my spirits are sinking a bit in that regard .
I have heard many references to Council statements from previous years and from March of this year , but I have heard little in the way of specifics .
Nevertheless , I should hope that the thoughts of the Commission and also of the Council have advanced since the generalities in the 15 March statement .
I hope so , at least - we shall see on 14 October .
I also hope that we learn from our past mistakes ; that we do not go to another international summit armed with a mandate characterised by vagueness and generality and that we , the European Union , do not again spend all our time there in mutual consultations on how to react to developments , leaving no time to play the leading role for which Mrs Kadenbach , among others , has called .
The final point to which I should like to draw attention concerns the mainstreaming of biodiversity into other policies .
We , Parliament , called for such coherence in the field of the environment and other policies in the recent report on biodiversity in the European Union ; similarly , we must also mainstream biodiversity at international level .
Biodiversity is not just a matter of the environment or of the Millennium Development Goals ; in other spheres , too , such as the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , non-trade concerns such as biodiversity must be placed much higher on the agenda .
Commissioner , I know that biodiversity is something you hold dear .
I hope that you do convey this message about international mainstreaming to your counterparts at international level .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , I was also at the UN with Mr Mitchell and represented the Parliament on the issue of the MDGs .
I want to congratulate the Commission on what they are doing , but I want to inform the House that we in the EU lead internationally on these issues - on biodiversity , on climate change and , indeed , on the MDGs ' poverty alleviation - but , interestingly , at the UN , we are only given observer status .
That must change , as we lead the world on these issues .
We have the Year of Biodiversity , but I would suggest that every year should be the year of biodiversity .
Our citizens - maybe in the visitors ' gallery , maybe watching at home - will ask what this has got to do with them .
Without public awareness and the raising of awareness , nothing will change .
They must realise that the tin of tomatoes that they pick up in the supermarket would not be there if it were not for biodiversity .
We need a 360 degree awareness of what this means .
As Mr Mitchell brilliantly put it , this wall of poverty - and , may I add , deprivation - must come down .
We talk of policy coherence in this House , but let me just refer to some of these issues : without policy coherence on access to energy in the developing world , deforestation , climate change , food security , the reform of the common agricultural policy , the common fisheries policy , land grab , natural resources and access to water , we will never protect biodiversity and we will never end the suffering of the world 's poor .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , as we discuss the European position at the Nagoya Summit , outside this House , a hunt is being undertaken : a relentless hunt for resources , a hunt for oil and gas , minerals , timber , food and water , a hunt for resources that are all provided by nature .
In this hunt , Chinese investors want to construct a highway through the Serengeti National Park to exploit the resources of Central Africa .
There are Saudi investors putting billions of dollars on the table to build 6 000 kilometres of roads through the rainforests of the Congo to start huge palm-oil plants .
We all want to stop the loss of biodiversity , but in the real world , this hunt for resources is frustrating our goals .
That is reality .
Therefore , the only way to stop the loss of biodiversity is by radically changing our behaviour .
We need biodiversity for food , shelter , medicines , clean air , water , and so on and so forth .
We simply cannot survive without it .
We are reaching a tipping point at which damage is irreversible and , even worse , accelerating .
That is the sense of urgency of the Nagoya Summit and that is the sense of urgency I expect from the ministers and commissioners who attend .
Unfortunately , political declarations and resolutions will not be sufficient to reach this sense of urgency .
We need much more pressure .
For that reason , I have started an online campaign , along with many colleagues from all over the world .
I want all of the people to have their voice heard on this issue ; because people care about this .
Go through Facebook to stop biodiversity loss and support this campaign .
I will , together with many colleagues , present the thousands of signatures to the decision makers in Nagoya , to let them know that people depend on their perseverance and persistence to make Nagoya a success .
Madam President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the commitments made in 1992 in Rio and in 2002 in Johannesburg have not been respected .
Our strategies for halting the loss of biodiversity have been a failure , and we know the reasons for this failure .
The climate is changing , biodiversity is diminishing , and humanity must be determined to adapt itself more and more quickly , and in ways which are more and more difficult .
In Nagoya , with a few weeks to go before Cancún , the European Union has the opportunity to argue in favour of adapting our economic development model to face up to the challenges of the 21st century .
Climate deregulation , halting the loss of biodiversity and combating poverty : these three challenges , and the responses needed to face up to them , are intimately linked .
We have the responsibility of proposing and introducing a new development model which is fairer , more equitable and more sustainable .
So let us speak clearly and practically .
Parliament 's resolution identifies three key challenges which now raise several questions about the Commission 's and the Council 's position .
The first challenge , of course , is to start protecting and restoring biodiversity .
This presupposes adequate financing , the withdrawal of all public aid which is harmful for biodiversity and a dedicated budget which we propose should be multiplied tenfold .
However , is the European Union ready to commit 0.3 % of its GDP to its policy for halting biodiversity loss and to convince the OECD countries to do the same ?
The second challenge is the cost of biodiversity loss to society , which has only just begun to be evaluated .
It is thought to be around 1 % of global GDP , but this evaluation does not take into account the social , cultural , moral and scientific value of biodiversity .
Is the European Union determined to resist the monetisation of living things ?
Is it determined to defend the common inheritance of humankind and to reaffirm that nature is priceless and is not for sale ?
Finally , the third challenge is to stop the pillaging of genetic resources by businesses and industries .
One solution is to regulate access to genetic resources in a way which , in particular , respects fully the rights of indigenous and local communities .
The European Union will still have a particular responsibility in these negotiations .
As such , is it determined , firstly , to defend the principle of the non-patentability of life and , secondly , to support the repayment of the ecological debt to the countries of the South by supporting the retroactivity of the system which is to be adopted ?
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , biodiversity is not some abstract word that is used by abstruse scientists to look after some environmental peculiarity .
Biodiversity is the very core of our survival on this planet as a human race .
Take , for example , a recent calculation done by Dr Pavan Sukhdev about the loss of biodiversity and the value of that loss .
His findings show that deforestation alone - the loss of the Earth 's lung , which changes carbon dioxide to oxygen and which enables us to breathe - is costing USD 4.5 trillion every year .
Every year , we are losing in replacement costs 4.5 trillion US dollars ' worth of oxygen manufacturing process .
That is about the size of the New York Stock Exchange .
If , every year , we lost an asset with the value of the New York Stock Exchange , I am sure everybody in this room would be up and running around , but because it is biodiversity , nobody seems to care .
That is an enormous amount of funding that would be required to replace the loss of oxygen that we cut down by cutting these trees .
Take the collapse of the Newfoundland cod fisheries in the 1990s .
It has cost CAD 2 billion in replacement costs .
If we lose - as we are doing - some of the pharmaceutical genetic material which comes from biodiversity , we will be losing about 640 billion dollars ' worth of raw materials .
This is a very serious issue and we need serious people making serious decisions .
Madam President , in two weeks ' time , we shall all be heading to Nagoya , Japan , to discuss biodiversity .
I wonder whether bluefin tuna or whale will be on the menu served up by our hosts .
However , the big debate there will once more concern whether to start by coming forward with money or by talking about objectives .
Developing countries would prefer us to start by putting money on the table and the EU would prefer to start by discussing objectives .
One thing is clear , however , and that is that we have to halt the loss of biodiversity no matter what .
The costs of failing to act are estimated to exceed USD 4 000 billion by 2050 .
Failure to act is not an option , therefore , and so I am disturbed that , inter alia , the new Dutch Government means to reduce the budget for development aid - one of the most vital financial resources for combating biodiversity loss in developing countries - by EUR 1 billion .
If the EU really wants to achieve something in Nagoya , it must take the lead and develop sound agricultural and fisheries policy itself rather than waiting until after Nagoya to come up with proposals on this .
When reforming agricultural policy , we must look beyond merely sustainable agricultural policy and must take a firm stand .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to transpose what is agreed in Nagoya into proposals that can be measured and monitored and to develop a long-term vision , so that , in 2011 , we do not need to say once again that we have been unable to halt biodiversity loss .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , biodiversity has a bearing on everything - quite simply .
Therefore , we must fight to conserve it at the conference in Nagoya .
However , as we are constantly felling forests , cultivating new land and damming rivers , there is clearly a lack of knowledge and ability when it comes to including habitats and ecosystems in national legislation .
Everything from modern agriculture , fisheries , housing development , road networks and transport to numerous types of industry have a negative effect on the planet 's biodiversity .
Marine life is in a poor state .
Over 60 % of all fish and shellfish eaten in the EU are caught outside the EU .
We have overfished , and stocks are having a difficult time recovering .
The Baltic Sea has a historically high level of pollution .
Pregnant women in Sweden were advised not to eat locally caught fish .
The EU Member States may have taken steps towards improving natural conditions , but where is the rest of the world ?
What can we do to help other parts of the world to progress in their development ?
Global biodiversity will diminish as a consequence of human activities - whether we have global warming or not .
However , we must not make unrealistic demands here .
Biodiversity is best served by remaining realistic .
It is therefore high time that we found practical , realistic solutions to preserving healthy terrestrial environments , healthy flora and fauna , as well as healthy aquatic environments .
( RO ) I would like to begin by emphasising that it is absolutely imperative for the European Union to adopt a clear , united position on the issue of biodiversity for the COP 10 meeting in Nagoya .
Failure to adopt such a firm , consistent position would result in another scandalous outcome , like that of the CITES Conference in March 2010 .
This is why I would like the recommendations made by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to be accepted without reservation , as they may offer the best guide which the European Union can use to draft an official position which our representatives will be able to support wholeheartedly in Nagoya this month .
In addition to these considerations , we must not forget that it is not only the European Union 's credibility at stake as a clear thinking , responsible partner in the process of making global decisions but also , above all , the destiny of the planet 's future .
( DE ) Madam President , let me begin with a detail .
Commissioner Potočnik - whom I hold in very high esteem - gives figures in dollars , although he then converts these into euro .
Mr Deva also gives figures in dollars .
I have not looked into this in detail , but actually it demonstrates to us that the debate on biodiversity has clearly not yet arrived in Europe .
Apparently , we in Europe are not yet capable of forming our own opinion on this and I think it would be a good idea if we could take this debate seriously enough to actually translate what it means in concrete terms into figures .
I believe this is an elitist debate far removed from what is actually going on in the homes of our citizens .
I believe that until we succeed in getting this debate into the homes and households of Europe , then we have no hope of it gaining political weight here in Parliament .
In other words , I believe that the communication strategy that we should now adopt is simply to take this matter to the people , as I said , and once we know how people react , then we can set ourselves specific goals .
The Commissioner has mentioned some very specific objectives .
I hope he will be able to get these adopted in Nagoya and I also hope that the Community will speak with one voice .
That is always the big challenge at these international conferences .
I also believe that money alone is not enough .
Many of my fellow Members have called for additional funding .
That may be one way , but it is not sufficient to ensure success .
Secondly , as I mentioned , we need to change our communication strategy ; and thirdly , we need to improve the quality of the data that we have .
It is clear that much data is still lacking and I believe that this is an area in which the Community , with its research problem , could yet do something specific .
As you know , my pet subject is water .
If we get the new fisheries policy off the ground , for example , then we will have a great deal of catching up to do as regards species that need protecting .
The fisheries ministers will probably pass excessive fishing quotas again , and biodiversity will once again be pushed to the sidelines .
For that reason , I believe this gives us a real opportunity to show in this House that we are serious in what we say .
Let us see what shape the proposals take then .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , we in this House are indeed hotly debating the objectives and implementation of the new objectives for biodiversity .
However , at the moment , while we are engaged in debate , the negotiations are in danger of collapsing completely and we are to blame , the European Union is to blame .
That is why I wish to address the Council and to call on it to change its stand .
We need to ' unblock ' negotiations on the ABS protocol , on genetic information access , and on benefit sharing .
In fact , if we do not , not only will we be guilty of maintaining a situation which fosters bio-piracy and is a crime at present towards local communities and genetic resources ; we will also miss yet another opportunity for the environment , the negotiations will collapse and we shall have a second Copenhagen .
I therefore urgently call on the Council to examine this issue in depth .
We need to change our stand before it is the European Union which , for the first time in its history , causes environmental negotiations to collapse .
Madam President , the challenge we face in reversing the loss of unique species of life becomes depressingly apparent as this debate continues .
A lot is going to be said at the biodiversity conference about the need to put in place the correct measures , but if all we end up with is a pious declaration , we will achieve very little .
I hope we can put in place a set of targets and the financial support mechanisms - no doubt linked to access to biological resources - to make them worth something .
I hope we can ensure that procedures are put in place to assess and confirm compliance , and I hope that we can put in place arrangements for frequent review of the targets and for improvements to be made to the procedures as time progresses .
It is quite clear that this conference cannot possibly halt the loss of biodiversity ; the pace is simply too rapid .
However , if we can at least put in place the mechanisms and the structure that can eventually slow and perhaps one day reverse that loss , then it will be judged a success .
( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I should like to offer Commissioner Potočnik sincere thanks for his commitment to the conservation of biodiversity .
We know that his heart is in the right place and that he is striving hard for this .
In this respect , things are looking good in terms of Europe 's commitment to Nagoya .
However , we still need to agree objectives in part-fields such as fisheries , agriculture and forestry .
We are still expecting ambitious objectives in all these fields , not least on Europe 's part .
Yet even more importantly , ultimately , when we return from Nagoya , this has to be translated into European policy .
In the coming year , we are going to review our agricultural policy , and also our fisheries policy .
The Commissioner has told us that he is also endeavouring to ensure that the term ' biodiversity ' features clearly in this policy .
Yet the Council is silent .
Hence , the question to the President-in-Office , Mrs Schauvliege , as to what the Council is planning to do in the near future .
We can , of course , make fine promises in Nagoya , but what are we going to do in the near future with regard to our own fisheries and agricultural policies ?
That is when it becomes really important ; otherwise , our promises in Nagoya will be nothing but empty words .
( NL ) Madam President , tomorrow , we shall be voting on the motion for a resolution on the Nagoya conference and , in my speech , I should like to call for attention to Amendment 1 , which Mrs de Lange and I have tabled on behalf of our two groups .
This amendment reconfirms the principle that life forms and living processes must not be subject to patents .
It therefore requests a breeders ' exemption , enabling the further development of plant varieties to take place freely .
Without such an exemption , there is a danger that only the companies with the most money and the largest portfolios of patents will be able to survive .
They would then be the ones to determine what species were placed on the market , and that would definitely not be to the benefit of biodiversity .
Therefore , I make an emphatic call for your attention to and support for Amendment 1 in tomorrow 's vote .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , from 18 to 29 October , COP 10 on biodiversity will take place in Japan , and it is important for Parliament to know what the Council intends to propose for the purpose of protecting and guaranteeing biodiversity .
Research has shown that in a study on 4 000 plants , no less than 22 % were classified as threatened .
This means that one in every five plants is at risk of disappearing and - another alarming statistic - many plants will also disappear that have not yet even been discovered .
The same thing applies to many animal species .
Along with them , we risk losing active ingredients , in the case of plants , that are fundamental to industries that are engaged in developing new products that may help to combat diseases that are currently incurable .
As far as animals are concerned , if they disappear , we will lose characteristics that are important for our planet .
This September , the European Parliament approved an EU regulation on this topic with a clear vote that cannot fail to commit the Council to the same approach .
We should not forget that the fight against poverty and thus , hunger too , is also fought by preserving the wealth of our natural resources , of our inestimable flora and fauna , a wealth that we cannot afford to lose and must do everything in our power to preserve .
( IT ) Madam President , in 2002 , government representatives from around the world made a commitment to significantly reduce biodiversity loss by 2010 .
Despite the fact that this goal was brought up and stressed in various international forums , it was , unfortunately , not achieved .
The rate of this loss from the planet has accelerated to a point where it is occurring at least 100 times faster than natural cycles , and during the last 50 years , it has reached unprecedented levels .
In Europe , one mammal in six is at risk of extinction , and when one species disappears , it can create a domino effect with regard to all the others .
Over the last 30 years , at least 30 % of all animal and plant species on the planet have been lost .
Without ambitious targets , to be adopted immediately , the biodiversity loss - this has already been stated more than once , and also reported by the WWF - that will occur between now and 2050 will cost Europe EUR 1 100 billion .
Therefore , as Mrs Striffler emphasised in her question , safeguarding biodiversity represents an important aspect of the Millennium Development Goals and the Europe 2020 strategy .
Promoting biodiversity means having more weapons in our arsenal to combat extreme poverty and hunger , through the implementation of environmental sustainability policies that maintain our rich and fertile planet .
We need a new strategic vision and new targets that take into account the consistent species loss and reflect the importance that we attribute to this problem .

( PT ) When we talk about preserving biodiversity , we are also talking about fighting climate change , about food security , about public health , about fighting poverty , about achieving the Millennium Development Goals , and about the planet 's sustainable development ; in other words , about our collective future .
As has already been said in this Chamber , the European Union must speak with a single voice at the Nagoya conference and do everything it can to obtain good results .
Political will is needed in order to save the most threatened species of flora and fauna .
Several Members have also already said that the costs of the loss of biodiversity are of the order of EUR 50 billion per annum : in other words , roughly 1 % of gross domestic product .
It has also been said , however - and there are studies demonstrating it - that by 2050 , these costs may have increased to 7 % of gross domestic product , but the return from investment in preserving biodiversity is 100 times greater .
Biodiversity is essential to mitigating and adapting to climate change , given , for example , the role of land and sea ecosystems as major carbon sinks .
We therefore hope that good results will come out of the conference .
That is what the European public is hoping for , and we also hope that the results will make them more aware of these challenges that we must all confront .
Madam President , ' biodiversity ' is a word I often hear bandied about by Eurocrats , MEPs and lobbyists out here in Brussels .
But I wonder if anybody in here can actually define what it really means , because I bet my bottom dollar that none of you can .
Oddly enough , I think it does matter that you understand what you are talking about if you are making laws for the whole of the EU .
But what does the conveniently vague and ambiguous term ' biodiversity ' actually mean ?
Because the truth of the matter is that there is no correct number of species , whether it is on a Cumbrian farm or a Liverpool suburb or even in a Cheshire forest , and I defy the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to come up with a proper definition or stop using such ragbag words .
And , may I ask , where is the boundary of the biodiverse area ?
Is it ever applied to offshore marine environments ?
And if so , why are you so keen to build monstrous wind farms that are detrimental to wildlife and do not even work !
Let us be frank , you have not got a clue .
There is no clear thinking , no coherent policy and no logic to what you are proposing .
If you are going to preach , which is what you are doing , look in the mirror first , sort your own house out and let us start with the disaster which is the common fisheries policy .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , I wonder if the honourable Member would agree that we are losing unique forms of life on this planet each and every day and that there is a need for international action to try and counter that ?
I did not hear anything in his remarks that suggested that he did agree with that but I invite him to explain his position to the House .
Madam President , let us put a few facts in order .
If you want examples of species which are disappearing , there are a lot of dodgy statistics out there - take polar bears as an example .
People constantly say that the polar bear population has fallen .
Yet the polar bear population is actually bigger now than it was in the 1940s .
I agree that species are disappearing , but I do not believe that the European Union - which is fundamentally undemocratic , the British people have never had a say on it - is the forum to decide this matter .
It should be done in nation states .
( HU ) Commissioner Potočnik , I would warn fellow Members against believing that the European Union can achieve its objective .
It is right for us to wish to lead the way in Nagoya in protecting biodiversity , but even the European Union has not been able to stop biodiversity loss .
Let us therefore be cautious and take a look at what our own tasks are .
Commissioner Potočnik , who comes from a Slovenian farming family - I myself come from a Hungarian farming family - would also like to draw attention to the great contradiction between biodiversity and agricultural regulation .
On the one hand , we are offering farmers support to set up artificial nests for birds , while on the other , we decree , for purposes of supporting grazing land , that the proportion of trees and shrubs may be no more than one third , and that farmers must cut out any trees in excess of that limit .
In other words , we reduce the habitats of birds and other animals .
The future common agricultural policy must reconcile biodiversity with agricultural subsidies .
I agree entirely with the report that we must determine the value of environmental protection assets , including the market value of biodiversity , which is very difficult to determine .
This is why it is very important for us to encourage and reward farmers in the future , since the market is not doing so .
( RO ) Ensuring environmental sustainability is one of the Millennium Development Goals , which has direct , major implications for human life .
Pollution and the reckless use of agricultural land , forests and water resources cause climate change , which jeopardises the planet 's natural resources .
I would like to mention one of the most serious threats , which is the increasing difficulty in accessing water sources , presenting mankind with the gloomy prospect that , by 2050 , around 45 % of the world 's population will be threatened by water scarcity .
Unfortunately , it is only this year that the UN General Assembly has declared that the right to clean , good quality drinking water and the right to sanitation are basic human rights required to enjoy life .
However , this declaration is made at a time when already more than a quarter of the planet 's population has no access to drinking water and suitable sanitation .
The morbidity and mortality rates resulting from drinking water unfit for consumption remain , in these circumstances , alarmingly high , especially among children .
This is why I believe that the European Union must push at the Nagoya conference for a much quicker and more precise solution to these problems in the developing world , which are exacerbating poverty and the lack of prospects .
I think that the historical responsibility which developed countries have for the material and ecological state of the planet should provide a further argument in support of policies which will go against the current trend of encouraging the unsustainable exploitation of natural resources in developing countries dependent on raw material exports .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , on 18 October the Tenth International conference on biodiversity will open in Japan .
This will be attended by the European Union , despite the fact it has not achieved the target set in 2001 , in other words , that of halting biodiversity loss by 2010 .
Recent studies show that our natural resources are seriously threatened , particularly marine areas of Mediterranean countries .
The European Union has set in motion important actions to combat climate change but must make a greater commitment to protecting biodiversity : an undertaking to increase funding for the Natura 2000 programme and more incisive action by the Commission to exercise the supervisory powers invested in it by the treaty .
What action is being taken to reduce the delay in applying the Natura 2000 directives ?
( RO ) If we reflect on not only the environmental , but also on the social and financial impact of the destruction of biodiversity , we cannot underestimate the importance of the forthcoming Nagoya conference .
The ecological disaster which has occurred in Hungary , killing four people , has affected seven towns and the ecosystems of a number of rivers , threatening to reach the Danube and the Danube Delta in Romania .
It provides us not only with a sad backdrop to today 's debate , but also with a serious jolt into taking stronger measures to protect the environment and biodiversity .
It is time for us to reignite the debate about the ban on using hazardous substances in the mining industry in order to put an end to these tragedies .
The resolution on biodiversity presented by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety contains many important points .
However , I would like to highlight a few of them which I regard as being essential .
First and foremost , the main objective of the negotiations should be to adopt ambitious , specific targets which are relevant to a number of areas and sectors of activity , ranging from construction and transport to forestry and agriculture .
( SK ) As a member of the Committee on the Environment , I am extremely concerned about the results of recent studies that present alarming statistics on biodiversity loss in the European Union .
The urgency of this problem demands even greater efforts at the level of the EU and the Member States , and I therefore consider it essential for the Commission and the Member States to act in unison at the conference taking place at the end of October in the Japanese city of Nagoya in order to increase the effectiveness of their approaches and to achieve measurable and realistic targets with binding time limits .
I would also like to emphasise the need to raise awareness in the private sector of the economic benefits of the fight to preserve biodiversity and of the return on investment in its preservation .
Biodiversity loss is already reducing people 's level of well-being and causing losses running into the billions , which are due to rise to several trillion by 2050 .
( RO ) Europe can be split into nine distinct biogeographical regions according to similar climatic , topographical , geological and vegetation features .
The Danube region is among the top 20 ecoregions in the world .
This region 's biodiversity is extremely rich .
It is home to 2 000 plant species and 5 000 animal species .
Since 1991 , the Danube Delta has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site and the Danube region includes several Special Protection Areas and Special Areas for Conservation within the framework of Natura 2000 .
As the Danube and the Danube Delta have a unique and fragile ecosystem , which is home to rare plant species that are under threat due to pollution , we believe that it is important for the European Commission sometimes to enhance forecasting and response capabilities for flooding , extreme drought and accidental pollution .
The European Union has adopted a number of measures to protect diversity , especially biodiversity .
Nature is not only an important part of Europe 's heritage and does not only provide economic benefits , but it also offers numerous valuable services , such as water purification , flood control , prevention of soil erosion , pollination of crops and leisure activities .
The farming of land , the rapid process of urbanisation and the development of the transport infrastructure have had a severe impact on the natural habitat and , for example , large-scale drainage schemes have reduced a large section of the natural floodplains .
( FR ) Madam President , the successive conferences on biodiversity protection , rather than offering solutions , are , at best , a way of keeping the rather paltry balance sheet up to date in this area .
Is this a question of money or of responsibility ?
I would say both .
Forests , which contain the majority of species , are threatened by corruption and indifference , among other things .
Corruption - for which the leaders of developing countries are as responsible as those who profit from bad governance - only partly explains the failure in this area .
As for indifference , let us remember that our consumption habits are not neutral , either , in this regard .
How can we be more responsible ?
As I do not have much time , I will take just one example : forest certification .
Models are in place .
Can the Commission tell me if , in its opinion , the restrictions on imports , as well as the introduction of the two systems of forest certification , are helping to limit the damage in this area ?
Is there an evaluation , and if so , could you tell us about its main conclusions ?
Madam President , if the EU is to have any credibility in Nagoya , it has not only to propose strategic plans but also to act on its present policies at home .
The compromise proposal the Commission is presently preparing to allow a continuation of the exportation of the acutely endangered European eel , a CITES Appendix II species although it clearly qualifies for CITES Appendix I , is nothing other than a shame .
The European eel stock , one common stock , has declined by 40 % since 2007 .
If the EU is to have any credibility at all at Nagoya or in the next CITES meeting , there can be no other option than the implementation of a total export and import ban on eels .
It should not listen to a small fishing sector that wants to export baby glass eels - threatened glass eels - to Japan for the present price of EUR 600 a kilo .
( PT ) The preservation of biodiversity , more importantly than any economic consideration , constitutes an ethical imperative and an essential condition for the future of the human species itself .
Before the Nagoya conference , the European Union must learn from its failures in this area and set itself on the right path if it wants practical results rather than repeated and meaningless declarations of intent .
Among other things , it will have to thoroughly change its sectoral policies .
The reduction in the diversity of species and varieties being cultivated must be halted and reversed , as must the erosion of the genetic base on which food depends .
The use of agricultural varieties specific to given regions must be promoted .
The homogenisation of agricultural production , disease-spreading intensive models , and the abandonment of small- and medium-scale farming resulting from current agriculture and trade policy must be fought .
Those are just a few examples .
Biodiversity and the series of environmental equilibriums that are dependent on it constitute part of our planet 's heritage : a common good that must not , under any circumstances , fall into private hands ; a priceless common good that everyone must be guaranteed the right to make use of and enjoy .
( DE ) Madam President , 2010 is the International Year of Biodiversity .
At European level , we already have excellent instruments for protecting biological diversity ; I am thinking here of the Natura 2000 networking programme or the Habitats Directive .
However , any idea is only as good as its execution , and I regret to say that in many Member States , this leaves much to be desired .
As members of the Committee on Petitions , our attention is constantly being drawn to serious problems in designated Natura 2000 sites .
The Member States and the Commission must together take a leading role at the forthcoming conference in Japan .
However , somewhere along the line , people will stop buying into this unless our words are followed up by visible action .
( LT ) Biodiversity is a difficult and complex issue which is , of course , important , both in the European Union and the world as a whole .
However , it raises another issue : how do we balance environmental protection and economic growth ?
That is probably the overall issue giving us the greatest headache .
It is known that biodiversity loss is mostly related to irresponsible human economic activity .
It might always be argued that environmental protection requirements hamper competitiveness because the European Union 's standards are high , while those of other countries are not , resulting in certain problems in this area , and it is , of course , difficult to strike a balance .
However , there could still be certain preventive instruments .
I am talking about activities carried out in the European Union and the use of analyses to justify those activities .
It is important for these analyses and the environmental impact assessment to be of a high quality and independent .
Of course , realistically , it will be difficult to reach an agreement in Nagoya , but I would still like to wish the European Union and the Member of the Commission all the best .
( PT ) I welcome this debate with the Council and the Commission in which we can discuss the European Union 's plans and main strategic objectives for halting the loss of biodiversity on the eve of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity .
I hope that the European Union can take a strong and consistent position to this conference , with ideas about the specific measures that will be taken to ensure that biodiversity protection can contribute to sustainable development .
I would point out that preserving biodiversity is fundamental to the quality of ecosystems , has direct effects on essential functions such as food production or the availability of water , and prevents landslides and floods .
Finally , I would like to see the political responses intended to ensure the integration of biodiversity into the activities of economic sectors such as agriculture , forestry , fishing and tourism having the courage and ambition to protect this invaluable yet extremely fragile heritage - as in my region , the Azores - from outside interests that blindly threaten it .
( ES ) Madam President , this week , we have heard the wonderful news that more than 20 000 new species have been discovered in the sea .
This is what the Nagoya conference is going to take responsibility for , not only so that these species continue to exist , but also so that even more species can be discovered and they do not disappear before we are aware of them .
However , the credibility of the European Union - the Commission , the Council and the Member States - is not only going to be at stake in Nagoya .
It will also be at stake a month later in Paris at the meeting of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas , where the future of bluefin tuna , which is a highly endangered marine species , is going to be decided .
It is this consistency that I think it is important to demand , because what the Commission says about maintaining biodiversity is good , in fact , it is very good , but it needs to be consistent when applying it to sectoral policies , for example , fisheries policy .
It will be important and essential to observe how the consistency that we are going to see and hope to see - as we are demanding for Nagoya - is maintained in Paris , when we really understand that protecting bluefin tuna means protecting not only an animal , but also a way of life , a culture and , above all , a way of seeing the world that relates to humanity .
Madam President , this has been a very interesting debate because we now conclude that biodiversity loss is a problem for the developed world and in the developing world .
Gay Mitchell spoke very eloquently about the difficulties for the developing world when erosion of biodiversity occurs .
He also spoke positively about where improvements have been made .
In order to guarantee food security for the world , we need sustainable agriculture in a sustainable environment .
I think another colleague mentioned that we have perhaps failed to communicate outside our own ranks , to those who are managing farms and ecosystems , about how important biodiversity is .
We have failed to pay for it in the price we pay for our goods .
As has been said , we have to put a market value on biodiversity if we are serious about reversing the loss .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , after hearing everything that the honourable Members of Parliament have said , I should say thank you because I think that the messages and the awareness which they are sharing , not only with me but , I hope , sharing with the whole European public , are more than clear .
I should start by saying that we should hide nothing .
We have failed in delivering 2010 biodiversity targets and we are responsible for that and we should do better .
There are basically two lines on which we should and can act .
One is our European line , the other is the international Nagoya line , about which you had more to say .
But soon , after Nagoya , we will also come with the proposal for the European Union strategy on how to deal with this serious question and then , of course , many of the matters which you today underlined will have to be addressed .
It will have to include a baseline , which we currently , finally , have .
It will have to have measurable targets , not a lot , but a few that are the closest to something we would like to achieve : the best proxies for what we would like to pursue .
Why a few ?
Because this has to be fundamentally understood , so that we can share the understanding of biodiversity .
We have done quite a lot in Europe up to now .
I am very cautious when we talk about implementation of Natura 2000 .
I think that Natura 2000 will still give some advantages in the future but , when we talk about our strategy , I think we have to be ambitious , as we are when we talk about when we are going out , when we talk about international appearances .
Many of you mentioned financing .
I am not underestimating the question of financing , but do not fix your debate only on financing .
It is much more than just financing and much more than just fresh money for biodiversity .
It is about environmentally harmful subsidies .
It is also about private financing .
It is about many of the things which you in this House have adopted .
Illegal logging is a typical example of how we can really help , and finance even , the countries which are exporting timber , also in Europe .
I think it is extremely important that we understand that .
As some of you mentioned , it is truly and fundamentally a moral and ethical question but , for those who do not understand that , it is becoming more than obvious that it is an issue of our quality of life and an issue of our economic success .
It is important that this is understood too , because this was a turning point in the climate change debate , if you remember .
I think it is important also that governments , not only in Europe , also our partners around the world , understand very well how important it is that they also engage their priorities in following the things that we are discussing in this House today .
The next question which I would like to mention is access and benefit sharing ( ABS ) .
For me , after sitting in New York discussing with practically all our partners , ABS will be an important , if not the breakthrough , issue in Nagoya .
So we should do our utmost to ensure there is a breakthrough there .
Of course , you can make a difference , but it is not only about you and , after all the discussions which we have had with the Member States recently , I can confirm that there is a strong willingness on the part of the Member States to have a breakthrough on that point .
The next question is something which we will also need to discuss in the future , and how to deal with it is also closely connected with answering some other questions .
You know that there were two Rio conventions .
One was for climate change , the other was for biodiversity , and there was also the separate issue of deforestation , an important one .
Increasingly , they are separate and they are developing in parallel ; we are increasingly understanding that we should start to reconnect them .
Many of the issues about mitigation and adaption in climate change have to do with biodiversity .
Red Plus is as much for climate change as for dealing with biodiversity .
So let us also prioritise the questions of biodiversity when we set the priorities on how we will use the money which is committed to Red Plus activities .
And , when we talk about Millennium Development Goals , it is the same story .
I met and talked with Helen Clark in New York about how we can cooperate better between the Commission and the UNDP in the future to ensure that these issues are more interconnected .
The next issue which some of you underlined , and which I think is the basis of all the issues , is the integration of biodiversity , the mainstreaming of biodiversity in other policies .
I fully share the view that if we want to talk about the CAP , the fisheries policy , cohesion and other policies , we have to take that angle into account , too .
When we talk about the common agricultural policy - which will soon be on your table , you will soon be discussing it - I think we should develop more the concept of the public good .
I believe that farmers should be partially repaid for what they do for us : they are providing food and we are grateful for that , but we should also be grateful to them for keeping up biodiversity .
This is an important debate which lies ahead of us .
Nagoya / Cancún are pretty much connected stories .
It is not only about biodiversity ; it is not only about climate change ; it is also about the success of multilateralism and governance globally .
So it is very important that we achieve success there .
All your calls for us to speak with one voice are well heard .
We are doing everything possible to make this true in reality and here , I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency for having a very constructive stance on that .
The next thing which I would like to mention , and with this I am almost coming to an end , is a remark on euros and dollars .
I took it positively but I am a bit afraid that , when we talk about biodiversity and international help , we will talk more about euros than dollars .
So , finally , we have to come away from Cancún with something which is a success , which we can consider a success , and which will be connected with solutions , because there is simply too much at stake .
We have responsibility , but I think it is fair to say others also have responsibility .
But having Parliament firmly behind us is really helpful .
Mr President , honourable Members , I should like to thank all the speakers who have underlined the importance of biodiversity .
This is a very important message that has come across here in this debate .
I have already discussed , in my introduction , many aspects that have been touched on here .
There are certain points I should like to discuss in rather more detail .
First and foremost , access and benefit sharing ( ABS ) .
An important point to make is that the Council undertakes to complete the Protocol on access to genetic resources and benefit sharing ( ABS Protocol ) at the 10th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties ( COP 10 ) to the Convention on Biological Diversity ( CBD ) given that it will make a very important contribution to achieving all the objectives of the CBD .
The development and implementation of the ABS Protocol must be regarded as an integral part of the process surrounding the CBD .
Progress has already been made in this field in the recent discussions in Montreal , but it is true that a number of other issues need to be resolved ahead of COP 10 .
This will require sufficient flexibility from all the negotiating partners , and thus also internally within the EU .
Secondly , as regards the motion for a European Parliament resolution , this resolution discusses the key elements of the biodiversity policy : the urgency to act , the economics of ecosystems and biodiversity , the overall mission , vision and goals of , and indicators for , the CBD and the CBD strategic plan , and also the more specific aspects such as ABS and synergies between the three Rio conventions , and so on .
These elements tally with the positions taking shape within the Council with a view to the Nagoya conference .
The conclusions on this should be adopted by the Environment Council on 14 October .
As regards the question concerning the package and sectoral integration into areas such as agriculture and fisheries , I would remind you that , on 15 March , the Council expressly asked the Commission to propose a package .
I understand from what the Commissioner said a minute ago that the Commission is working hard on this and that we can therefore count on it .
The Council will be asked to adopt the conclusions on biodiversity at its meeting on 14 October - next week , that is .
They will then serve as political guidelines for the negotiations in Japan in October .
These conclusions are to form the basis for determining the important issues for COP 10 and also the Council 's position on these : the revised , updated CBD strategic plan , the negotiations with a view to the ABS Protocol , the strategy for mobilising funding , particularly via innovative financing mechanisms , sectoral integration and synergies between the fight against climate change , desertification and policies to promote biodiversity .
I should like to thank everyone who has underlined the importance of this .
I also wish to thank the Commissioner for the constructive cooperation we have enjoyed up to now and also for the pleasant cooperation we are likely to enjoy in the run-up to , and on the spot in , Nagoya .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 7 October 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Biodiversity is , and will remain , an important issue for the European Union , because biodiversity goes hand in hand with securing the food supply in Europe and therefore represents the prospects for a positive future for the next generations .
European agriculture is aware of its important role as promoter and preserver of biodiversity .
Through CO2 storage in soils or near-natural land management , our European farmers are actively contributing to the preservation of biodiversity .
However , all of this effort will be of no benefit if there is little or no public awareness .
We need to make European citizens aware of the fundamental importance of biodiversity for our countryside , our economy , our lives and our children 's future , and to spur them into action .
The European Union will not be spared from the extinction of a diverse range of species .
Already today , numerous ways of life are under serious threat .
Let us take action now and set the course for a species-rich future .
I would like to emphasise , in the context of this debate , the important role played by ' The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity ' ( TEEB ) project , funded by a number of European states , which calculates the financial value of nature and the costs incurred as a result of biodiversity loss .
TEEB allows us to raise awareness about the magnitude of the challenges involved and to prepare the future decisions in this area .
I would simply like to mention a few facts presented in recent TEEB findings .
The cost of deforestation is rising to approximately USD 4.5 trillion per year .
According to other similarly recent estimates , more than a quarter of the world 's initial biodiversity disappeared by 2000 , with the expectation of a further loss of more than 10 % by 2050 .
I can give you more examples .
In these circumstances , the timing of the Nagoya Summit could not be better .
Furthermore , I believe that this parliamentary debate is particularly timely as well because it allows us , at EU level , to harmonise our position for the forthcoming summit .
This year is a crucial time for stepping up global efforts and commitments in order to halt biodiversity loss .
We must seize this moment to create a vision and some clear objectives concerning biodiversity and its sustainable conservation after 2010 . We need to define a strong common position and ensure the European Union 's active participation in future international negotiations .
A long-term global vision must take into account the links between biodiversity , ecosystem services , climate change , desertification , economic prosperity and citizens ' health and well-being .
Achieving the proposed biodiversity objectives and targets is subject to mobilising the necessary resources to implement adequately the measures promoting conservation and sustainable use of natural resources .
In this respect , Romania supports greater involvement from the private and public sectors in finding innovative solutions and mechanisms for funding biodiversity .
Homo sapiens produces the most waste of all the biological species .
Industrial pollution , municipal waste , CO2 production , noise , light smog , heat pollution and all the other known and unknown waste products of our civilisation create an enormous ecological footprint .
The effect of the ecological footprint of our species is to prevent the continuing existence of certain other species in the planetary ecosystem .
This is the basis for the present day decline in biodiversity .
Biodiversity is a defining precondition for the existence of the planetary ecosystem in the metastable state which we know and which enables the existence of our own civilisation .
The interdependency and interconnectedness of our existence with other forms of life on the planet is neglected , undervalued and played down .
If biodiversity declines , the absorptive capacity of the planetary ecosystem will decline as well .
The ecosystem will become less resistant and more susceptible to changes , including step changes .
At a certain stage , it will then tip over into another state .
The question is whether this new state will allow the continuation of our civilisation , or of the current number of people on the planet , and whether it will allow the very existence of our biological species .
In the present time , it is no longer a question of one or another animal species , nor even of the protection of any individual ecosystem .
It is a question of the preservation of our own species , of our own ecosystem .
Unfortunately , we still behave like a patient suffering from cancer .
We lie to ourselves and we fail to take the measures which might save our lives .
Social provisions of the Lisbon Treaty ( debate )
The next item is the Council 's and Commission 's statements on social regulations in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on behalf of Mrs Onkelinx , the Deputy Prime Minister , on the various new perspectives on social matters offered by the Treaty of Lisbon .
I truly believe that we have to look at the social advances in European law .
Thus , Article 9 of the treaty provides for a horizontal social protection clause which obliges the European institutions to take into account requirements linked to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection , the fight against social exclusion , and a high level of education , training and protection of human health .
This requirement follows the statement in Article 3 ( 3 ) of the treaty that the internal market shall be constructed through policies based on a social market economy which is highly competitive and which tends towards full employment and social progress .
Article 9 accordingly calls for the social dimension to be taken into account from now on in the definition of all European policies .
This is about restoring a fair balance between aspects that we will have to realise in practice .
This is a priority cross-cutting objective of the Belgian Presidency .
In future , then , we will have to pay much more attention to the social impact of policies developed at European level .
While we need to maximise economic growth within the European Union , we must also encourage the fair and just distribution across the board of the fruits of this growth , and we must take particular interest in the fate of the most vulnerable people .
We must also take the social dimension into account in the Europe 2020 strategy , which , as you know , was adopted by the European Union during the June European Council .
This strategy , which is targeted at employment and growth , incorporates the economic , social , employment and environmental dimensions .
It is based on a limited number of quantified objectives and some guidelines .
Of the five fixed objectives , one is specifically dedicated to the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
It sets the objective of taking at least 20 million people in the European Union out of poverty by 2020 .
Along with guideline 10 , it constitutes the social pillar of the strategy .
Although we may be disappointed by its lack of ambition , it nevertheless shows a desire to attain a specific and clearly identifiable objective , which is new in this area , and it introduces a new dynamic of which we need to take advantage .
The Member States will have to report each year , in their National Reform Programmes ( NRPs ) , on the progress made in implementing this objective .
It has always been my view that we must maximise the benefit of this social dimension of EU 2020 .
I want to make the Belgian Presidency a social presidency par excellence .
In this context , the Europe 2020 strategy provides an opportunity for visibility : a European social policy .
This will be a genuine challenge , because the Member States are busy defining their reform plans , and therefore their policies for achieving the quantified objectives , and , at the same time , they are busy working on their national budgets , which limit their financial freedom .
In addition , the financial crisis is still recent , and the economic recovery is slow in making itself felt .
As such , we must make sure that fiscal consolidation does not have a negative impact on employment and social policies .
The EU 2020 growth strategy must be sustainable and inclusive .
It must not be characterised by growth without jobs ; it must show a desire to combat job insecurity .
Thus , the fight against poverty really has to be a major concern of ours .
In the Council , the Belgian Presidency is working hard to make this dynamic work , but it is also sensitive to the role that the Commission must play in this context .
We would genuinely urge the Commission to be dynamic on this matter .
I am thinking here of the flagship initiatives that it needs to adopt , especially the platform for combating poverty and social exclusion , which must offer a broader perspective on the social challenges which Europe faces .
Among other things , the Commission must use this method to propose ways for us to specifically implement the new horizontal social clause in Article 9 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As you can see , the Belgian Presidency has a great deal of ambition , but I truly believe that it will meet the needs and demands of our fellow citizens .
Without a social dimension , the European project is doomed to failure .
Here too , you have your role to play in continuing the debate concerning this strategy , not only at European level , but also by highlighting the social dimension in your respective countries .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the horizontal social clause laid down in Article 9 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states : ' In defining and implementing its policies and activities , the Union shall take into account ' , inter alia , ' requirements linked to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection ' and ' the fight against social exclusion ' .
The Commission is committed to implementing this clause , including through strengthening the assessment of social impact , as part of its overall impact assessment system .
In relation to the specific situation of social services of general interest ( SSGI ) , the Commission believes that it is important to ensure legal certainty for public authorities in the Member States .
However , the Commission does not consider it necessary , at this stage , to set up a multi-stakeholder taskforce to tackle the difficulties some providers of SSGI are experiencing with the interpretation of the single market rules .
The Commission is aware that a significant number of public authorities and stakeholders consider the EU rules applicable to social services as an obstacle to the organisation and financing of such services .
However , consultations of public authorities and stakeholders show that the existing rules , to a large extent , take account of the specificities of social services of general interest .
The problems reported are very often due to a lack of awareness of , and information about , the rules , or to doubts about the way such rules are to be implemented .
For this reason , the Commission has put a strategy in place , including the interactive information service , the frequently asked questions documents and the training initiative for local public authorities .
The Commission is in the process of updating the frequently asked questions documents .
Once finalised , the Commission will present them to the Member States and the stakeholders within the Social Protection Committee .
Another discussion forum with the Member States is the Advisory Committee on Public Procurement .
A public consultation on the SGEI package - Services of General Economic Interest - which aims to clarify and simplify the application of State aid rules to those services , has just ended .
The Commission will share its assessment of the contributions received with Parliament , the Committee of the Regions , the European Economic and Social Committee and the Member States .
As the Commission has stated on numerous occasions , the specificities of social services will be duly taken into account in the revision of the package .
In addition , the Commission has had a fruitful dialogue with the main stakeholders over the last few years on possible adaptations to the existing EU rules - in particular , within the Social Protection Committee and Parliament 's intergroup on public services .
In July , the Commission participated in a seminar organised by the Belgian Presidency with the Member States and various stakeholders .
Once again , these discussions have shown that , while there is a strong and legitimate interest in fine-tuning , there was no real need to change the fundamental structure of existing EU rules in order to adapt them to the specificities of SSGI .
This being so , the Commission is aware that the Belgian Presidency has put forward some suggestions with a view to clarifying and adjusting the existing rules .
The Commission is carefully considering these suggestions .
I also recall that the Third Forum on Social Services of General Interest , to be organised on 26 and 27 October under the auspices of the Belgian Presidency , will provide an opportunity to discuss these suggestions and possibly others as well .
Lastly , the Commission is working within the Social Protection Committee on a voluntary quality framework for social services .
The Commission has worked very closely with the main stakeholders , social partners , local authorities , service providers and users in drawing up such a framework .
In summary , the Commission is committed to implementing the new horizontal social clause , including the relation to SSGI .
As I have explained , there are numerous fora for discussion and dialogue with the SSGI stakeholders .
The Commission , therefore , does not see the need to establish an extra taskforce .
However , the Commission is committed to tackling the difficulties faced by some providers of SSGI with the interpretation of the single market rules , including under the forthcoming Single Market Act , to be adopted by the Commission before the end of October .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon did not give the European Union any fundamentally new powers in the area of social policy .
Article 9 - the representative of the Council has already referred to this - expands the existing powers within the context of the basic principle of the social market economy , which is very important to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and which we introduced into the European Convention , which essentially prepared the way for the Treaty of Lisbon .
Our second point is that with the report by former commissioner , Mario Monti , entitled ' Putting citizens at the heart of the Union ' , the European Commission made an interesting and valuable contribution to how we can succeed in combining the great positive impulses of the internal market with social elements of the common consumer market .
For this reason , Commissioner Andor , we are expectantly looking forward to the so-called Single Market Act that Commissioner Barnier is currently working on .
We believe that this can really get to grips with the Monti-Kroes package in a constructive way .
However , we are sceptical as to whether the opening up of the public procurement directives and the creation of a concession directive will , in the end , really result in us putting the internal European market on the right track , since obviously , we are clearly against any inflation of the public sector .
The representative of the Council has already made reference to this , but it is all the more important , as great and significant as social consolidation may be - and I say that as a member of the younger generation in this Parliament - that we include all the shadow budgets - the Freiburg-based professor Bernd Raffelhüschen has spoken of the fact that we have a series of hidden budgets as regards pension debts - when we consider social consolidation , and that we make a policy that also gives the younger generation a fair chance in the coming decade .
I therefore believe that together - and the representative of the Council has already made reference to this - we face great challenges ; that the European Parliament and the EPP Group have a shared view of this challenge and that we should all do everything we can to support the efforts by the European Commission in respect of both this package of measures for the internal market and , on the other hand , the social measures that must supplement this internal market , against the background of the social market economy .
I am therefore looking forward to further debate and am grateful for your attention .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , first of all , I want to thank the Council and Commission for their statements today and I want to thank the ALDE Group , the Greens / EFA Group and the GUE / NGL Group for their support in having this matter on today 's agenda .
The new social clauses do not relate solely to services of general interest as implied by the EPP intervention earlier this afternoon and , as regards social services of general interest ( SSGI ) , we need to come to conclusions on these matters which have been heavily debated over many years , rather than rehashing old arguments .
As rapporteur on the future of social services of general interest , I look forward to working with all the groups which recognise the need for a strong social market economy and I hope to bring forward concrete proposals to resolve the dilemmas faced by providers of SSGI .
As you are no doubt aware , Europe 's citizens have high hopes regarding the development of a more coherent and dynamic social dimension to European policies and legislation following the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty .
Indeed , one of those important debates in Ireland during the referendums on Lisbon concerned the new social clauses , including Article 3 , Article 9 , Article 14 and the social protocol , and indeed many others in relation to disability and equality .
It is always important that we live up to citizens ' expectations .
It is doubly important at this time of economic and social crisis for many millions of our citizens who have already lost , and many more who will lose , their jobs , their homes , their savings , their pensions , their public health services and , indeed , educational opportunities for their children because of the crisis and the remedies being applied .
It would be deeply destabilising for the European Union if the College of Commissioners and the European Council were to take the view that these new treaty articles change nothing and continue treating social objectives as secondary to market objectives .
If we fail in our responsibilities , there are waiting in the wings extreme xenophobic and intolerant political parties willing to capitalise on the anger and the discontent that is out there .
My specific request to the Commission today , and to the Council , is to accept that we need a dynamic process for making progress with regard to services of general interest , particularly social services of general interest .
I regret the statement today by the Commissioner .
I hope , over the next few months , to persuade him that he is wrong , that we do need a dynamic process , that we do need a high level taskforce which includes not only himself and other DGs but members of civil society , the trade unions , the Council and the Committee of the Regions .
We need a mechanism which will drive the change which everybody recognises .
Commissioner I have heard you saying , and I have heard Mr Barroso saying , that the stakeholders apparently tell you that there is no real problem .
The stakeholders are not telling me that .
I have met dozens of them in the past six months .
They are telling me there are administrative problems and there are legal problems and that they need to be addressed urgently .
They are not going to be addressed urgently , I am afraid , on the basis of what you and the Council said here today .
I hope , as I say , I can change your mind over the next few months .
However , there is an urgent need for a mechanism , a high-level mechanism which will include the stakeholders and ensure that the decisions that need to be made are made and followed through .
I think it is most important that Parliament is involved in that process .
We have to bear in mind that we must address the concerns and demonstrate that Europe is serious about creating a social market economy and not a single market on its own .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I have here a well-worn , annotated , underlined , dog-eared , tea-stained copy of the Lisbon Treaty .
For 12 months , this was my constant travelling companion when I was trying to persuade Irish citizens to vote ' yes ' . When Irish citizens asked me why they should vote ' yes ' , one of the top five reasons that I gave them was that this treaty would bring about a more social Europe .
Just 12 months ago , we ratified this treaty and now we , as politicians , have to deliver on our promises .
We have spoken about the new horizontal social clause - Article 9 - that obliges the Union to consider the social consequences of decisions when making its policies .
This is a cross-cutting objective and it gives us greater scope to be more ambitious when writing , amending or implementing EU legislation , but Article 9 does not guarantee desired policy outcomes .
It is a powerful tool which is at our disposal , but we have to ask ourselves whether we are using it or whether it is just window dressing .
Social policy was poorly built into the original treaties , but I believe it is much stronger in the Lisbon Treaty .
Apart from the Protocol on services of general interest , Article 14 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union has been mentioned .
That clearly states the shared responsibility of Member States and the EU as regards SGIs .
To date , the EU has applied internal market rules , but Article 14 states that in the application of the treaties ' the Union and the Member States ... shall take care that such services operate on the basis of principles and conditions , particularly economic and financial conditions , which enable them to fulfil their missions . '
That is a shift in EU policy and it must be reflected in the Commission 's communications and proposals .
Also , in the Council , the anti-discrimination directive is still blocked .
That is an important piece of legislation .
We need to see it implemented .
So , while the fundamental principles are established and social policy legislation is protected in the Lisbon Treaty , the future direction of social policy is not settled definitively .
We - the Commission , the Council and Parliament - can , and must , use the tools provided by Lisbon .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Courard , Commissioner , the principal objective of the European Union , an objective which appears in the Treaty of Lisbon , is the development of a social market economy oriented towards full employment and social progress .
It therefore contains a horizontal social clause which states that the promotion of a high level of employment , adequate social protection and the fight against exclusion must guide the definition and implementation of all EU policies .
The recognition of social rights and , in particular , of the right to access services of general interest , is made binding in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The charter contains rights and principles , such as the right to access social security payments , housing benefits and social services .
On the eve of the Third Forum on Social Services of General Interest , initiated by Parliament , how can you claim that , in applying the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , only the rules on competition and the internal market need apply to these social services of general interest , with no adaptation to their specific modes of organisation and financing ?
Is it not true that the Services Directive , for example , calls into question the role of social services of general interest with a strong local base consisting of community members who are not aiming for financial gain ?
When will you stop burying your head in the sand and when will you finally shoulder your responsibility as colegislator , in accordance with the provisions of the new Article 14 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ?
Mr President , I have to admit that the Treaty of Lisbon and its social commitments read well .
However , we cannot ignore the fact that hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets in Brussels and other European capitals .
They were protesting against a mistaken and unsocial policy towards the crisis .
We have hardly begun to turn the corner from this , the worst of crises , yet we are already hearing from many governments that national debts need to be reined in .
The emergency parachutes that are the rescue plans need to be folded away , they say , and investment programmes abolished .
The Commission is calling for the Stability and Growth Pact to be tightened up .
States in which reasonable wages and salaries are paid , in which the labour market still follows rules , or in which social security systems are too ' social ' - which means too expensive - are to be penalised .
The banksters are carrying on as if nothing had happened .
Pensions and wages are to be cut , consumption taxes perhaps increased .
Contributions to social health insurance are rising while services decline .
In the light of the judgments of the European Court of Justice in the Viking , Laval and Rueffert cases , it is not only the trade unions that fear that the social balance of the European Union is in a precarious position .
The call of the trade unions for a social protection clause deserves our full support .
Employee rights , trade union rights and social protection need to be given at least the same significance as - and , indeed , precedence over - the internal market and freedom to provide services .
This needs to be clearly laid down in primary law .
I am pointing out these facts because the relevant paragraphs merely look good - in reality , they change nothing .
Human dignity cannot be ensured without minimum social standards .
A social progress clause would improve the badly damaged reputation of the European Union amongst the populace and help to stem social fears .
( DE ) Mr President , we are witnessing within the European Union what I believe to be a worrying development whereby more and more people are being pushed into temporary agency work , false self-employment and McJobs , and whereby the social rights of employees seem to be being pushed into the background .
Not only does the European Court of Human Rights seem to be paring back worker protection standards in its jurisprudence , but it also rules out giving preferential treatment to socially engaged entrepreneurs when awarding public contracts .
The Treaty of Lisbon was going to make everything better , we were told , but , personally , I have not seen much of any social turnaround .
Attempts are being made , for instance , to reduce economic and social differences between the Member States using the European Social Fund .
Yet , if the bringing to account and execution of projects leads to problems in many regions , the fund is failing in its mission .
The freedoms of the internal market , I might point out in passing , all too often only involve the freedoms of the multinational conglomerates , which are squeezing out the local employers , which is to say the small and medium-sized enterprises .
I believe that this needs to change as soon as possible .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Treaty of Lisbon unquestionably provides Europe with new social objectives .
Sustainable development in Europe is based on the high competitiveness of the social market economy , which means full employment and social progress , the fight against social exclusion and discrimination , the promotion of justice and the eradication of poverty .
The Treaty of Lisbon confirms the role of the social partners and promotes social dialogue between the trade unions and the representatives of employers ' organisations at European level .
On these various points , the actual situation is certainly not the one described by some speakers here .
Today , we can dramatise the situation ; it is true that there are worrying situations , that the crisis is not yet over , and that it has consequences .
However , Europe is taking measures in this area - which we must explain to our citizens - to create some order in the financial sector , in particular , and in this regard , it is one of the first to be making efforts to organise that sector , on the basis of our work .
Allow me to make a few short remarks .
On services of general interest in particular , I will say clearly that we should take specific national circumstances into account , because it is true that some of our fellow citizens are a little alarmed - I am thinking , for example , of the French - when they feel , wrongly , that Europe is endangering the public services which are a French tradition .
Likewise , in relation to public contracts , we should take account of individual circumstances , and especially of those which allow for collaboration between several public authorities .
Nevertheless , social policy is dependent on the health of the economy and on economic growth .
That is the primary objective of a social market economy .
Mr President , unlike some of the other speakers , I do not believe that the Lisbon Treaty changes as much in the social policy field as in some other areas .
We have had codecision in the employment field for many years now but , under the Title II provisions having general application , in Article 9 there is a reference to , among other things , the protection of human health .
One directive that affects that is the Electromagnetic Fields Directive and I know the Commission has been looking at this .
When we take the Electromagnetic Fields Directive through the whole procedure with the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we must ensure , and I hope Member States agree , that state-of-the-art MRI scanners can be used .
Article 10 under Title II covers anti-discrimination .
As several other speakers have said , it is most important that we make sure that the horizontal directive on access to goods and services is unblocked from the Council and make sure that those Member States that are blocking it lift their objections so we can have a true anti-discrimination directive on access to goods and services .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , it has to be said that what prevails in the application of the Maastricht Treaty is not at all what you describe : it is neither Article 9 nor Article 14 for protecting public services .
Rather , it is the principles of competition , unrestricted free-tradeism , the weakening of social protection , the smashing of pensions and wages , and the rejection of fair fiscal harmonisation .
For example , this year has been declared the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Let us note exactly what you have done which conflicts with that , Members of the Commission and of the Council .
The decisions taken in these last few days pushing us towards super austerity , and the Commission setting itself up as a veritable tribunal to put it into effect , are in conflict with every single social project .
Instead of believing that austerity and social regression will get the European Union out of the crisis , I think that we must use quite different reasoning ; in fact , the opposite reasoning .
Social progress is a lever for ending the crisis .
I would therefore like to make a proposal to you , which I submit to the debate for further consideration .
The proposal would involve creating a new system which would allow the European Central Bank to buy - including via the creation of money , as all banks in the world do now - all or part of the debt of the Member States if necessary , and , at the same time , to set up a European fund for human , social and ecological development .
Backed up by the European Central Bank and the European Investment Bank , this fund should allow public services - or community services of general interest , if you like - to be expanded , and should provide aid for industry , research and training .
( PT ) The pressure being exerted by the Commission and the great powers of Europe on the countries with more fragile economies and higher levels of poverty flies in the face of all the principles of economic and social cohesion that the Belgian Presidency has spoken about here in the name of the so-called ' social clause ' of the Treaty of Lisbon - Article 9 .
The truth is that it has only been possible to move outside the irrational criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact when it was necessary for the Member States to support the banks as a result of the problems they were experiencing because of the toxic waste that they had created .
Now that the banks have soaked up billions of euros in public aid and the public debts of the countries with the greatest difficulties have rocketed , the pressure to reduce debts and deficits has returned with no thought for employment , social inclusion or the universal rights to public education and health care , housing , or living wages and pensions .
In the name of the sustainability of public finances , the austerity measures being imposed in some countries , such as Greece and Portugal , are multiplying , social injustices are on the increase , and growing unemployment , poverty and social exclusion are threatening 120 million people in the European Union .
Portugal will slip back into depression if the new austerity programme that the Portuguese Government has just announced goes ahead , which raises a few questions .
What sort of social Europe is that ?
In the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , where are the guarantees of minimum incomes with which to confront poverty ?
Where does the integration of social and social sustainability objectives with macro-economic policy stop ?
Where is the defence and promotion of public services ?
When will there be a cross-cutting social guideline and an effective assessment of the social impact , of the policies of the Stability and Growth Pact , of competition policy , of the internal market , of budgetary and fiscal policy , and of monetary policy ?
That is the aim of the workers ' struggles that are multiplying across Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , the political goals are clear .
We want a Europe with a sustainable social market economy , fundamental rights , no discrimination , full employment , an integrated social clause , social cohesion and services of general interest , which are to be defined through subsidiarity .
That is our goal .
However , we have too few instruments at the European level to achieve this goal .
Most of the instruments are to be found at the Member State level .
We need a balance between the economic , the competition policy and the social instruments if we are to be able to realise these goals across Europe .
We should therefore broaden out monetary union into an economic and social union .
We also need to clearly come out and say that we need more acts of solidarity and that training , getting people qualified , growth and employment are not elements to be played off against the social side of Europe ; they are , in fact , a prerequisite if we are to combat poverty and exclusion and end the plight of the working poor .
( FR ) Mr President , I have just come out of a meeting of the Public Services Intergroup .
I sometimes wonder if we speak to the same people .
For you , everything is fine .
The majority of the parties involved , at best , do not understand anything about European legislation , or they understand it only too well .
You are talking about measuring the social impact of the European Union 's policies .
So I would say to you : there is a good area for you to work on - go on , I dare you !
If , as you claim , there is no problem with public services , and , in particular , with local public services , then commit yourself to undertaking a proper , exhaustive review of the liberalisation of public services across the European Union .
Free and fair competition was supposed to lower prices .
I am French .
I will just give you some examples which perhaps explain why the French are a little wary about Europe on this subject : the prices of postal services , rail transport , air transport and water transport , which have been given over to private companies , have increased exponentially .
The notion of universal service was supposed to guarantee that the most basic services were accessible to everyone .
In reality , for the poorest people , it is barely enough , and instances of discrimination are increasing .
What happened to your great redistribution of wealth , when we know that inequalities between the richest and the poorest continue to increase everywhere in Europe ?
So yes , Commissioner , as many Members have already asked you , when will the Commission decide to take into account the consequences of Articles 9 and 14 of the treaties , as well as the protocol on social services of general interest ; in other words , when will it respect the rights of Parliament ?
Please , what are you afraid of ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission as a whole , as do I , believes that our objective is to develop a social market economy .
I can say , for me personally and for my portfolio , that in this expression , the ' social ' is more important than the ' market ' .
Of course , at the end of the day , the Commission has to put forward , represent and implement a very balanced approach .
However , I have always represented the social objectives and we have taken this very seriously .
I also noted in the discussion that the forthcoming Single Market Act would be received with disappointment by Parliament if it were not to include a very strong social dimension .
That is what we have been working on : ensuring that this very important document will be strong on social issues .
I have participated in the relevant group of commissioners and have ensured the inclusion of items concerning pensions and other issues that are very important in terms of strengthening the social dimension of the European economy .
However , there are many other issues .
I would certainly object to an approach of having only one particular type of solution , i.e. establishing another high-level body in order to ensure that we deliver on social issues .
There was nothing in my answer that suggests an objection to having a dynamic process on SSGI .
In fact , we find ourselves in a dynamic process on SSGI in the run-up to the October conference of the Belgian Presidency .
I will attend both the opening and the conclusions of that conference , and I am very hopeful that it will bring up a number of issues related to SSGI to guide us forward .
SSGI is treated very seriously in the upcoming European Platform against Poverty which will be published at the end of the year .
Mr Courard , the Secretary of State for Social Integration and the Fight Against Poverty , also referred to this in his introduction .
I am open to taking further steps .
However , I would first like to see what these events and documents will bring from the wider range of European stakeholders .
I would like to stress that , although officially there is some recovery , we are in a very difficult phase of the economic crisis and that there is still a lot of pain inflicted not simply by the crisis itself but also by the measures to exit the crisis .
The Commission has consistently been calling for the interests of social services and vulnerable groups to be taken into account .
In recent weeks , I have made many speeches and I have called for caution in terms of the macro-economic policies of Member States .
Fiscal consolidation is inevitable because countries accumulated high debts .
However , austerity - especially mindless austerity - and single-minded expenditure cuts are not inevitable .
All Member States , even those that are under pressure from the markets , have room to consider how to deliver a measured fiscal consolidation .
Everyone has the capacity to balance the various options - expenditure cuts or revenue increases , and they can apply fairness ; they can take into account the interests of vulnerable groups .
The Commission has been calling for that .
Even in these difficult times , we are calling for social awareness .
That is where the European Year has been helping us a lot .
This has been an awareness-raising campaign and , to that extent , it has been a success because it helped to deliver the two very important targets of Europe 2020 .
Without this campaign we would not have been successful in delivering the very ambitious targets on raising employment and reducing poverty in Europe .
Of course , nobody believes that this can be delivered overnight .
We have to improve our instruments .
I accept what the honourable Member said about the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
It has not been functioning perfectly , but we are in the process of exploring where the ESF should be improved in terms of innovation , what the ESF should be dealing with , and how it should be used .
This is all part of a process .
There are series of conferences to discuss that , especially in the context of how to handle the situation of the Roma population , among other issues .
The Belgian Presidency is holding a conference specifically on how the ESF could be more useful in reducing poverty .
I would be doubtful about establishing a new fund .
I think we first have to explore how the social fund could be used , with the available instruments , to improve social conditions .
Here , I would underline the role of the European Investment Bank in terms of developing the infrastructure and services in Europe .
Nobody is calling for the privatisation of social services .
These are predominantly Member State competences .
However , if the EU rules concerning public procurement or State aid , for example , are applied correctly , taking all important parameters into account , they will guarantee quality , cost effectiveness and transparency .
These are very important objectives and we should not undermine these important objectives , particularly transparency , when we try to pursue other objectives , however important or relevant those might be .
I hope these points are convincing and that the upcoming events , especially the next conference on SSGI and poverty , will provide ample opportunities to discuss how to proceed .
I can assure you that reducing poverty and improving social standards in Europe are very much in the focus of the Commission 's work and very much in the focus of my personal agenda .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members for the quality of their speeches .
The Council has asked the Commission to develop a platform which is not limited to poverty , but which genuinely introduces a broader dynamic for dealing with the fight against exclusion and the role of social welfare .
I would also like to say that , in the austerity measures , which the Commissioner has just spoken about , it was obviously important to consider the measures to be taken in order to ensure that austerity does not make people even poorer .
The fight against poverty really must not be forgotten today .
I would also thank the Commission for its efforts in trying to establish greater legal certainty for social services of general interest ( SSGIs ) , and particularly in respect of their specific characteristics .
It is genuinely our wish to pursue discussions , in particular within the Social Protection Committee , as well as to improve dialogue with the various stakeholders , both institutional and non-institutional .
As Mr De Rossa stressed , it is clear that , in the debate on SSGIs , the involvement of the European Parliament is , and must remain , extensive .
Article 14 is also an important element which we must use in the discussions on SSGIs .
Indeed , it will be one of the important subjects to be discussed during the third forum on 26 and 27 October .
Finally , discussions on social affairs are difficult within the Council because of budgetary restrictions , as you know .
Nevertheless , social services fulfil necessary tasks - indispensable ones - which therefore require very specific attention , and , although their specific characteristics are recognised , this means that we must provide a specific way of dealing with them .
I will finish by thanking Commissioner Andor for his dynamism and his desire to make progress in everything relating to social affairs .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The financial crisis has been contributing to a severe worsening of the European public 's social situation .
The recovery has been taking its time to be felt , with high rates of unemployment and weak economic growth .
The Europe 2020 strategy ( EU 2020 ) aims to set out a plan to facilitate the creation of economic growth that can offer higher employment and greater competitiveness within the Union .
Its defining initiatives constitute a path for us to follow towards making Europe more inclusive for Europeans .
The Treaty of Lisbon reinforces Europe 's social policy dimension .
Europe belongs to the European public and part of its mission is to contribute to promoting employment , and to improving living and working conditions .
I would stress the crucial nature of dialogue between social partners , and the role of small and medium-sized enterprises as a driving force for the economy .
We must realise the Treaty of Lisbon 's objectives regarding social issues through the specific proposals included in EU 2020 , for example , defining initiatives such as ' an industrial policy for the globalisation era ' or ' an agenda for new skills and jobs ' .
Europe must be more competitive and able to face up to the challenges of globalisation without , however , refraining from being inclusive and aiming for development that is sustainable and which guarantees social integration .
The Treaty of Lisbon reconfirms Member States ' commitment to the basic social rights set out in the European Social Charter ( in 1961 ) and in the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers ( in 1989 ) .
The Treaty of Lisbon reaffirms that the European Union is working for Europe 's sustainable development .
The EU economy is a social market economy , promoting a large degree of competitiveness .
Its objectives include full employment , social progress and a high level of protection for and improvement in the quality of the environment .
The EU combats social exclusion and discrimination , and promotes justice and social protection , gender equality , solidarity between generations and the protection of children 's rights .
In August , the unemployment rate across the EU-27 was 9.6 % , with a rate of youth unemployment of 20 % .
The economic and financial crisis has had a dramatic impact on the social environment , with the main concern for European citizens nowadays being jobs and quality of life .
The European Union is primarily about its 500 million citizens , which is why Europe must have a social aspect .
Social Europe must offer European citizens jobs and a decent living , its young people high quality education and the prospect of integration into the labour market , and its pensioners a decent living and high quality healthcare services .
Third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of Member States ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Fajon , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of Member States and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement - C7-0134 / 2010 - .
Mr President , representatives of the European Commission , Commissioner Malmström , representatives of the Council , of course , ladies and gentlemen , I will try to use four minutes now and , if necessary , two more at the end .
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina have met all the conditions and stand ready for visa liberalisation .
The European Commission has confirmed this , as indeed did we last week , in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , without a single vote against .
The expectations of the Albanian and Bosnian and Herzegovinian public , that tomorrow in this House , we will be giving the green light , are legitimate , and these people deserve that .
I would like to welcome Mr Sven Alkalaj , the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Mrs Jozefina Topalli , the Speaker of the Albanian Parliament , who are seated in the gallery and who are closely following this debate .
It is time we sent out a message to these two countries : we are ready for you , you have met the conditions .
We will knock down the visa walls that have divided the countries of the Western Balkans for far too long .
We have long struggled to achieve this common goal of ours and I would like to thank everyone who participated in this process , especially the European Commission and the Council .
I am pleased that my own country , Slovenia , has played a very important role here .
To the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , the European Union sometimes seems a lot further away than it really is .
With visa liberalisation , we will be taking a major step forward towards building confidence among the people and continuing with the urgent reforms still needed to bring them to fully-fledged membership .
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina have made their borders secure , they have ensured the security of biometric passports , and they have made significant steps in the fight against corruption and organised crime .
Last year , the European Union liberalised the visa regime for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro and their joy was indescribable .
That makes sense because , some twenty years prior to that , the citizens of the Western Balkans used to travel west without any visas .
It seems to me that this is not merely a diplomatic gift .
It is now our duty , the duty of the European Union , to fulfil our promise .
What is at stake here is our credibility and the credibility of the European Union .
Might I remind you that , last November , it was Parliament itself , together with the European Council , that undertook to deal with the visa liberalisation for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , under an expedited procedure , as soon as these countries met the conditions .
I therefore call on you to support my report , so that we can send a truly positive message to both of these countries .
Their people deserve it more than ever before and .
I believe that we will very soon be followed by our European governments .
Ladies and gentlemen , representatives of the Commission and the Council , let us make an effort and perhaps take one more step to make it possible for the citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina to travel freely before the Catholic Christmas , thus , before the end of this year , so that they can visit their relatives and friends during the holiday season .
We did that last year in the case of the FYROM , Serbia and Montenegro and I believe that , with the amount of will that we have , we will also be able to do it this year .
One final thing I would like to add is that our ' yes ' in Parliament tomorrow will be recognition of the very hard work done by both countries , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
They have met all the conditions , which is the key criterion for us , and I think that that recognition will be a very good incentive to all the countries of the Western Balkans , because it would show that hard work really does pay .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Fajon , for her very committed , enthusiastic and hard work on this dossier .
It has been a great pleasure working with you - and the shadow rapporteurs as well - in our joint efforts to grant a visa-free regime to the citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The proposal we discussed today confirms the European Union 's political will and our commitment on the liberalisation of short-term visa requirements for the citizens of all Western Balkan countries .
This is part of the Thessaloniki Agenda and a cornerstone of our integration policy for the Western Balkans .
By supporting the free regime , we are not only sending a political message .
That message is important , but we are also concretely facilitating people-to-people contact , enhancing business opportunities and cultural exchanges , and giving people the opportunity to get to know each other - giving the people of Bosnia and Albania the opportunity to get to know the European Union and vice versa .
We stand here today as a result of the hard work of the authorities and the people of these two countries , and I would like to pay tribute to that work .
I congratulate them for the efforts made and the important results achieved .
The result-oriented visa liberalisation dialogues between the two countries and the European Commission acted as a very strong initiative and incentive , accelerating reforms towards reaching EU standards in the core areas of justice , liberty and security .
The two countries have made important progress in improving passport security , strengthening border control , reinforcing the institutional framework to fight organised crime and corruption , as well as in external relations and fundamental rights .
The Commission has thoroughly monitored the steps taken .
In our proposal of May this year , the Commission identified a limited number of remaining open benchmarks for both Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , which required further monitoring .
This approach followed exactly that which was taken in 2009 for Montenegro and Serbia .
In the case of Albania , the open benchmark related to the development of a policy to support the reintegration of Albanian returnees , the strengthening of capacities in the fight against organised crime and corruption and , finally , effective implementation of the confiscation of organised crime assets .
Regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina , the open requirements were the strengthening of the capacities of the fight against organised crime and corruption , steps towards improved electronic police data exchange , and harmonisation of the criminal code between state and entity levels .
On the basis of detailed information provided by the two countries , expert missions with valuable participation of Member States ' experts during this summer and , later , with other information available , the Commission was able to present , on 14 September , our assessment of the fulfilment of the remaining open benchmarks .
It showed that both countries had undertaken all necessary measures to fulfil all open benchmarks listed in the proposal of May this year .
Consequently , the Commission considers that all the preconditions listed in the road map are met , and on this basis we propose to grant the visa-free regime .
Let me underline that the visa-free regime of the two countries also comes with responsibilities .
In order to prevent abuse , it is essential that Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina take all necessary measures to limit influxes of persons making unfounded asylum applications .
This aspect has been very strongly highlighted through the contacts between the Commission and the two countries , and I know that efforts have already been made by the two countries in this respect .
It is important that you continue the information campaigns , with the aim of properly informing and explaining to your citizens the meaning of short-term visa travel and what it entails , in particular , warning against misuse for purposes incompatible with visa travel .
Now we are here - and this is a very important step - I hope that the Council will be able to finalise the examination of this proposal during the coming weeks and that we can have a formal adoption that will be confirmed for November .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Mr President , I would like to join with Commissioner Malmström in sincerely thanking Tanja Fajon for her committed and patient hard work .
I have been a modest member of her team , under her leadership over the last eighteen months , in what I know she has and I have regarded as an extremely important exercise .
It is reported - and I am quoting from an English translation of the report - that the French European Affairs Minister , Pierre Lellouche , has called visa policy a matter of security .
He apparently said in the Assemblée Nationale the other day that ' my position and that of the government is that the visa issue is a matter of security .
It is not only a diplomatic present which we offer along the way ' .
As I say , I am quoting from an English translation .
Yes , we agree , but I will come back to the issue of security shortly .
Of course - and Tanja Fajon dealt with that - it is not a diplomatic present .
But he went on apparently to say that France would request security guarantees from the two countries .
But that is exactly what the Commission has done , under the usual , carefully prepared road map which has had the full support of the Council of Ministers as well as of Parliament .
So all the points that Commissioner Malmström made were absolutely pertinent and she is also right to add that it must be made plain , and will , I am sure , be made plain to their citizens by the national authorities of those two countries , that it is a right that must not be abused ; that it is a right for short-term travel , for tourism , for exchanges , for business and so on , and it is not for other purposes , including work .
But just to come back to that point about security in the broadest sense .
The European Union is about security in the broadest sense and this is part of the whole exercise of opening up minds , of fighting nationalism , of fighting ethnic conflict , of building a continent on peace and prosperity , and that is what we want to open up the eyes of the citizens of those countries to .
We are all in this together and we hope to prepare them to become members of the European Union because the European Union is a security project .
We made this deal .
We said , if you jump through these hoops , you will get visa-free travel .
If France or any other Member State had doubts about this journey , they should never have given support to the visa liberalisation road map .
They must not now fail this promise .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I am glad that tonight we can finally say to the people of Albania and Bosnia : ' You have not been forgotten ' .
I hope that the vote in plenary tomorrow will show a strong commitment by this Parliament to visa liberalisation for Albania and Bosnia .
The EPP urges the Council to respect their undertaking in the joint declaration adopted by the Swedish Presidency to grant a visa-free regime as soon as possible .
Now that the benchmarks have been met - according to the European Commission - the people of Albania and Bosnia should see the light at the end of the tunnel and get visa-free travel to EU-Schengen by Christmas .
The EPP has been fully committed to accelerating the process of visa liberalisation , treating all the countries of the Western Balkans equally .
We have pursued a consistent , realistic and credible line all the way through , supporting the authorities and taking the responsibility for the reform process while respecting the legitimate security concerns of European citizens .
I sincerely regret that false expectations were raised with unrealistic timetables , and I am pleased that the other part of this House has finally joined our realistic path , accepting that , unfortunately , there were no possible shortcuts .
We were ready when they were ready .
Now they are ready , and we congratulate the authorities of Bosnia and Albania for their achievements in pursing the reforms .
Strengthening the rule of law , combating crime and corruption are important for the people of the region and help close the gap with the European Union .
People-to-people contact , as Commissioner Malmström said , and breaking the sense of isolation , are important to promote stability in the region in a European perspective .
I experienced the siege of Sarajevo and was in the war in Bosnia for years .
The plea of the people who felt locked in and left behind is really close to my heart and has been at the basis of my commitment since I entered this House in the summer of 2009 .
I would first like to thank my colleague , Tanja Fajon , for this report .
It cannot be denied that a so-called visa wall has gone up over the past two decades between the European Union and certain western Balkan countries .
Fortunately , a section of this wall was knocked down last year , when we removed the visa requirement for citizens of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia .
This work must continue , however , and the advantages of visa-free movement around the European must also be granted to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Albania and , in the future , perhaps Kosovo as well .
In the first place , it has to be said that the governments of these countries have made enormous strides over the past year , fulfilling almost all of the Commission 's demands .
Secondly , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot be so naive as to imagine that the current regime prevents criminals from crossing the border .
They always know how to find a way .
We are not talking today about criminals , or even about politicians , businessmen or entrepreneurs .
We are talking about ordinary people from the Balkans .
We are not talking about safeguarding jobs or the right of residence .
We are discussing today the fundamental right of future citizens of the European Union to travel freely around the Union and to forge social and professional links with partners from the EU Member States .
Thirdly , liberalisation of the visa regime will help to stabilise the western Balkans and strengthen political and economic cooperation , to boost the inhabitants ' support for the EU and the prospects for European integration , expand people 's horizons and put a stop to the forces of anti-European extremism .
The only reservation I have over the report concerns Kosovo .
I agree with Mrs Fajon that ordinary people from this area should not be hostages to the current political situation but , at the same time , it is necessary to formulate the decision on free movement for Kosovars clearly in such a way that their leaders do not begin to interpret it erroneously as a de facto recognition of their declaration of statehood .
We must make all efforts now for the visa-free regime to be introduced as soon as possible for citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made dramatic progress in recent months , after the EU ruled in July last year that these countries did not fulfil the conditions for liberalising the visa regime .
As long as these advantages are granted only to certain nations , there will always be a risk of destabilising the region , as well as a danger that the political and ethnic mosaic will shatter into even smaller pieces .
The governments of these countries have worked hard over recent months to eliminate their shortcomings , make up for lost time , and provide quality levels equal to those of neighbouring countries .
The knowledge that the European Union will soon allow both countries - and particularly Bosnia and Herzegovina - visa-free travel , will reduce the risk of even greater ethnic and political instability , strengthen political and economic cooperation , boost the inhabitants ' support for the EU and the prospects for European integration , expand people 's horizons and put a stop to the forces of anti-European extremism .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to congratulate our fellow Member , Mrs Fajon , on her excellent report , and also to say that , although we are talking about a very important first step or phase , the visa exemption proposed in this report is nevertheless the cornerstone of progress on the road to integration .
As you have said , Mrs Fajon , this is , in fact , a big moment for all the citizens concerned , and especially young people , for whom freedom of movement is a very important factor in their ability to become citizens who are open to the rest of the world .
I completely share your desire to see this report adopted very quickly so that things can move forward by Christmas .
However , I would not want us to stop there , and I would like the process to allow us to go further .
We cannot let the citizens of Kosovo be the only citizens in the Balkans who cannot travel freely , and I hope that the Commission will look into this issue without delay .
Thus , while retaining our European requirements - and , as a French person , I fully support Baroness Ludford in saying that the government position is not the only view in France - I suggest that we should proceed without fear along this path of liberalisation .
Mr President , I have every confidence that , tomorrow , a large majority of this House will vote in favour of visa-free travel for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
And rightly so .
Despite all kinds of political troubles , they have worked very hard to comply with these criteria .
In fact , they have progressed further in that respect than Serbia and FYROM had at the time when they were granted visa waivers .
Therefore , I have no worries on our Parliament 's score .
We have said that criteria are criteria and , as soon as a country complies with them , we will grant its citizens visa-free travel .
That is important for young people , for business people and for everyone .
What I am worried about , however , is the Council of Ministers .
There are rumours that some countries are having doubts .
I hope that these rumours are unfounded .
If the Council fails to allow visa-free travel soon , that would send out the wrong message .
We would be seen to be applying double standards .
The perception would be that criteria do not really count for anything , because everything really depends on political games .
That the Council does not trust the Commission 's opinion .
Where will that leave us then ?
The matter is quite simple , in fact .
The Commission has indicated that Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania have complied with the criteria and , therefore , the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers must recognise that , as soon as possible .
They might have their own opinion about the Commission and politicians in these countries , but this is about the people who live there .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , visa liberalisation is an important step for any country seeking a closer relationship with the European Union .
Making it easier for bona fide citizens of third countries to visit the EU , for business and tourism , is an important part of integrating these countries with our own Union .
The positive experience of extending visa liberalisation to Montenegro - for which I had the privilege of being the rapporteur of this Parliament - to Serbia , and to Macedonia , has given extra momentum to these countries ' aspirations for EU membership .
However , we must eventually give all countries in the western Balkans an equal opportunity to achieve this status if they qualify for it .
After all , this is nothing more than what they used to enjoy in the days of the former Yugoslavia .
Extending visa liberalisation now to Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore a natural progression of a long-standing strategic policy which I welcome on behalf of my group .
But we should be insistent on all of these countries reaching and maintaining high standards of passport biometric security .
Visa liberalisation is a privilege and not an automatic right which can be taken for granted .
As for Kosovo , concerns still remain about the quality of passport security and organised crime .
Until these questions are fully answered , Kosovo must necessarily remain outside the scope of our policies .
But I , for one , am not opposed in principle to Kosovo eventually achieving visa liberalisation .
Even though five EU countries do not recognise it , this alone should not be a reason not to grant Kosovo as a territory the right to freedom of travel to the European Union .
No EU Member State recognises Taiwan , a territory for which I happen to be the President of the Friendship Group of this Parliament , but nevertheless , our Union is shortly expected - and rightly so - to grant visa-free privileges to Taiwanese nationals .
So Kosovo , a bit like Taiwan , should enjoy the same privileges eventually when the time is right .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer my thanks to Mrs Fajon for her excellent report , which has really moved us forward on this issue .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left is very clear in its support for visa liberalisation throughout the Western Balkans , and in this case we are , of course , also in favour of the removal of the visa requirement for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , specifically so that the opening up of these countries actually gets under way and because it will provide better opportunities for their overall development .
We hope that such opportunities will really be exploited .
Personally , I would also like to see this kind of arrangement in place for Kosovo very soon - or at least for initial talks to take place .
There is an urgent need for this , as Kosovo is otherwise a small island in the Western Balkans that is actually cut off .
What worries me , however - and I want to make this point - is that we are compelling the introduction , at the same time , of biometric data .
I want to be very clear on this : the use of biometric data is as controversial as ever and , above all , the use of such data is not secure .
I say this on the back of news in Germany a few days ago that the PIN codes can be , and have been , cracked .
There needs to be an acknowledgement that this kind of thing can happen .
Let us do everything we can to ensure not only that these countries have their visa requirement lifted , but that social and economic development is set in train there .
There is an urgent need for this in both countries , and the people have earned it .
We in the EU should also work towards this goal .
Mr President , we will vote against this report not least because the rapporteur proposes exerting pressure on the Commission and the Council to speed up the process of visa liberalisation for Kosovo .
Do we realise what we are discussing ?
Do we realise that Kosovo is finding it difficult to reintegrate the thousands of Roma who sought asylum in Germany ?
This is an extremely sensitive situation for the entire European Union .
Do we realise that visa liberalisation - which I have heard said will be used only by students and respectable people , even though I personally do not agree at all with that optimistic statement - will simply mean that Europe becomes a hotbed of Roma ?
We really do not need this , considering the serious problems we are facing with integration and resolving the extremely severe problem of the Roma .
As far as Albania is concerned , I would like to point out that the Commission again proposed in May that Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina should be able to allow their citizens to circulate within the Schengen area with electronic passports .
The proposal was not , however , taken forward due to Albania 's shortcomings with regard to reintegrating repatriated Albanians .
I believe that security and control issues exist that weigh on visa liberalisation like boulders .
We need to think about this very carefully : visas are necessary , and how !
( NL ) Mr President , the delegation of the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is against the visa waivers for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , two countries which are affiliated , as a member and an observer , respectively , with the Organisation of the Islamic conference .
This is an organisation which upholds sharia as the basis of human rights and which is holding the United Nations hostage with its undisguised anti-Semitism .
How on earth can you hand out symbolic gifts to countries that claim that sharia law is the basis of human rights ?
Sharia is a law which governs every aspect of life in an Islamic society , from civil and family law to criminal law .
It stipulates how you must eat , dress and , even , how you must use the toilet .
Oppression of women is good , drinking alcohol is bad .
This is beyond me .
Can somebody explain to me how this law can exist side by side with the fundamental and human rights so cherished by this European Union ?
These two countries could almost be considered the most corrupt countries in Europe and , yet , Parliament finds it necessary to reward them with a visa waiver , merely because they have been less corrupt than Zimbabwe .
This is being concealed behind statements such as ' Well , it will allow them to visit their families or to complete a course of study abroad ' .
That , of course , is absolute nonsense , because that possibility already exists .
Only they first have to obtain a piece of paper giving them permission for that .
It is absolute nonsense to waive their visa requirement on the grounds that they would otherwise be trapped in their pitiful little countries .
What a load of nonsense !
Dutch cities have already been swamped by hordes of Poles , Romanians and Bulgarians .
It is enough to drive you round the bend .
This visa waiver will only make things worse .
How profoundly sad !
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to put a question to Mr van der Stoep .
You said that these are countries which use sharia as the basis for human rights .
Could you please tell us what specific proposals the parliaments of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania have debated with a view to introducing sharia and on what dates these debates took place ?
You are making an assumption that you cannot substantiate are you not ?
I hope that you will be able to do so , but do let us know .
( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Bozkurt is , of course , well aware that I am not familiar with the exact details of everything that is happening in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , nor is it of any interest to me , to be honest .
Could I remind her of the fact that the Cairo Declaration explicitly states that sharia is the basis of human rights and that Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania are signed up to that declaration .
Could you explain to me how you cannot see anything wrong with that ?
If you have sharia as the basis for human rights , well , you must be out of your mind then mustn 't you ?
That is all I can say on that score .
( ES ) Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Fajon on producing a report that involved so much commitment in such a determined way .
I would also like to congratulate my colleague and friend , Mrs Corazza Bildt , for her determination and passion in taking on the commitment of visa exemptions for Bosnia and Herzegovina and for Albania , two countries that desperately need them .
Like you , I , too , was in Sarajevo and Mostar during the war , and I too witnessed Milosevic 's mass population displacements and the solidarity of the Albanians .
That is why I am expressing my joy here today , Mr President , because , happily , justice is being done .
Since the Salonica Summit in June 2003 , when the European Union at last took the welcome step of committing to exempt the Western Balkans from visas , following the first stage when the two countries did not fulfil the requirements , we can now reaffirm and welcome the commitment that finally , Albanians and Bosnians are going to be able to travel to EU territory .
Mr President , Commissioner , the need to bring stability to the Balkans , especially to countries that will certainly join the Union in the future , and to facilitate the mobility of a population that is currently isolated , must , in my view , be one of Parliament 's political obligations .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Tanja Fajon .
In Bosnia and Herzegovina , people feel as though they are trapped in a cage after the war in the 1990s .
Now , finally , the door will open for them to get out .
Tomorrow is the day when the European Parliament can give a clear sign that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania are welcome visitors in Europe .
The European Commission concluded that both countries have fulfilled the benchmarks for visa liberalisation .
The reforms are important for those countries but also for the EU .
Significant progress has been made in securing the borders and improving cooperation in combating cross-border crime - like human trafficking and drug trafficking - and it will be possible to return persons who are illegally staying on European soil .
The experience of visa liberalisation showed that leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina were willing and able to agree to process the required reforms quickly .
The cooperation and effectiveness of these reforms will , hopefully , serve as an example for further reforms needed for EU integration , but it is also of huge importance for people who will finally be able to visit their families , especially with regard to the wide diaspora that Bosnia and Herzegovina has in Europe .
It is also essential for young people and students to envisage their European future .
They will have the chance to look over the walls of their own country .
Hopefully , they will tell their new leaders that EU integration should be high on the agenda .
The last thing we want is a black hole in Europe .
The European Commission - and we in Parliament - want to lift this isolation .
We promised the countries visa liberalisation when they fulfilled the criteria .
With the Commission 's and the European Parliament 's consent , two thirds of the European institutions will recognise their effort and progress .
I want to see the Council also fulfilling its promise so that , finally , Bosnian and Albanian people will see that there is light at the end of the long tunnel .
( SL ) Congratulations Tanja .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let us be clear about why Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina failed to secure visa liberalisation for their citizens last year .
It is because they failed to do a piece of political homework that would have demonstrated their responsibility towards their citizens .
This year , however , the parliaments and governments of these countries have successfully passed their resits .
Yet , they did so only at the last moment because there are still doubts in the minds of some people over there .
We in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe are looking forward to the visa liberalisation and we would like to say to the citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina that they are our friends , our partners and our dear neighbours .
They will be welcome when they come to visit us and their relatives , who are , with their hard work and together with us , building a united , better , richer and larger European Union .
The decision to liberalise visas which is to be taken in the European Parliament is our common achievement , an important political , and a sincere human , message .
Visa liberalisation is intended to benefit the people of these countries , not to reward their politicians .
However , the governments of both countries must persevere in their efforts to persuade the ministers for the interior of EU Member States that they are fully committed to the implementation and consistent observance of the rules and obligations they have taken on .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Fajon , on behalf of my group , for her excellent work , and also to offer thanks to Commissioner Malmström , as I believe that they both played valuable roles and have taken the right steps .
The vote in Parliament tomorrow will make the promise of a European future more tangible for the citizens of Albania and of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
It will be possible to finally secure for them what the people of Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia have had since last year .
This broad consensus in the European Parliament tomorrow will also set a clear challenge to the Council to make clear at its next meeting in November that it , too , will give the green light for this to go ahead , just as the Commission has already done and Parliament will be doing tomorrow .
As has already been said , we cannot allow a few Member States to now start wavering and advancing new arguments , such as the need for new security guarantees , when we know perfectly well that the only reason for this is their internal political debates - there is no basis in the reality of the criteria , which Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina have already met .
In other words , tomorrow , we will be challenging the Council to give the green light , as the Commission and Parliament will already have done .
As the rapporteur for Kosovo , I also have to say , however - and this point is partly addressed to Mrs Flašíková Beňová , who , I think , is unfortunately no longer in the Chamber - that Kosovo is an independent State .
This is true despite the five EU Member States that have not yet recognised it , that do not want to see the reality .
It is a fact ; it is the reality .
As rapporteur for Kosovo , I also call on the Commission to finally give the government in Kosovo a road map so that a start can be made on the work , and so that freedom from visas , freedom to travel , can finally be on the horizon for the citizens of Kosovo as well .
( SK ) The submitted proposal - a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council - will enable citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina to travel without a visa to all countries of the European Union .
At a time when a number of Islamic organisations are threatening Europe with terrorist attacks , it is , in my opinion , a surprising and positive gesture , intended perhaps for the entire Islamic world .
However , outside the framework of the regulation , there is the reference to Kosovo which has appeared in the explanatory memorandum .
According to almost two thirds of the Member States of the United Nations , under the terms of UN Security Council Resolution No 1244 and UN Charter Chapter 1 Article 2.7 , Kosovo is formally a legitimate part of the Serbian Republic , even if under a kind of special protectorate today .
I therefore think , Commissioner , that we must scrupulously respect international law in the case of Kosovo , and not divide up the citizens of Serbia according to place of residence or ethnic criteria , but allow inhabitants of the Serbian province of Kosovo to travel around all the countries of the European Union with a Serbian passport in the same way as other citizens of Serbia .
( NL ) Mr President , it is a particularly unwise idea to liberalise visas for countries such as Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
In her explanatory statement , Ms Fajon said , in precisely these words , that this is mainly about students and young people coming to visit their friends and family .
Is this real naivety or are you just feigning naivety , in an attempt , as it were , to actively deny reality ?
For instance , you argue in your report that scrapping the visa requirement will contribute to the elimination of ethnic and political instability .
Let us face it ; the only thing we will be doing is simply importing much of that instability into the European Union .
Allow me to read you a quotation from a report by Europol , Eurojust and Frontex on the state of internal security in the EU .
This is a document from 7 May 2010 . ' Albania , Kosovo , Serbia , Montenegro and FYROM are transit countries to the EU for illegal migrants and victims of human trafficking for sexual exploitation , cannabis products , heroin , cocaine , cigarettes , synthetic drugs and precursors , counterfeit Euros and firearms .
Albanian-speaking organised crime groups are prominent , particularly in trafficking heroin and women for sexual exploitation ' .
Unquote .
Therefore , instead of tightening checks , we are now going to abolish visas , open our doors wide and make the problem of imported crime even worse .
( BG ) I welcome Mrs Fajon 's report and the Commission proposal to remove the visa regime for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Practice has shown that , unfortunately , visas are not always the most effective method of stopping illegal immigration and organised crime .
Those who suffer most from travel restrictions are ordinary people , and particularly the young .
They prevent the future citizens of the European Union from seeing and appreciating everything that we have achieved in Europe together , and from meeting and befriending other Europeans of their age group .
I should like to point out to some of those who have just raised voices of criticism that the visa-free regime with Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia has not had any negative consequences .
The European Union has undertaken a commitment to give the Western Balkans a clear European perspective , so let us do our bit and give these countries a visa-free regime .
Of course , we cannot compromise on measures to fight organised crime , money laundering , human trafficking and drug smuggling .
Intensifying legal and administrative reforms and improving the rule of law in these countries is also important .
Nobody in Europe should feel isolated and excluded without an opportunity to travel .
The European Union is founded on values we share with our neighbours and with the countries which have set out on the road of European integration .
I am glad that we are opening the doors to the Albanians and Bosnians as one day we expect them to be European Union citizens too .
Lifting the visa regime in the Western Balkans will benefit security , the freedom of the citizens of those countries and the entire European Union .
Kosovo also needs to be included in the visa liberalisation regime .
After the lifting of restrictions on Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , the citizens of Kosovo will be the only people left in the Balkans who will require a visa to travel to Europe .
Regardless of our differences with regard to Kosovo , it needs to be given a road map towards a visa-free regime by European leaders .
I believe that this will provide an opportunity to reduce ethnic tension in the Balkans , and they will no longer be the historical powder keg of Europe but become a model of law abidance , civic freedoms and a guarantee of prosperity .
( RO ) I would like to begin by congratulating Tanja Fajon for her report .
As part of the Thessaloniki Agenda , the visa liberalisation process with Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina takes into account the progress made during the dialogues held over the last seven months .
A thorough assessment has been carried out on a case-by-case basis to produce a set of criteria relating to illegal emigration , public order and safety , as well as the European Union 's external relations with third countries .
In this context , special attention must obviously be focused as well on the security of the travel documents issued by the third countries in question .
The visa waiver has been based on road maps adapted for each country .
There is a need for a reminder here about the European destiny of both countries and that they have already lifted visa requirements for all European Union citizens .
Finally , I want to point out that this visa waiver should be applied only to holders of biometric passports issued by each of the two countries in question .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the fact that at last , nearly a year after adopting our position on Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia , we can now adopt a position in the matter of the visa-free regime for Bosnia and Herzegovina as well .
Special recognition is due to the rapporteur , Tanja Fajon , and my colleague , Anna Maria Corazza Bildt , for their dedicated work .
The issue of visa-free travel in Europe cannot be considered either a privilege or a diplomatic gesture .
It is based on reciprocal commitments , which means that security concerns cannot jeopardise our political goals .
I would therefore like to thank the Commission emphatically , and Commissioner Malmström personally , for the work they have done to ensure the sustainability of the timetable undertaken for the liberalisation of the visa-free regime for the Western Balkans .
The fact that we are only a few days after the elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina makes this issue particularly relevant .
The results of the election also show that the deep divisions along ethnic lines cannot be abolished in one fell swoop .
It is the visa-free regime that offers the next generations , the young people , access to a European perspective , and this European perspective can help achieve reconciliation .
It is for this reason as well that a visa-free regime is needed in this region .
The road to the creation of the conditions required for peaceful coexistence leads through the European Union , and by supporting the visa-free regime , we are making our own contribution to this goal .
This is why we should not forget about Kosovo either , and we need to draw up a timetable for that region as well , as soon as possible .

Mr President , I think that we should support the visa-free regime for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina and I welcome very much the report of Tanja Fajon , but with regard to Albania , we must make sure that we send the message that a positive vote in the European Parliament does not in any way mean a reward for the Albanian Government .
It is instead only a relief for the citizens of Albania , who , for over a year , have had to bear the consequences of a never-ending political crisis .
It is anyway clear that the positive outcome in Parliament would only be half of the way for Albania , since unless they make concrete progress , some members of the Council will end up with reservations .
Until now , the Albanian Government seems not to have made any progress or shown any effort to solve the political crisis , despite the resolution adopted by the European Parliament in June .
The only field in which there has been visible progress was corruption , but unfortunately , in the opposite direction to what we expected , with cases of high-ranking members of the Albanian Government being daily brought to public attention in recent months , at least .
This is not the right way to act towards the EU and Albania should listen to the warning before it is too late .
( EL ) Mr President , the abolition of visa requirements for citizens from all the countries of the Western Balkans is real proof of the European prospects of their people .
It is very important that Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina now meet the terms and conditions and indicators required for exemption from the visa regime .
However , I should like to add a few points to what has already been said and to draw our attention to the following three comments : firstly , we will need , from now on , to be particularly careful and strict in terms of compliance with obligations in the illegal immigration sector .
More importantly , I would remind the House that , in 2009 , the land border between Greece and Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia accounted for the largest percentage , namely 34 % , of illegal immigrants apprehended throughout the European Union .
Secondly , we must not ignore concerns about a possible increase in the number of economic migrants from these countries to the countries in the rest of the European Union for one additional reason : experience here in Brussels about a year ago from the increase in the number of applications for political asylum from the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro is still fresh .
At that time , as we have been reminded , special action was needed by the Belgian Government immediately after visa requirements were lifted .
Finally , the questions raised here by certain Member States need answers and the Presidency needs to keep its promise and organise a meeting of experts to examine the points which some Members feel are still outstanding .
These are outstanding issues which need to be sorted out if the procedure is to progress smoothly .
( PT ) I will begin by congratulating Mrs Fajon on her excellent report and my colleague , Mrs Bildt , who was shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , on the work she did on it .
It has already been recalled that when , in November 2009 , we adopted the visa exemption for Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , we were only unable to do so for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , too , for the simple reason that they did not fulfil the criteria .
In fact , the liberalisation of the obligation for visas for access to the Schengen area is subject to a rigorous , case-by-case assessment .
This assessment is based on criteria relating to strengthening the rule of law , public order and security , in particular , the fight against organised crime , corruption and illegal immigration ; and to the external relations of the European Union with third countries .
The assessment also takes into account the implications for regional coherence and reciprocity .
The proposal tabled by the Commission makes it possible to conclude , on the basis of the assessment reports , that these two countries currently fulfil the majority of the criteria for transferral from Annex I ( the so-called ' negative list ' ) to Annex II ( the so-called ' positive list ' ) .
There are only a very limited number of criteria that are still being fulfilled and whose implementation is being monitored by the Commission .
It is hoped that this process will be completed very soon .
The European Parliament and the Council have committed to making a decision as quickly as possible , as soon as these criteria are all confirmed to have been fulfilled .
We are now honouring this commitment and we hope that the Council will also do so .
As my colleague , Mrs Bildt , has said , it is time to send out a signal and to bring an end to isolation .
Let us hope that these two countries will even be able to benefit from this exemption over the Christmas period .
It would strengthen political and economic cooperation with this region and would serve as a way to bring an end to its peoples ' sense of isolation .
( PL ) Madam President , the lifting of barriers and demolition of the walls which are presented by visa restrictions will be a very joyful moment , not only for the residents of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , but also for us , the residents of the European Union , because this will confirm that we are true to our values of openness towards our neighbours .
This will also guarantee us a safer neighbourhood .
While welcoming the fact that pains have been taken to deliver visa-free travel and demolish those walls for parts of the Western Balkans , a huge request and an appeal should , nevertheless , be addressed to the European Commission and to the Commissioner , and also to our fellow Members : let us remember the countries of the Eastern Partnership , let us remember , at this time , Ukraine , Moldova and Georgia .
Further challenges await us .
As we have now reached one stage , let us think right away about the next .
These countries - Ukraine , Moldova and Georgia - have not even officially received road maps , which is something we have already appealed for during the present term of office of the European Parliament .
The European Union felt an obligation towards the Western Balkan states , and it should also have the same feeling about its - and our - eastern neighbours .
The situation in both cases is similar - we are talking about neighbours who , not so long ago , were able to travel freely in some of the countries of the European Union .
Now , unfortunately , they are the victims of restrictions , and they are mostly young people and students , because the elite can manage and are going to travel anyway .
However , we are talking about the future of Europe , about students and young working people .
It is not only the lives of these people which could be affected by visa liberalisation , but also the quality of democracy in the countries concerned , and this would result in a strengthening of our direct neighbours and , hence , a strengthening of the European Union .
Therefore , I reiterate the appeal to the European Commission and the Commissioner to take up these further challenges and present a road map for the countries of the Eastern Partnership .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania for fulfilling all the benchmarks for a visa-free regime .
I would also like to congratulate my distinguished colleague , Tanja Fajon , for her admirable , dedicated and enthusiastic work .
Freedom of movement is one of the most important freedoms on which the European Union is based .
I am glad that we are broadening this principle to include the neighbouring countries of South-East Europe .
This is an important step and a positive development on their way towards European integration .
I have personally seen the positive impact that visa-free travel has had on the citizens of Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia since last year .
Having a chance to freely travel to the EU is not only a practical advantage , but it has also , in many cases , taken away psychological barriers and reconnected people .
This has also proved that the principle of conditionality used by the European Union for visa liberalisation has worked well and brought positive results .
Yet the EU also needs to keep up its credibility and commitment .
It is important to ensure that the implementation of the visa liberalisation regime for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina is not delayed any longer .
Not only will this bring good things for the people of these countries , but it will also strengthen the credibility of the European Union .
Finally , in order to bring more stability to the region , the policy of opening the EU to the Western Balkans should not stop here .
I would therefore welcome , in the near future , a strategy and solution for a visa-free regime that could be proposed to Kosovo .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you very much for this debate .
I feel a very powerful support for the Commission proposal to grant visa freedom to the citizens of Bosnia and Albania and I think that is a very good thing .
Hopefully , there will be a big majority tomorrow in the plenary and that will send a signal to the people of these two countries that the elected Members of the European Parliament strongly support their wish to travel more freely in the European Union .
I can reassure you once again that the benchmarks have been met .
We have been monitoring very closely .
We will , of course , remain in contact and monitor this , but they have been fulfilled .
All countries must be treated equally .
The benchmarks are clear and are very transparent .
The process has been as transparent as possible .
A few words on Kosovo before I end .
Kosovo is not forgotten .
Kosovo is , of course , also a very important partner in this .
They have made a lot of progress but still , in order to be credible , the Commission has to watch over all the benchmarks and all the conditions if we want to have credibility and legitimacy for this process .
Kosovo is not ready .
We are working with them .
I know that they are making great efforts on the government side on readmission and on the reintegration of forced returnees .
They need to do more .
Once these conditions are met , we are , of course , ready to enter into a more formal visa dialogue with them .
In the meantime , we can only encourage Member States to use all the facilities provided by the revised visa code when they are addressing the visa applications submitted by Kosovo citizens .
So , rapporteur , thank you for this very fruitful and very encouraging debate and I look forward to a very strong vote tomorrow in plenary .
I am very pleased to see that , with the rare exceptions who have admitted their obvious ignorance of the situation in the Balkan countries , the vast majority of this House agrees that it is time we supported the tearing down of visa walls in the Western Balkans .
It is true , as has been said several times , that criminals , those who have money , have already found ways to travel , but tomorrow in the European Parliament , we will be deciding the fate of ordinary people and their mobility , especially that of young people and students .
There is an entire generation that has grown up behind visa walls and , as we have said , Kosovo will remain a serious problem .
We have to find a solution for these people as soon as possible because their isolation and frustration will understandably increase .
Commissioner , we need clear guidelines in order to set the authorities in Kosovo to work .
Another thing is that , today , people in Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina know a lot more than they used to thanks to our extensive information campaign .
They know what visa liberalisation means , they know that , by abolishing their visas in the European Union , we will not be giving away jobs or rights to asylum or citizenship or suchlike .
What we are offering them , however , is the fundamental right of every European citizen , the right to travel freely .
For the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , and for the people of the Western Balkans generally , this will be a major and important step on the road to the European Union .
To conclude , I would like to say that what we will be doing tomorrow and what we did last November will be important for all of us , for the strengthening of economic and political cooperation , not only in the region , but in the European Union as well .
In particular , however , this will be important as regards relations between the peoples who are living , I might say , only a few kilometres from us .
The message we will be sending out is that we are serious and that they have a clear European future .
The people of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina are expecting that from us .
I think that is the message they will be waiting to hear tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow as planned .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I support the EU visa liberalisation initiative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
I would like to take this opportunity to raise the subject of visa liberalisation for the Republic of Moldova , a country which has made noticeable progress within the Eastern Partnership .
Just as in the case of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Republic of Moldova has made extraordinary efforts during the last year in order to achieve a visa-free regime .
The government has already started to implement the measures requested by the EU of the Western Balkan countries as part of the road maps , promoting a ' preliminary implementation ' policy .
The first measures towards this have entailed the approval of the Aliens Act and initial work on devising the concept of Integrated Border Management .
The decision was also made to issue only biometric passports and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court was ratified .
The visa ' barrier ' tarnishes the EU 's image in the Republic of Moldova significantly .
The first step the European Union should take to remedy this is to draw up , as soon as possible , a road map for a visa-free regime .
In the context of the forthcoming elections , this measure would send a powerful message of support to the pro-European forces in this country .
I support the rapporteur 's position when she says that the process of reuniting Europe as a continent will only be complete when all Europeans can travel freely to the European Union .
It touches more of a raw nerve with me personally when we debate the subject of the Western Balkans and , in particular , the problems of Albania and the progress which allows the European Union to waive visa requirements for citizens travelling within the EU .
Part of my family originates from Albania .
I welcomed a year ago the same measure which was adopted , aimed then at Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia .
I will vote with complete conviction for the real right to free movement for European citizens from Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
We are all aware how cruel the wars were which resulted in the break-up of Yugoslavia and divided this region .
We also know that young people in these regions find it most difficult to put up with isolation from a prosperous EU .
Our role is to encourage them .
The right to visa-free movement will help achieve this .
The European Parliament can once again demonstrate its support for the catching up process and EU accession of Western Balkan countries .
I consider it highly significant that the liberalisation of the visa regime for citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina will mean that almost all residents of the former Yugoslavia can enjoy visa-free travel in the European Union .
Neither the granting of visa-free travel nor accession can have any requirements other than the fulfilment of the criteria .
Both countries complied with the stringent requirements imposed on their internal and justice institutions , and have demonstrated that they are ready and able to fulfil the various expectations made of them .
EU experts who have conducted on-site inspections have also ascertained that security risks can be eliminated .
It is unacceptable for governments to allow their actions to be influenced by internal policy considerations rather than an impartial assessment of the fulfilment of eligibility criteria .
Granting visa-free travel also conveys to the countries concerned the message that they can overcome obstacles successfully if their preparations are supported by political agreement .
I was pleased to learn that the political powers in Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina have joined forces in order to achieve this goal .
I sincerely hope that the possibility of joining the EU , as demonstrated by tangible results such as those achieved today , will speed up their process of catching up and help overcome the divisive , nationalistic efforts that can only hinder the process .
We have already seen from last year 's visa liberalisation that many people equated visa-free travel with being given carte blanche .
Countless people have used the more liberal visa conditions to travel into the European Union .
How many of those people actually went back to their home countries once the period of time granted for their stay had expired , nobody knows .
For us , it is obvious that visa liberalisation has nothing to do with jobs and the right of abode , but this does not seem to be clear to the people in question .
Kosovo , in particular , represents a major problem for us in this regard .
The EU has never been able to decide what it thinks more important or what it thinks is correct and proper - territorial integrity or the right of self-determination for peoples - and because we have ignored the problem of multinational states for too long , what we have now is a divided Balkan state .
The maths of stemming illegal entry into the EU through a readmission agreement cannot stack up while visa liberalisation continues to be abused .
This idea needs to be put paid to .
The importance of visa rules is also shown by the fact that Ankara seems ready to finally sign the readmission agreement in return for visa liberalisation for Turkish businesspeople .
Such agreements are required for EU candidate countries .
Together with the unfulfilled customs union agreement , this shows just how unready for accession Turkey is and is another slap in the face of the European Union .
A stop must be put to the negotiations at long last .
The aim should instead be to establish a privileged partnership .
A visa-free regime has a great importance in people 's lives as it strengthens people 's contacts and helps to realise the idea of free movement , which is one of the fundamental rights in Europe .
Already , in the context of the Thessaloniki action plan , the European Union has expressed the political desire to abolish the requirement for citizens of all the Western Balkan countries to obtain short-term visas .
The definite fact that the European Union will , in the near future , give Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , as well as the citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia , the opportunity of visa-free travel will reduce the risk of an increase in ethnic and political instability , strengthen political and economic cooperation in the region , increase people 's support for the European Union , and improve the prospects for European integration .
At the same time , it will broaden people 's horizons and hinder anti-European and extremist forces .
However , I am unhappy about one fact , namely , that Kosovo is the only country which , because of private differences , the Member States have excluded from the abolition of visa requirements on citizens of Western Balkan countries .
We do not want to punish Kosovo for private differences between inhabitants of the Member States , but the European Commission and the Council should quickly take steps to include Kosovo in the process of abolishing visa requirements , which would encourage Kosovo 's state and government bodies and politicians to make the necessary structural reforms , and would strengthen political and economic cooperation with the European Union .
Basel II and revision of the Capital Requirements Directive ( CRD 4 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Karas , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on Basel II and revision of the Capital Requirements Directive ( CRD 4 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with this report on Basel III , the European Parliament has a clear position on the deliberations of the Basel Committee .
We would like to draw attention to the unresolved questions and problems that Europe faces , and we are putting before the Commission a collection of demands for the drawing up of the draft directive .
Although - and I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs in this regard - this report was adopted by 38 votes to 0 in the committee , I nevertheless feel a need , as rapporteur , to table six additional amendments , three of which relate to developments occurring in the meetings of the Basel Committee , in order to bring the report up-to-date , and three of which relate to the leverage ratio and to the liquidity standards .
We believe that it is not propitious to automatically incorporate the leverage ratio into Pillar 1 from 2018 but that there should instead be an evaluation process first .
Secondly , there are a few unresolved issues in Basel in relation to the liquidity standards that need to be addressed to keep us up-to-date .
I am a little bit amazed by the nine EU Member States in the Basel Committee , as they have allowed the process to be deemed completed despite the fact that we fail to see how there is a level playing field between the economic structure of the United States and the European economic and banking structure , and between classical retail and investment banking .
Furthermore , we still do not have a definition of liquidity .
The economic crisis , of course , demonstrated that we need a change of framework .
It is therefore right to get to grips with this issue and to bring forward proposals .
However , the crisis also clearly demonstrated that what we had was primarily a crisis of liquidity and not one primarily of capital resources , although we do need increased capital resources - one only needs to think of Lehman Brothers , where only 11 % capital was held , to see that .
From our point of view , there are five unresolved issues .
The first is that there is no study into the impact of the figures that have now been agreed for growth and employment in the European Union .
I would ask that the Commission produce and submit such a study as a matter of some urgency .
Secondly , we have not examined in detail the cumulative effects of all the regulations that we are currently considering .
Key examples here would be Basel III , deposit protection , the bank levy and the transaction tax , amongst others .
Thirdly , there is no level playing field between the EU and the United States , for example , when it comes to accounting regulations , and there is still no agreement with regard to the time frame for implementation .
Fourthly , there is no level playing field between retail banks and investment banks in the definition of capital .
Fifthly , there are unresolved issues such as those of the leverage ratio , the definition of liquidity and the role of rating agencies in the light of the decisions the United States has made .
These issues need to be resolved before the Commission brings forward a draft directive and they should not be concluded by the G20 , but clarified , before being finalised by the Basel Committee .
We will stay on the ball .

Madam President , Mr Karas , ladies and gentlemen , just a few days after the agreement reached in the Basel Committee , I think that it is very important that Parliament is demonstrating its commitment to banking reform and clearly showing that Europe behaves and must behave in a way appropriate to its global standing .
I would like to thank Mr Karas and the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their commitment and for this excellent report .
Mr Karas , you raise a number of critical points which will be studied very carefully before the adoption of our proposal for revision of the Capital Requirements Directive next spring .
I first want to say that I share your view , Mr Karas , on the importance of problems which are specifically European - our banking economy in Europe does not resemble those of the other regions of the world in all areas - the necessity , Mr Karas , of an in-depth impact assessment and the need to maintain a level playing field at international level .
We must , of course , stress that increased capitalisation of the banks is a necessary precondition for making the financial sector more stable and strong , but it will not be enough .
As you know , ladies and gentlemen , since you are working on it , we must also have stricter supervision , stronger corporate governance , supervision of speculative financial activities and a framework for crisis management and for resolving banking crises .
That is our road map .
Thanks to you in particular , much progress has already been made in this direction .
I am thinking of the supervision agreement and the Green Paper on the governance of financial institutions .
The Commission , for its part , is doing its job , and it will do it in such a way that by the end of next spring , we will have submitted to you and to the Council all the texts that are expected of us for implementing the recommendations of the G20 .
It is in this spirit that , a few days ago , I presented the draft regulations on derivatives and on short selling .
In a few days , we will put forward a new document on the bank resolution and crisis management tools .
Returning to today 's debate , however , I would like to discuss three issues , with regard to which I share Mr Karas 's concerns .
The first is the recognition of capital instruments issued by cooperative banks , or mutuals , under the definition ' tier one capital ' .
The agreement reached in Basel will allow us to take account of the specific circumstances of these unlisted banks , which play an essential role in financing European businesses .
My services are now working with experts from the Member States on defining the technical arrangements for properly implementing these new principles in European legislation .
Second , as regards the rules on liquidity and the definition of ' liquidity buffer ' , the Commission is fully aware of the problem raised in particular for Denmark and Austria .
Indeed , the very serious concerns expressed by the Commission in this context are the very reason why an agreement has not yet been reached on this issue .
We had some reservations , and my services will continue to work with our partners in Basel to find a solution , particularly as regards the recognition of covered bonds .
The third point concerns the leverage ratio .
We cannot go back on our commitments made at the G20 on this point .
We are , however , satisfied with the agreement reached in Basel , which makes the leverage ratio part of Pillar 2 during a reporting period , as Mr Karas said a moment ago , the aim being to transfer it under Pillar 1 .
This transfer will not be automatic , and we will integrate a revision clause on this subject into our draft proposal for CRD 4 .
I would now like to say a few words on the implementation of the Basel Agreement in the European Union .
This financial crisis has shaken the world .
It has taught us some lessons , which we must take on board .
The global prudential rules were not suited to real-life conditions .
In addition to the reforms which have already been implemented in order to strengthen the existing rules , we now have the agreement recently drawn up in Basel by the group of governors of the central banks and those responsible for banking supervision .
In my view , this agreement is good news .
It is an important step in strengthening the rules and global financial stability , and this new Basel Agreement will help to establish common rules for the banking sector internationally , which is extremely important .
This agreement also paves the way for a balanced solution : businesses benefit from an adaptation period providing sufficient time to meet these new requirements , which will allow for the health of the banking system to be gradually improved without , we think , compromising economic growth .
Ladies and gentlemen , my services , my colleagues - whom I want to thank - have done a great deal of work in Basel to find common ground with our non-European partners .
I hope that the Heads of State or Government of the G20 will approve this new Basel Agreement during the forthcoming Seoul Summit in November .
However , we will not stop there .
The next step will be to reform the basis of the banking system at Union level .
We always take the specific circumstances of our Union into account when implementing international rules , and , ladies and gentlemen , the CRD 4 Directive will be no exception ; here , too , we will take the specific circumstances of the European Union into account .
Furthermore , in this context , we will specifically carry out the macro-economic and micro-economic analysis which forms part of this Basel Agreement , and you and your colleagues will naturally be informed about it , Mr Karas .
Our aim is to adopt the proposal for a directive during the first quarter of 2011 .
This means that the Member States need to transpose it before 1 January 2013 .
That will give them enough time to conform to these new provisions .
We must nevertheless remain realistic .
This agreement reached in Basel constitutes very significant progress , but I repeat : there is still much to be done .
We will work together with you and with the Member States in the coming months to implement one of the essential reforms of the post-crisis period .
I would like to be very clear on this point too : we will be very attentive and very vigilant when it comes to ensuring that our main global partners - above all , the Americans , but not only them - also implement this essential reform correctly and in due time .
This is an issue which I shall raise during my second and very imminent visit to the United States , at the end of this month .
Finally , I agree with you , Mr Karas , that it is essential for the European Parliament to play an even greater role in this process .
That is why , in conclusion , I pledge to keep you - your committee and the plenary session - regularly informed of all future developments within this Basel Committee .

Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to start by briefly praising Mr Karas ' excellent work .
I was one of the people who were in favour of an own-initiative report being produced before the Commission makes its proposals on the framework for transposing the Basel Agreement , and I am delighted that the work done by Mr Karas with the help of the various shadow rapporteurs has highlighted the main points for consideration .
I will not repeat them here , Commissioner , and of course I welcome the points you make and your determination to ensure that this regulatory framework is effective and workable and above all that it creates no distortion of competition at international level .
To move on to a different subject , I cannot help noticing that there is often a big difference between the statements that are made publicly and the commitment to these in practice .
I also note that countries outside the European Union , and I am thinking of the United States in particular , have an irritating tendency to make value judgments about how we operate , whilst they themselves are not putting the systems into practice as they ought .
As regards Basel , it is vital that European companies are dealt with on an equal footing and are not penalised more than US companies .
In the United States , few banks are taking notice of these directives or of the Basel Committee and , at present , nothing is actually being put into practice .
I would hate to see the provisions adopted in June to regulate US finance - the statements made about these exaggerate their real impact - being used as a legal basis for not applying the provisions which might be introduced by bodies outside the United States .
Commissioner , I trust in what I know to be your total determination and vigilance to ensure that this does not lead to a distortion of competition for the French banks , the European banks , and for those who finance the economy in general .
It is right that we should be steering the banks back towards their primary role of financing economic development , but we must make sure that they are not penalised disproportionately .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me just point one thing out before I start .
The Basel Committee is a group of more or less intelligent central bankers and overseers , but it is certainly no infallible council of wise men and it is definitely not the law .
This House is the legislative body - Commissioner , you know that , and we know that you do - and this legislative body will pay close attention to what is put on the table and , where it makes sense , to what is put on the table here , too .
Clearly , we do want the rules on capital requirements to be tightened up .
How could we not want that , in the wake of the economic crisis in which we still find ourselves ? 20 to 30 % of the gross national product of our national economies are in pawn as the rescue package for the banks .
The people expect us , of course , to make respectable banking rules so that we do not find ourselves in a crisis like this one again .
Clearly , we want there to be counter-cyclical elements in this banking safeguard like those , for example , that have already been proving their worth in Spain for years .
Although there , too , they had to be implemented in the face of opposition , they are paying off today because they were implemented at an appropriately early point and they did not make the banking system worse ; they made it more robust .
There are key issues , though , and I am truly grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Karas , for having put these key issues at the heart of his own-initiative report , which we find ourselves absolutely and totally able to support .
The first of these is that , yes , indeed , we do need an impact study , specifically a complex impact study that makes it clear what the impact is , for one thing , on the financial sector in all its parts but also , of course , in particular , what the impact is on the real economy .
What is the impact on the issue of what the future actually holds for loan financing conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises ?
The second issue is that we need the certainty that this time , unlike in the past , the agreements will also be implemented in other territories .
We need to know that before we legislate , as otherwise there will be a new asymmetry for which we cannot be responsible .
The third issue is that there can be no discrimination in terms of legal forms .
Those forms among the diversity of the European banking system that particularly proved themselves during the financial crisis - and that means those banks that looked after the small and medium-sized business sector and those banks that were focusing on private customers and thus did not elicit cross-border risks - must not be penalised for the solidarity of their establishment .
The proposal on the table at the moment does not do enough to ensure this .
We therefore believe that the proposals need to now be improved and that we need to consider how we can tackle this issue in practical terms .
Public banking overall is of major value , provided it can be run on a sensible basis .
We do also need to ask - and I am thinking here about silent partnership reserves - how this will actually be effected in future , if we buy the regulations as they are envisaged in Basel .
This cannot be the last word , nor is it the final version that we will accept .
The capital instruments need to be measured in order to see the extent to which they ensure consistent quality without false provisos , are available to absorb losses , are durable and flexible in terms of payment , as the rapporteur also argues in his report .
It is a reasonable starting position for us to take .
We want the leverage effects to be limited and reasonable allowance to be made for the different risk profiles .
We will examine your proposal , therefore , Commissioner , and we hope for the best of cooperation with Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , can I say to the Commissioner that when we voted on supervision , I said our legislation was like Swiss cheese , full of holes , places where the common rule book would not reach .
Then , last week , bankers from around the EU assembled for Eurofi , discussing Basel III .
The word on everyone 's lips was ' national ' : national flexibility , national rules , national rules , national exemptions ; the beast of perverse incentive was rampant .
As soon as a framework is agreed for harmonisation and stability , the wriggling and the wheedling to make holes starts , and frankly , it is no better here .
I am fed up of it .
Why does Europe have to be the cry-baby of Basel ?
This is not what we intended with the supervisory architecture .
It is not what is intended by Basel III .
The facts are clear .
G20 was clear .
Banks must be able to withstand the type of crisis that we have just had and capital is crucial to that .
I am not blind to the problems of the real economy and the need for banks to lend and , like others , I look forward to the macro-economic and cumulative impact assessments , not just of Basel , but of the whole post-crisis financial regulation that you , Commissioner , and Commissioner Rehn both promised me in your competency hearings .
To the banks , I say : we cannot give weight to your protestations while your aggregates are cloaked in secrecy and you stamp ' Confidential ' on everything .
So as far as I am concerned , the extended timetable of Basel is enough slippage : no more .
Now , Commissioner , liquidity measures - as others have said - are not fully resolved , and I do fear more perverse incentives around the growing concentration on sovereign debt and short-term instruments .
We must be very careful here ; we must think and not replicate the same measures in every piece of the prudential regulation where they may not be appropriate and would destroy investments in equities and the real economy .
Madam President , Basel III is supposed to be a starting point and under no circumstances must it be the furthest that the European Union is willing to go .
To those who say that if we go further than Basel , we might jeopardise the competitiveness of our banks on the international scene , I say that our primary concern is , and should be , the viability of our economy .
And if that means more stringent rules , then so be it .
I would also add that we hear so much about a level playing field , and yet the United States does not hesitate to go it alone whenever it can and when it suits it to do so .
Therefore , I do not want to see Europe simply waiting for some kind of consensus that will never materialise .
Secondly , any transition period must necessarily be time-limited , and I can tell you that the eight years we are envisaging for ourselves is too long .
What is more , and this is not something that has been factored in , during this transition period , strict conditions must be introduced regarding the payment of dividends and bonuses .
We would find it indecent and unacceptable if , whilst the banks are claiming that it is difficult to build up the capital reserves imposed under the new rules , their shareholders and managers continue to help themselves from the kitty .
My final message is directly for the banks .
To those banks that complain that they will no longer be able to make the same profits they made during the golden years , I say that all businesses working in industry or retail in the real economy are having to make do with net yearly profits of between two and five per cent - and that is nothing to be ashamed of .
It is time to realise , therefore , that the party is over .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I am very aware that the economic crisis is far from over and that we do need lending in the wider economy .
However , last week , we saw in Ireland that banks are still coming to the taxpayer for their bailouts .
We cannot continue to have the taxpayer bailing out banks .
We need banks that are prepared to take risks , but they need the capital and liquidity to live within their means when those risks go wrong .
This is a complicated piece of work , and one for which I would like to thank Mr Karas , but it is only part of the work , and we need the right resolution mechanisms too .
It is very clear from the number of amendments across the floor that MEPs want to look at the detail and at the impact .
We must make sure a similar approach is taken to the collateral in the derivatives language .
First of all , there is an impact assessment - it was done for Basel - but it is so cloaked in confidentiality that we cannot see it .
Let us release it and use it .
When we make an international agreement , we need to make sure that it is implemented globally - not just here and in Wall Street , but globally .
There are a number of places in this text where there is wriggle-room - paragraph 24 , on minority interests and deferred taxes , paragraph 40 with its description of Pfandbriefe , and the new paragraph 43A .
Yes , Basel should look at networks of small banks supporting each other .
They are doing that .
However , my interpretation of the English is that we could , in some way , be seen to be pre-empting their conclusion .
Furthermore , it has been agreed that there will be a migration towards a full and binding leverage ratio .
Let us not move away from that .
I agree that , where we have good local practices , we should allow them to continue , but let us examine those in public and not bring in exemptions through the back door .
The market will just assume that back door to be a way of promoting bad practices , rather than promoting good practices .

( FR ) Madam President , I would like to start by thanking our rapporteur , Mr Karas , for his excellent work , and I fully support him in his approach to this complex matter .
However , I feel it is important to use my two minutes to emphasise an issue which was mentioned in the report but which deserves a closer look .
I refer to the matter of mortgage bonds , or Pfandbriefe in German , in the context of liquidity standards .
The new European liquidity standards that we are working towards redefining should give greater recognition to their special economic , legal and operational nature .
Mortgage bonds are used for long-term financing and investment in the wider economy .
However , the Basel Committee 's current proposal regarding these bonds would have a negative and disproportionate impact on Europe 's economy compared with other major economic zones , such as the United States .
I certainly welcome the fact that the agreement reached by the Basel Committee on 26 July 2010 recognises mortgage bonds as highly liquid assets in the context of calculating the liquidity coverage ratio .
However , I call upon the Basel Committee and on the Commission , Mr Barnier , to give greater recognition to this financial instrument , with a view to promoting sufficient diversification of the eligible liquidity buffer assets and avoiding any distortion in the markets .
This low-risk financial instrument must be given an environment in which it can thrive .
( EL ) Madam President , we all know that today 's debate on the agreement reached by the Basel Committee is yet another step dictated by the recent crisis , a crisis which dramatically highlighted the shortcomings and weaknesses in the regulation and supervision of the financial system , reversed what had , until then , been the prevailing doctrine of deregulation of the markets , and highlighted the need for stricter rules , both on capital adequacy and on the supervision of financial institutions .
Against this background , the Basel Committee has reached an agreement which includes certain basic principles and changes which need to be made to capital adequacy rules in order to improve the safeguards to the banking system .
As far as the implementation of this agreement in Europe is concerned , Mr Karas 's report highlights numerous important aspects which need to be taken into serious account , such as the peculiarity of the European market , on which 80 % of lending is based on bank credits , the need to democratise the Basel process with more active participation by the European Parliament , among other things , and , of course , the proposal to include all euro area sovereign debt as high quality liquid assets , regardless of their credit rating , so as to reduce the impact of rating agencies .
However , I wish to repeat that the new capital adequacy measures are a minimum review and still need more general reform over a longer time frame .
Europe , as the Commissioner said , has already taken an important step in adopting the new European system of supervision .
We are changing tack and promoting enhanced coordination as a basic preventive tool .
However , we must not stop there .
We need to take further steps by introducing a supervisory and regulatory framework for agencies which have hitherto been operating without controls , such as credit rating agencies and alternative funds .
We need , at the heart of the proposals which you recently presented , Commissioner , to adopt rules to regulate transactions which are highly obscure and , as such , subject to increased systemic risk , such as the market in over-the-counter derivatives and naked options .
Finally , Commissioner , as you referred to the G20 summit in Seoul , we need to lead efforts to introduce a tax on financial transactions , not , of course , to take revenge on or punish the banks , but to limit speculation and send a strong message to the citizens of the EU who are currently paying the price of the crisis , that we expect a fairer distribution of the burden .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if banks have to hold more capital for loans and financial instruments , that increases their ability to bear losses .
The most recent proposals from the Basel Committee take this stability-based approach as their basis .
Unfortunately , the Basel Committee has not , as yet , satisfactorily addressed the problem of system-relevant banks .
I therefore welcome Mr Karas 's call for the requirements for the liquidity standards to be made independent of system-relevance .
In other words , appropriately tougher requirements need to apply to banks that , due to their size or interconnectedness with the global financial system , need to be bailed out using taxpayers ' money in crisis situations .
We should take a more differentiated approach to the factor of debt leverage .
Only when it is empirically proven that this instrument does not lead to arbitrage and distortions of competition and actually counters the overheated granting of loans should we consider permanently incorporating it into the first pillar .
There is a need , in any case , for these proposals to be implemented at the global level .
We cannot allow the US authorities to have a decisive influence on the Basel proposals only to not then implement them .
The G20 summit in Seoul next month will show whether , and to what extent , we can achieve this objective .
( PL ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to say I am very pleased that the European Parliament has taken up this matter , especially because this report arose at Parliament 's initiative .
I would like to congratulate Mr Karas very warmly .
In the last decade , we have seen unprecedented development in the different types of financial innovation and new instrument available .
It is often these instruments , in fact , which determine the nature of the market today .
I think that an essential condition for effective supervision is , in this situation , to be in possession of truly reliable knowledge about what is happening in these markets .
Meanwhile , the financial instruments which have become so popular have reached a degree of complication which significantly hinders supervisors in making an appropriate evaluation of the risk associated with them .
Besides these new instruments , we have to be aware that the market is changing and is globalising very rapidly , and that in the confrontation between the globalised , evolving market and national supervisors , these instruments are completely inappropriate and the supervision unsuccessful .
The growth of financial institutions is also causing , in a certain sense , a lack of monitoring where the supervision takes place , and the supervision , therefore , is also hampered .
By all this , I would like to say that there is a lack , in fact , of an overall view of the sector , both concerning the geographical aspect and concerning the sector 's activity itself .
Understanding the relations between the parties which are active in the sector , as well as the evolving nature of the activity itself , are , I think , crucial for the security of the financial system on a global scale .
It seems to me that this has been lacking hitherto .
The current Basel regulations concern , in fact , capital , and I am glad that the new measures are implementing the requirements associated with aspects of liquidity , as well as mechanisms of counter-cyclical policy .
The measures proposed in this area should be welcomed .
In the context of the low effectiveness of capital indicators as an advance diagnostic measure , stability of the system and the attempt at standardisation of liquidity coverage ratios should be assessed positively in both the short-term and long-term perspective , because it was , after all , liquidity problems which necessitated the measures to save the banks , to which we were witnesses .
( SV ) Madam President , it is , in many respects , a positive sign that work on the new capital adequacy rules is progressing .
The fact that the Basel III process is being brought to a successful conclusion is a prerequisite for being able to restore stability to the financial sector .
The report that we are to vote on now is both balanced and well-worded , but I would nevertheless like to highlight three points on which it could have been clearer .
Firstly , it is important in itself not to place too much pressure on the banks by giving them far too short an implementation period , but at the same time , it is at least as important that the implementation does not go too slowly .
The aim should be for the banks to have sufficient stability to be able to cope with the next recession .
With the target as far away as 2017 / 2018 , there is a risk that many banks will not manage this .
Secondly , we must ensure that the implementation is carried out with close and positive cooperation with the United States and other players .
The clear aim must be for the whole of the international banking sector to be stabilised , not just parts of it .
Areas with weaker regulations or a slower rate of implementation could expose the whole of the global system to risks .
Thirdly , regular stress tests are an excellent way to continually ensure that the banking system is stable .
This is therefore something that we should use as an effective tool to complement the capital rules .
Both the frequency and the requirement level of these tests could well be increased .
The crisis has demonstrated that some things can happen extremely quickly .
In the financial sector , it is therefore important for developments to be monitored very closely at all times .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , the new Basel rules will establish the prerequisites for stability and sustainable growth .
The crisis has taught us that the banks need to have more and better capital , and the regulations must promote sound banking and sound risk-taking .
The rules concerning the leverage ratio must be formulated in such a way that banks that lend low-risk capital are not penalised .
There is a risk that the rules will affect banks in the Nordic countries particularly badly , as these banks have large low-risk home loan portfolios .
This gives cause for concern .
All directives and new rules must be well thought-out , but , overall , we risk having too many rules , which , in turn , could damage growth .
I agree with Mrs Bowles that the Commission must produce an analysis of the effects of all these new banking rules on growth in Europe .
Rules and new laws are not always the answer .
Let us not settle for good if we can achieve the best .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank Mr Karas for his excellent work .
I believe that we have stood by and watched this severe global economic and financial meltdown impotently over the past two years , even though some claim that things could have been even worse .
Today , the European Union is at the sharp end , and you , Commissioner , are conducting a revolution , aimed at stability , to provide us with the guarantees we need .
During the last plenary session , we gave economic power a positive shake-up to safeguard Europe itself .
As you stated not long ago , proposals have already been prepared on derivative products and short selling , and we are also discussing taxation on banks and the levy on financial transactions while awaiting the Commission 's final proposed revision .
Commissioner , we need to take great care that , as often happens , we do not go from one extreme to the other , with rules and laws that could hinder or slow down economic development and recovery .
I believe that rigidity and bureaucracy are always lying in wait .
It is true that at the moment , we need stability , but it is even more true that we very much need growth , growth and more growth - as President Barroso stated in this Chamber .
Basel III marks the start of a process that requires all of us to be responsible , but we must also safeguard competitiveness and equal conditions and pay attention to SMEs , on the one hand , and savings and cooperative banks , on the other , which are close to the grass roots .
Madam President , I think everybody agrees that we need to strengthen the resilience of the banking system .
Thanks to Mr Karas , we are aware that under the Basel proposals , we do not have a level playing field , and if you do not have a level playing field , you cannot compete .
In fact , there is a great danger that you will score many own goals .
The point has been made , but needs to be made precise , that the US and Europe are totally different .
The US economy is mainly financed through the capital markets .
Europe relies mainly on the lending capacity of the banking sector and we know that more than anywhere in Ireland .
Our banks simply cannot give credit to SMEs , and otherwise viable SMEs are going to the wall every day simply because they are starved of credit .
And , as Vicky pointed out , the taxpayer is bailing out these bankers and also funding the redundancy packages and the pension funds and the golden handshakes of dormant regulators , etc .
So there is a lot of work to be done to get the balance right and I think that is the key here .
I am encouraged by the Commissioner 's response , and he did say he would work with us and would try and get the balance right and establish a level playing field .
Then we would be scoring goals and not conceding own goals .
Thank you , Madam President , and thank you to everyone for your proposals , your encouragement , your suggestions and your requests , which I and my team have noted carefully .
Mr Gauzès was the first to mention the issue of striking the right balance , and this was reiterated by Mr Schmidt , Mr Klinz , Mr Ludvigsson , and just now Mr Kelly .



Yes , we will be aiming to ensure that we strike the right balance ; in fact , the balance needs to be struck in three particular areas to which I will be paying very close attention :
Striking an intelligent balance in the Basel measures themselves and the way in which we transpose them into our legislation .
I will be making the best possible use of the transition periods and of the room for manoeuvre that the Basel Agreement gives us , plus you will be making your own contribution .
The second area in which a balance must be struck is between the Basel measures and all the other measures that we are introducing in the context of the G20 crisis prevention and management agenda , and I will come back to these in a moment .
The third area , which Mr Kelly has just mentioned , concerns the United States .
Mr Kelly , I realise that Europe 's banking sector is much more involved in financing the economy than is the case in the United States , and we will be taking this difference into account .
This is the transatlantic balance .
We need to see to this - I am addressing Mr Lamberts in particular - without waiting for the United States .
I will be going back to the United States to see Tim Geithner and the other supervisors and I am not going there to drag my heels , but to make sure that we are all moving in the same direction on Basel II , Basel II and a half , Basel III , Basel IV - I beg your pardon , Basel III and CRD 4 - and on another extremely sensitive subject , which could become a point of divergence between the Americans and Europeans , and that is the matter of accounting standards .
We are not naive , therefore , in our relationship with the United States , but nor do we want to pre-judge its intentions .
I can therefore reassure Mr Gauzès and all the other honourable Members that we will be paying close attention to this three-way balance .
Mr Cancian has also quite rightly mentioned financial instability , which is indeed the worst enemy of growth .
This is why we need to establish conditions that will promote greater financial stability and , in view of the debate we are having with China at the moment , I would add monetary stability also .
I have taken careful note of Mr Bullmann 's comments urging us to conduct thorough micro-economic and macro-economic studies .
We will also make productive use of the transition periods , which are not indefinite , and you are quite right , Mr Bullmann , in saying that it is here and in the Council that Europe 's laws are made , not elsewhere , not in Basel .
This is where the European legislator is and this is precisely why we are going to produce a proposal for CRD 4 , which will be a legislative proposal on which we will be seeking your approval , even before the debate and motion stages .
Mrs Bowles , you are absolutely right in questioning us and in saying that it cannot be business as usual .
I also hear certain bankers here and there , who have short memories , telling us that the economic crisis is over and that we can return to business as usual .
We cannot allow ourselves to have short memories , and it will not be business as usual .
We are perfectly serious about making reforms .
I would also add , Madam President , that the improved capitalisation we are talking about in Basel and CRD 4 is not the only tool , or the only solution .
There are many other solutions to crisis management , which I mentioned earlier on in my first speech : there is everything that we are doing to regulate hedge funds of course , which I hope we will be completing in the next few days ; then there is our action on private equities , derivatives and short selling .
There are other tools which are also important .
A few moments ago , Mr Ludvigsson spoke about stress tests .
These need to be carried out regularly .
So this is our approach at the moment .
Mr Lamberts , I will just mention another important point that you brought up : the payment of dividends by banks that do not put the minimum capitalisation requirements into practice .
This problem has been clearly accounted for through one of the so-called buffers , in this case , the capital conservation buffer , which stipulates that a bank cannot pay out dividends if it has not fulfilled the minimum capitalisation requirements .
This is one of the provisions which we will , of course , be incorporating in our legislative proposal .
Mrs Ford , we do indeed need to protect taxpayers .
I am sure you will be watching closely for the proposals we will be making in a few days ' time on crisis management and prevention , and on the creation of a resolution fund in every Member State , we hope , which will ensure that the banks pay for the banks , not the taxpayers .
Mrs Lulling asked a very specific question .
Yes , in the Basel talks , my colleagues and I were very attentive to this point and we obtained an agreement that 40 % of the liquidity buffer may be made up by the Pfandbriefe , or mortgage bonds , that you asked about .
I feel this is a positive result , and we are totally in favour of diversification of liquid assets .
Mr Klinz raised the issue of ' too big to fail ' .
Here again , when this concern was raised in the United States , I replied that it was impossible to make comparisons , because the US and European banking systems are not the same , either in terms of their contribution to the economy or in their structure .
However , Mr Klinz , it is an issue that is not yet settled at international level , both in the context of the G20 and that of the Financial Stability Board .
We are watching the situation closely , to make sure that taxpayers are not and cannot be called upon .
Mr Nitras , as regards complex financial instruments , we need stronger supervision .
That is why the new European authority , the ESMA , will be playing a key role , thanks largely to this Parliament , in looking into the possibility of banning certain toxic products , and you will see that we will be further reinforcing ESMA 's role in the near future .
Lastly , I would like to let Mrs Podimata know that regarding the rating agencies , here again , there will be a third round of actions .
What we have done so far with yourselves is not enough , and I am currently working on this third round of actions to regulate rating agencies and diversify the rating agency market , which , to put it mildly , is concentrated in too few hands .
We questioned the ministers at ECOFIN last Friday , and your committee Chair , Mrs Bowles , was present .
I am going to prepare a consultation aimed at strengthening this regulation .
Mr Schmidt also raised the issue of a cumulative effect ; however , I have answered this question in my point about the three-way balance , which is something we are going to be watching very closely .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , The debate was lucid , clear , competent and responsible .
We put out a very good image of ourselves as both cohesive and determined .
Commissioner , I would also like to thank everyone who participated , you included .
We are not putting the process in doubt , but it is not concluded .
We have also brought up a painful subject .
The sore point in question consists , above all , of the differences in banking and economic structures between Europe and the United States .
We need to say one thing clearly at this point , and that is that , while the legislative process has not started yet , the Basel process does prejudice and limit our freedom to manoeuvre in political decision making .
What would have happened if we had not produced an own-initiative report off our own bats ?
There would not have been a debate today .
We therefore need to bring democracy and parliamentarianism into the Basel process , the G20 process , the new global institutions that are being created , and , at the same time , we need to be involved in the process so as not to always be presented with faits accomplis .
Basel III and deposit protection need to be connected , as there is a connection between the two .
We need a link between our decision making and global implementation , particularly in the United States .
We need the definition of liquidity before we get the draft directive .
Meanwhile , the Dodd-Frank Act in the United States presents us with another problem .
Because the Americans are going to have problems implementing the liquidity standard , they are now attempting , once again , to introduce additional criteria alongside the external ratings .
Our maxim must be that either external ratings or alternative criteria such as price stability should act as the basis of evaluation .
Yet we absolutely should not have both for Europe and only one for the United States .
We need to be vigilant and let us also together ensure , Commissioner , that the national finance and economic ministers pass on to their national parliaments what the Commission is now reporting in its impact study .
There is less awareness in the national parliaments about what we are doing here and what the impact and causes are in the Member States than there is in this House .
We also need to begin an offensive here .
Let us involve the national parliaments in this communication process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I believe that the recent economic and financial crisis , or the biggest recession since the days of the great depression , has highlighted the need for a radical review of the current Basel II regulatory framework .
I would like to remind you here in Parliament that the Basel II agreement defines the criteria for accessibility to credit by forcing banks to objectively assess the credit status of a company , taking account of risks connected with its possible state of insolvency , of guarantees , and of exposure in the event of bankruptcy .
Although the aim of these criteria is to improve the competitiveness of companies and strengthen the financial system , they are excessively punitive to the small and medium-sized enterprises that drive the Union 's economy .
In concrete terms , because European enterprises are not on such a firm financial footing , application of the agreement often means less access to credit and higher interest rates .
Although I find the efforts of the Basel Committee to update the general regulatory framework to be encouraging , I am extremely concerned about the shortcomings that emerged during the course of the negotiating process .
For this reason , I agree that it is advisable for Parliament to be more involved in the negotiations with the aim of making the changes needed to ensure that European industry and the European economy are not at a disadvantage .
A new stability pact for Europe is bound to involve the banking system , which represents the other end of the process in which the own resources that are the beating heart of the European economy are used .
In other words , the debt that the Member States of the European Union accumulate over time to produce national wealth and distribute it to their citizens is funded and managed by the banks , which should be able to make it produce profit .
While it is true that the Member States will still need a great deal of time to adjust to the standardisation of their financial laws and also to achieve an appropriate level of uniformity within their tax systems , establish decent margins of liquidity , and request reliable leverage effects to guarantee savings and their long-term trends , we must ensure that we can manage to find the right response to the crisis even in the short term .
The own funds that the European Union will have increasing access to will ensure that the aim of EU resources management will be increasingly less to shore up systemic risks and increasingly more to create a set of stimuli to benefit national economies , not only jealously guarded within national borders , but integrated to optimise the use of the respective comparative advantages .
Financial institutions that are strong and stable are crucial to the sustainability of the capital market , to access to credit , to competitiveness , and to economic and financial stability .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this report , particularly because it includes crucial measures that I tabled dealing with the situation of national financial institutions .
I am referring , in particular , to : the need for the Basel Committee and the Commission to clarify the treatment of reciprocal financial cross-holding agreements ; the importance of defining the criteria for high quality liquid assets taking into account the definition of European Central Bank eligible assets for monetary policy operations ( repo facility ) ; and the inclusion of all euro area sovereign debt as high quality liquid assets , regardless of its specific rating , thus reducing the disproportional impact of rating agency actions .
The submitted report is drafted in relatively precise terms .
It analyses clearly the issue of the new proposed banking regulation that is under review ( Basel II ) , and gives a detailed analysis of its main points , which , at present , are being discussed at the practical and academic levels .
In concrete terms , it involves introducing measures which should contribute to the greater financial stability of the banking sector , and to reducing the probability of another crisis , focusing on the following five areas : the quality of capital ( increasing the quality of bank capital is undoubtedly desirable ) , stricter liquidity standards ( the liquidity risk was shown to be significant during the crisis ) , countercyclical measures ( the creation of additional banking capital in good times should limit excessive credit growth and consequent creation of price bubbles , such as , for example , in Spain ) , the introduction of a leverage ratio ( this new indicator should contribute to the greater stability of banks , but it should include not only financial items contained in the bank 's balance sheet , but also off-balance sheet items , such as derivatives and the contingent liabilities of the bank ) and , last but not least , the creation of a central counterparty for the settlement of OTC transactions , particularly in relation to greater transparency in derivatives .
Based on the above , I believe that the submitted report contains a detailed analysis as well as relevant recommendations in the area of the proposed bank regulation , and I therefore recommend that the proposed text be approved .
I believe that having dynamic , clearly defined financial markets , capable of financing huge investments , is an absolute prerequisite for the European economy 's recovery .
I strongly support the commitment made during the G20 meeting to generate a greater volume of capital and draw up liquidity management standards .
These good quality liquidity standards are a key element in the response to the crisis .
I also think that a greater degree of flexibility from the eligible assets available in the European Union , which can be achieved by identifying secure financing sources and their specific features , will create financial stability when faced with crisis situations , both in the short and long term .
The financial and economic crisis of recent years has dispelled illusions that the banks know their own risk best and are able to determine security requirements on their own .
The profound ignorance of some of the people in charge of banks , the paramount importance given to sales plans and the ignoring of risk factors , accompanied by the passivity of the system of financial supervision , are the fundamental sins of the banking sector which were the direct catalyst of the world recession .
Basel II has not proved very effective as a crisis prevention mechanism .
In these circumstances , it is essential , as quickly as possible , to create a new code of standards - Basel III - which will no longer include the optimistic assumption of the ability of banks to regulate themselves .
Raising capital requirements will certainly contribute to an increase in the security of the banking sector by a growth in liquidity .
However , such measures also carry the risk of transferring costs to the clients of banks - a growth in credit prices and other financial services - to the detriment of the economy .
It is necessary , therefore , to guarantee suitable protective frameworks which would prevent us from being affected by this unwelcome effect , or at least keep it to a minimum .
On the other hand , however , we must be aware that financial security also costs .
The question is , how much are we willing to pay for it ?
The crisis has clearly shown that even bank capital has been insufficient regarding solvability and solvency .
The existing regulatory framework therefore requires an in-depth revision and thus , the efforts of the Basel Committee to upgrade the framework in general are to be welcomed , in particular , with uniform , clear and transparent regulations .
However , there are some shortcomings here and , in its current form , the framework would put the European economy at a competitive disadvantage .
European companies rely on credit from the banks .
Eighty per cent of investment and lending in Europe is based on bank credits .
In this regard , it is particularly important to secure financing for SMEs .
Differences must be taken into account without penalising certain business models .
Otherwise , there is a risk of harming the European economy .
Commission fines in antitrust cases ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on Commission fines in antitrust cases .

Madam President , it is , as ever , a great pleasure to be here with you day and night , and I speak on behalf of my colleague and friend , Mr Almunia , who has been held up as we speak at the working dinner between China and the European Union .
Your House has asked the Commission to voice its policy on fines in the fight against anti-competitive practices .
On its behalf , therefore , I am delighted to make this presentation .
As you know , the Commission is duty bound to fight anti-competitive practices and to penalise them when they are detrimental to companies and consumers in the internal market .
The primary tool that we have at our disposal is our power to impose fines on companies involved in these cartels , which adopt restrictive business practices or abuse their dominant position .
These fines are fixed in accordance with our guidelines on the method of setting fines .
The version currently in force was adopted just four years ago .
We also offer reduced fines for companies willing to cooperate in our investigations , for example , when they draw our attention to the existence of a cartel , and also for companies agreeing to reach a settlement with the Commission .
This saves a great deal of time and resources for all parties .
In any event , companies cannot be forced to shell out more than 10 % of their total annual turnover , which is the ceiling for the level of fines that can be imposed .
Fines , therefore , honourable Members , are our primary tool .
However , the introduction of sanctions for individuals should not be ruled out in the future , in particular , administrative sanctions .
A number of Member States actually authorise such sanctions .
We want to look closely at the legal and political implications of this kind of development .
Is there a need for a formal legal framework ?
Article 23 of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2003 provides the legal basis for fines imposed by the Commission but not the guidelines on the method of setting fines .
Article 23 sets out the basic principles , including the turnover ceiling , which I have just mentioned , whereas the guidelines give details of how they are applied .
It is relatively standard practice in many European legal systems to have a wide range of possible sanctions laid down by law as well as administrative guidelines on the method of setting the definitive penalty .
This is true of Germany , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands when it comes to the application of competition rules .
Based on this situation , we see no reason to propose new legislation on the fines imposed by the European Union in competition cases .
The second question is whether the guidelines need to be revised before looking at the level of fines imposed .
I would like to give you an idea of what cartels cost the European economy .
According to our estimates , the damage caused by the 18 cartels dismantled between 2005 and 2007 ran to almost EUR 8 billion .
Studies have also shown that cartels led to a 10 to 30 % increase in prices , a tempting prospect which would be hard to resist were it not for vigorous implementation of competition legislation , which is our job .
Our fines are set at a level that fairly punishes past unlawful behaviour .
They are high but they reflect the damage caused and the unlawful gains achieved by members of the cartel .
Our fines must also effectively deter companies from engaging in such anti-competitive practices in the future .
That is why , I repeat , we see no reason to amend the 2006 guidelines on the method of setting fines .
The third and final question is whether fines should be reduced during the crisis .
Rest assured that we look very closely at the financial situation of companies which , in some cases , claim their inability to pay and that we have significantly reduced our fines for a number of them .
For example , during recent decisions on sanitary ware for bathrooms , or high-tensile steel , we have applied reductions ranging from 25 to 75 % .
It is not in our interest , honourable Members , to exclude companies from the market .
In fact , it is quite the opposite .
Competition rules are often applied so as to enable new companies to break into the market and go about their normal business on a level playing field .
Madam President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank the Commission for the flexibility it has just shown .
Commissioner Barnier made reference to the fact that , in certain industries , in the construction industry , given the fact that there has been a substantial economic slump in the sector , there has been considerable movement when laying down penalties and granting - you cannot say ' allowances ' - deferred payment options .
I believe that to be a reasonable reaction on the Commission 's part , given the special economic situation in which many companies find themselves .
Irrespective of this welcome flexibility on the Commission 's part , however , there is nonetheless clearly a need to ask the fundamental question of whether the system of determining penalties that we are currently looking at still , in any way , corresponds to the principles of the rule of law .
Dare I say , there may be some doubt about this .
The reason is that , in laying down such a broad determination framework without specific criteria being laid down in the legislative instrument itself , Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2003 clearly does give the Commission such a free hand that you could almost suspect that the decisions behind it are not necessarily based on law making , but could instead very much involve certain elements of randomness .
Unfortunately , the European General Court has so far gone along with this practice and this method of determination and has not been critical of it .
I could imagine , however - and we do face a changed situation , as we will now very soon accede to the European Convention on Human Rights and the Treaty of Lisbon has now made the Charter of Fundamental Rights binding - that , potentially , the case-law could change in light of this .
I therefore think that consideration really should be given to this and I welcome the fact that the Commission is thinking about amending the provisions of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2003 in this area with regard to criteria and other types of sanctions , making the provisions more specific and laying down tougher criteria including in relation to the penalty measures to be laid down .
Personally , I believe this to be necessary in order to counter the deficits in the rule of law that many experts see in Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , the subject of fines is a very important one .
It is about responding to anti-competitive conduct , and that response must be effective and firm .
A weak , inadequate response will be an incentive and stimulus for infringements .
Therefore , fines must deter those who infringe the rules but also act as a general deterrent for all operators .
It must be clear that illegal competition is not going to provide any advantages or benefits for those who do it .
It is true that the Commission has a broad margin of discretion in the application of fines .
However , discretion does not mean acting arbitrarily , because there are rules , limits and criteria , there is a procedure with guarantees and , in any case , there is judicial control .
The treaty , Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2003 , the 2006 guidelines and the Communication on the leniency programme - also from 2006 - all constitute a framework that is working reasonably well .
The system could , however , be improved .
Experience of applying the system , recommendations from experts and the concerns legitimately expressed by institutions and some operators advise us to tackle certain issues .
Transparency and predictability could be improved and its impact on small and medium-sized businesses , employment and the sustainability of businesses could also be discussed .
Flexibility regarding the amount and payments should also be considered , along with the connection with leniency programmes , and even how to overcome the differences between the systems in the various Member States .
Moreover , the system would be complete if other relevant tools were added : for example , stressing individual liability , considering other types of remedy - not only in order to put an end to anti-competitive conduct , but also to prevent it from re-occurring - and launching private actions for compensation for both individuals and groups .
All these issues must be tackled rigorously , systematically and positively , without raising doubts about the way that competition policy works .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I agree with much of what has been said by the previous speakers .
I welcome the Commissioner 's statement because , if I listen carefully , the Commission is actually open to the Parliament 's request , which was included in last year 's report on competition policy , for a more sophisticated toolkit with regard to antitrust policies .
The focus has been very much on fines and the size of the fines , but we should be careful that this does not turn into an ideological debate .
This is very much about having a toolkit which is an effective deterrent to anti-competitive practices .
As you rightly pointed out , the damage to our economy and also to consumers is considerable .
I think that fines should be reasonable but , if companies are complaining about fines , then the one thing they should not do is engage in cartels .
That is the best guarantee that they will not face excessive fines .
Last year , we asked for proposals by the Commission for more sophisticated instruments .
We asked you to come forward with proposals that would cover issues like individual responsibility ( which you mentioned ) , transparency and accountability of firms , shorter procedures , the right to defence and due process , and mechanisms to ensure the effective operation of leniency applications , but also corporate compliance programmes and the development of European standards .
I would like to know if the Commission intends to come forward with such proposals .
We realise that this is very complicated , as we are looking at national competences and EU competences .
But I think we share the common objective of making the market function properly .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I recall a few years ago asking the then Competition Commissioner whether she was aware of any evaluation being carried out on the effectiveness for consumers of fines set , and on this matter , the then Commissioner indicated at the beginning of our committee meeting that she had managed to claw back so many million euro in fines .
And so the answer was that it had not been considered .
It would appear that since then , you have carried out studies to find out what damages were actually incurred .
However , I would like to draw your attention to two matters .
The first being that prices are fixed on the basis of a group 's turnover .
However , the company that may have violated competition rules , and I am not condoning it , may be a relatively small company within the group .
That is what bothers me , especially when there are separate legal entities involved .
Secondly , Commissioner , and it is you who said so and not your colleague , you often talk about the need for prevention , saying that prevention is better than repression and , in any case , more effective .
So the question I ask is whether these huge fines , which always make the front page of the newspapers in which they are delivered , really have any role in terms of prevention .
And I wonder whether it might not be more effective in terms of prevention to focus more on the number of checks rather than on the level of fines .
As has recently been the case in France , sentences can clearly be passed for sums of money requiring 4 or 5 000 years to be paid off .
I think that we should not become fixated on these figures .
We need to look specifically at the repercussions for the company , at a time of uncertain economic circumstances .
Skewing the rules of competition is not right .
It is quite right that a penalty is applied but this penalty needs to be truly proportional , which is why we wanted to know whether or not the Commission would amend its rules .
I think you said that this would not be the case , which is a shame .
Madam President , I do not know about companies having 400 years to pay off fines , but that does sound rather draconian .
Nonetheless , Commissioner , I realise that you are not necessarily in a position tonight to make policy on the hoof either .
To that effect , I will be submitting some questions to Commissioner Almunia on the issues that we are talking about tonight .
I would like to make two brief points .
Firstly , I would request that the Commission deliver on the impact assessments for the 2006 guidelines .
I understand Mr Almunia 's staff have already indicated that this can be done .
I am looking forward to seeing them .
Perhaps I just need to be up-to-date on that , but I would be reassured if that was the case .
Secondly , we have heard tonight that all the focus is on fines - and fines that are imposed on companies which violate the terms of competition .
There may be a graduation of fines , but these do not seem to deter them .
They still do it .
We may have to be inventive about what we do .
In the case of price fixing , for example , quite often , small enterprises further downstream may be affected by the consequences of companies having done this and , through no fault of their own , fall foul of these particular fines .
What if the Commission was to think about the social impact for a minute ?
What if the Commission was to think about adopting different approaches ?
In the UK , for example , the arrangements allow for the disqualification of directors , instead of imposing the fines , which actually deals with the culprits involved and allows the workforce and the companies to survive - an intelligent philosophy perhaps , and one we might borrow from as a model of what we could do , or even just as a pilot .
There are other examples - as we have heard from around the floor , from other countries - where I am sure we could do the same .
If we apply some intelligence to this , we can do a lot to secure that workforces for the companies out there are not equally affected by the bad practices of the directors who adopt this cartel philosophy .
Madam President , I will be brief .
I want to welcome what colleagues have said this evening .
The power that we have in terms of fines in antitrust cases is a real power to break cartels , to prevent anti-competitive practices , and to put the consumer first .
There are three questions I want to ask the Commission , like Mr Gauzès and others .
Firstly , what can we do better in terms of prevention ?
Secondly , are we looking - as Mr Skinner said - at best practice in the different Member States ?
Mr Skinner 's suggestion concerning board complicity , and what we can do about directors , is essential .
Thirdly , can we have a timescale for the prospective proposals ?
Madam President , Articles 81 , 101 and 102 all deal with these issues , under cartels , price fixing , predatory pricing , etc .
Certainly it is something that we should be concerned about , but often , it is difficult to prove that they actually exist .
For instance , I have here a headline which says ' Antitrust : car prices fell only slightly in 2009 ' , whereas prices for repairs and maintenance continue to rise despite the crisis , despite a reduction in wages and despite deflation , rather than inflation .
Is that a cartel ?
In my own country , if there is a shower of rain , the price of cattle drops automatically .
I think there is certainly a need to look at the guidelines , both in terms of establishing trends over a long period of time and also in the actual punishments you are going to apply .
I think Mr Skinner made a very interesting suggestion when he said ' make the directors pay ' .
I would say that we should also have a fine : do both .
There is a certainly a lot of work to be done , but we are going the right way .

Madam President , I have now heard all the arguments and requests and I will report them carefully to my colleague , Mr Almunia , who has told you , through me , that he sees no reason now to propose brand new legislation on fines , since the current Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2003 , which I have already mentioned , may be of great use to us in the foreseeable future .

As for the guidelines , the Commission constantly monitors their application and it is open to any suggestions for improvement and , from this point of view , what has been said by some would be extremely helpful .
Mr Lehne , Mr Gauzès , Mr Skinner , we have nothing against a certain degree of flexibility in our practices controlling the application of regulations , within the limits set by the guidelines of case-law , in order to take into account an economic situation that is still challenging .


However , for the time being , I repeat , Mr Almunia sees no need to revise the 2006 guidelines .
He is satisfied with the way that these guidelines are working .
They have proved adequately flexible during the current crisis , enabling us to take into account the difficult financial situation faced by some companies , as mentioned by some of you .
The Commission is bound by these guidelines on the method of setting fines .
This means that they provide companies with legal certainty as the Commission cannot depart from them without good grounds .
If the Commission does depart from the guidelines , it runs the risk of having the courts annul its decisions .
Mrs in ' t Veld , regarding different sanctions other than fines , we should assess to what extent it would be possible , if necessary , to integrate them into our current legal framework .
Although alternative sanctions are in place in Member States , they only seem to be used in a minority of cases and fines remain the primary form of sanction .
This debate should be steered by two principles .
Firstly , individual sanctions must not call into question our current system for controlling infringements , in particular , the leniency programme .
Secondly , the fact that directors or employees of a company have been individually penalised , which is therefore possible , does not in any way diminish the company 's responsibility where it has broken the rules of competition .
Lastly , the Commission believes that the current level of fines and uniform application of the European Union 's competition law are a good deterrent against anti-competitive behaviour within the internal market .
One point , Mr Lehne .
We have an administrative system for ensuring the proper implementation of competition rules .
What is more , this system has many advantages .
We also have the case-law of the Court which supports this system .
Mr Sánchez Presedo mentioned transparency , and this does not surprise me considering the other debates with him regarding supervision .
There are possible improvements .
We have flexible guidelines , as I have just mentioned , and , in particular , this year has seen the introduction of best practices .
Lastly , Mrs in ' t Veld and Mrs Stihler brought up the issue of more sophisticated programmes and more sophisticated instruments .
We can raise this issue through the compliance programmes .
They are very welcome .
I am well aware , in our view , that companies take these compliance programmes seriously and that can help prevention which , in fact , Mr Gauzès , is still cheaper than compensation or punishment .

Finally , Mr Skinner and Mr Kelly talked about the companies that sometimes suffer as a result of these punishments and the social problems that that can cause .
It is with keen interest that we follow developments in Member States , in particular , in small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is why we are keen to propose , as indicated in our White Paper , that we will act on damages actions to check how effective they are and to assess their impact .
For this reason , the Commission will soon be launching a public consultation on this matter .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Commission is imposing increasingly more frequent and higher fines on the cartels and companies which abuse their position on the market .
The amount of fines imposed by the Commission passed the EUR 2 billion mark in 2009 .
I welcome the swift response from the European executive .
At the same time , we must ask ourselves whether the current system of sanctions is sufficiently comprehensive .
The Commission plays the dual role of prosecutor and judge .
Furthermore , the adverse effects of the fines imposed also entail employees at the companies which have been penalised losing their jobs .
This means that people who have not broken the law become collateral victims .
Consequently , I believe that a set of more sophisticated measures needs to be drawn up for antitrust cases , aimed at both promoting more transparent procedures , through appointing an independent judiciary , and introducing the option to punish on an individual basis directors responsible for companies ' illegal behaviour .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to refer to the problems encountered at European airports by mothers with young children and by the elderly .
On the grounds of Regulation ( EC ) No 1107 / 2006 , these two groups should be provided with assistance by the airport .
Unfortunately , in most cases , the provisions of the regulation are not being respected .
Even in a television commercial , which was made with great flourish this year on the orders of the European Commission , there is not a word about mothers or fathers travelling on their own with young children .
The solution to the problem is simple - effective action should be taken to inform the citizens of their rights .
Firstly , the title of the regulation should be changed , by adding information to show that it also concerns mothers or fathers who travel on their own with young children .
Secondly , a new pictogram should be proposed for this group of travellers , which would be obligatory at all airports in Member States of the European Union .

( ES ) Madam President , as a member of the Committee on Human Rights , as a Spanish and European citizen , and as a victim of terrorism since the terrorist organisation ETA murdered my brother and his wife in Seville , I am speaking here today to condemn the fact that the Venezuelan Government and its President has allowed ETA terrorists to train on Venezuelan soil on the orders of the alleged terrorist , Arturo Cubillas , who works for Hugo Chávez 's government despite the fact that there is an international warrant out for his arrest ; this is a serious violation of the fundamental right to all European citizens ' right to security .
I demand firm action from the Spanish Government in response to this serious humiliation of all the Spanish people .
Mr Zapatero cannot continue to keep quiet while the Venezuelan Ambassador describes the members of our Civil Guard , who have been , and will continue to be , models of bravery in the fight against ETA , as torturers .
Nor can he look the other way as cooperation on Venezuelan soil between ETA and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia grows , which has already been condemned by the Judge Eloy Velasco .
Mr Zapatero cannot shake the hand of a leader such as Mr Chávez , who is turning Venezuela into a haven for terrorists .
The Prime Minister of a country such as Spain , where terrorism has caused so much pain , cannot continue to ignore this problem and should give the response that such a situation deserves , which is what any ordinary citizen would do if they had the opportunity .
Madam President , the matter I was wanting to raise today is that , on 18 September , 36 Members of this House , including myself , were honoured by the European Lung Foundation for our anti-tobacco work .
This is actually the European Year of the Lung , and the petition can still be signed by colleagues who are interested in our work against the tobacco industry and on tobacco control .
At the moment , only 10 out of the 27 Member States have a comprehensive ban on smoking in public places , to make these places smoke-free .
I am proud that Scotland was one of the first countries to introduce a smoking ban in public places .
The recent evidence suggests that there has been an 18 % drop in the number of children coming into hospitals with asthma because of this ban on smoking in public places .
This is something we have to see replicated across the European Union .
I would ask the House to congratulate the 36 colleagues who were presented with this award by the European Lung Foundation on 18 September .
Madam President , I would like to welcome last week 's vote by the Committee on Budgets to freeze the salaries and allowances of European Commissioners unless changes are made to their Code of Conduct .
That vote shows that Parliament will not tolerate any repeat of a case like that of Charlie McCreevy , the former internal market Commissioner , whose new directorship is being investigated by the Commission over concerns of a possible conflict of interest .
201 requests have been made by Commission figures seeking permission to take up jobs following their time in the Commission .
Only one has been barred .
The Code must be reviewed and should not merely be a set of guidelines , loosely interpreted .
( SK ) The current Slovak Government has put forward a number of bills which undermine the constitutionally guaranteed independence of the courts and of judges .
A constitutional amendment bill which aims to limit the immunity of judges is being put before Parliament without inviting prior comments and without having a specialist debate .
Slovakia 's drift towards a deformation of democracy and the legal state is also evidenced by the fact that the President of the Supreme Court and the President of the Judicial Council have twice been prevented from speaking in a plenary of the National Council during debates on laws concerning the judiciary , including a law on the Judicial Council .
The amendment of the Act on the Judicial Council has the aim of changing the composition of the Council even before the end of its proper term of office .
The amendment of the Act on judges will increase the number of political nominees in selection committees for selecting and advancing the careers of judges from one to three .
This is only part of a story which clearly shows how the current executive and government power in Slovakia is attempting to interfere with the power of the courts .
( HU ) This day , 6 October , is an important date in Hungary 's history .
More than 150 years ago , Hungarian revolutionaries took up arms against Europe 's two most powerful armies in the name of the fundamental values of liberty , equality and fraternity emerging throughout Europe at the time .
The thirteen generals of the defeated freedom fight were executed on this day in the town of Arad , now located in Romania .
However , the desire of the Hungarian people for freedom was manifested just as powerfully against communism , the twentieth century 's oppressive regime , as the events of 1956 amply demonstrated .
Only four of the thirteen martyrs executed in Arad in 1848 were Hungarian , standing as proof that universal values transcend national differences .
For us Hungarians , this symbolises the eternal desire for freedom and the unity of the Hungarian nation , as well as reconciliation and solidarity among nations .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to condemn the degrading and anti-democratic treatment by Hugo Chávez 's government of those who defend freedom and human rights .
The detention of my colleague , Mr Iturgaiz , at Caracas airport cannot be overlooked .
It is not the first time that the regime has launched an attack on members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Our mission as Members of this House is not limited to within the EU .
It also involves promoting the values on which the Union is based such as freedom , democracy and respect for human rights .
It is evident that this task is not well received by those that seek to impose totalitarian ideas on their citizens .
The result of the parliamentary elections held on 27 September leaves room for hope , although we should all be concerned about the reaction to the progress made by the Venezuelan opposition .
What can we expect from a government that harbours terrorists from the Oker terrorist cell , of an executive body that includes an alleged ETA murderer as the head of security of the Venezuelan National Land Institute , or of a government that ignores extradition requests for numerous terrorists who have fled justice ?
Obviously , we can expect nothing .
Madam President , such contemptible attitudes deserve a strong reaction and the firmest possible rejection by Parliament .
( HU ) A Germany divided in two was the most tangible symbol of the absurdity and inhumanity of a bipolar world .
Without the reunification of Germany , the reunification of Europe and the enlargement of 2004 and 2007 would not have taken place either .
No other people in Europe empathised more with Germany 's artificial and absurd division than the people of Hungary .
Europe 's reunification started with the reunification of the German nation .
The fall of the Berlin wall also brought down the wall separating a Europe divided by the Cold War .
As a Hungarian , I am particularly proud that my country 's leaders at the time took the brave and daring decision to allow the several tens of thousands of citizens of the German Democratic Republic who fled to Hungary to cross the iron curtain into Austria .
They cancelled the treaty between Hungary and the GDR , thereby knocking the first brick out of the Berlin Wall .
Gyula Horn , the then Foreign Minister of Hungary , and Prime Minister , Miklós Németh , performed an historic act , which could not have taken place without the reformist efforts of Mikhail Gorbachev .
Madam President , I have just returned from Iceland after attending the first meeting of the EU-Iceland Joint Parliamentary Committee .
Over the course of the two-day visit , our delegation held an extremely informative exchange of views with members of the Icelandic Government and of the Icelandic Parliament in relation to their application for membership .
When the delegation met with the Icelandic Minister for Fisheries , I took the opportunity to raise the issue of the substantial increase in the total allowable catch of mackerel .
We all have a responsibility to sustain this fishery , and indeed all fisheries , but I referred to this one in particular .
I am please to note that on 12 October in London , Iceland will enter into negotiations with the coastal states , and I am hopeful that a satisfactory solution can be reached .
The fall-out from the financial crisis is still very much evident in Iceland .
That is why the Icesave dispute must remain a bilateral issue between Iceland , the UK and the Netherlands .
It is vitally important that the parties involved continue negotiations with a view to reaching a satisfactory outcome .
( EL ) Madam President , I am especially pleased that Commissioner Barnier is here today , because I know that the matter which I intend to raise is of particular interest to him .
Natural disasters have an incalculable cost in terms of human lives and economic infrastructures .
Dealing with them is a joint challenge and requires joint action .
The European Union therefore urgently needs to be able to respond efficiently in such emergencies .
In order to do so , Europe needs to make better use of its potential and to galvanise European citizens into action .
The long European tradition of voluntary work and the principle of solidarity provide a solid basis for achieving this .
The time has come , therefore , to create a European volunteer corps , precisely as provided for in Article 214 ( 5 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would remind you that 2011 will be the European Year of the Volunteer .
A European volunteer corps would strengthen the role and image of Europe and win the hearts and minds of European citizens and citizens throughout the world .
The European Parliament has a duty to take urgent action to create a European volunteer corps .
( PL ) Madam President , specific limits on CO2 emissions will be in force in the European Union from 2013 .
The recent plans of the European Union to bring in a limit at a lower ceiling than previously planned , namely , at a level of 0.688 tonnes of CO2 per tonne of manufactured product , may lead to a disastrous situation for cement producers in many European countries , including Poland .
As has been reported by some media , for example , the daily newspaper Gazeta Prawna , it has been calculated that cement prices will rise by at least 30 % , which will , on the one hand , hit the retail customer who wants to build a house or flat , but will also slow down economic development wherever cement is a fundamental resource for production .
This situation is particularly dangerous for the new EU Member States because they have a long distance to catch up with the wealthy countries , such as France or Germany , for example , which built most of their infrastructure , such as motorways , a long time ago , when no limits were in force in this area .
This situation also has a detrimental effect in that part of production will be moved across our eastern border and the CO2 will be produced anyway , and our economy will be the loser .
( EL ) Madam President , the anti-democratic resolution approved by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe yesterday , 5 October , equates the working-class and grassroots fight with extremism and , in the name of combating extremism , proposes restricting and abolishing basic democratic rights , such as the right of free expression , the right of assembly and association and even a ban on action by political parties .
This despicable resolution reserves special comment for Greece and the major working-class and grassroots fight which developed recently against the barbaric , anti-grassroots policy of the European Union and of the government of our country and the governments of the other Member States of the European Union .
The class struggle will not be stopped by reactionary resolutions and laws .
It is an historic lever , the inevitable product of the system , born of barbarity and of the exploitation of man by man .
The working-class struggle , the reconstruction of and counter-attack by the working-class and grassroots movement throughout Europe can consign these resolutions where they belong : to the dustbin of history .
The Greek Communist Party calls on the working and grassroots classes to condemn this reactionary resolution in practical ways , by stepping up their fight against the anti-grassroots attack by capital in the European Union and the bourgeois governments , thereby supporting efforts to build a socio-political alliance of the working classes and self-employed which will claim changes for the benefit of the people .
( LT ) The EU-China summit is taking place today in Brussels .
Alongside climate change and trade , topics for discussion include the situation of human rights defenders in China , the death penalty and the Laogai forced labour camps .
These subjects are , without doubt , very important , but I would like to remind you of another acute Chinese problem - Tibet .
It is regrettable that the dialogue between the Dalai Lama 's representatives and representatives of the government of the People 's Republic of China , which offered some hope , is moving at a very slow pace .
The ninth round of dialogue took place last November .
Meetings take place on an irregular basis and are dominated by an atmosphere of distrust . This is despite that fact that the Dalai Lama has long since given up the objective not just of Tibetan independence , but also Tibetan sovereignty .
Once again , I would like to call on the leaders of China to resolve the issue of Tibet by means of dialogue , without the use of force and without ignoring the Dalai Lama .
The European Union would undoubtedly welcome such a dialogue and is ready to contribute , to mediate and assist in any way possible .
( RO ) Unfortunately , a system of draconian censorship operates in Romania , the like of which does not exist in any of the European Union 's Member States .
I am referring to an absurd institution called the National Audiovisual Council .
This is a Stalinist monstrosity which , flying in the face of all reason , would even ban such great writers as Cervantes , Goethe , Byron , Balzac , Cesar Pavese and Adam Mickiewicz , if they were still alive today .
This rabble effectively terrorises independent television stations .
I would compare this council to an elephants ' graveyard from which a few ' zombies ' emerge , under the remote political control of a declining dictatorship which imposes crippling financial penalties on those programmes that allow opposition parties to voice certain truths .
Help us get rid of the despotic mandarins from the National Audiovisual Council and restore to Romania the biggest victory it won in the year of revolution in 1989 : freedom of the press .
Madam President , earlier this evening , we debated the social provisions and the Lisbon Treaty , which obliges the Union to consider the social consequences of a decision when making its policies .
Is the EU - or should I say the Commission - considering the social , and indeed economic , consequences of insisting that Ireland comply with the Stability and Growth Pact by 2014 ?
Of course , fiscal consolidation is very important , but there is a real sense that it is all that matters .
' Get within the 3 % by 2014 or else ' : that is the very strong message coming from the EU .
Earlier this evening , the Belgian Presidency said that mindless austerity is not inevitable , and yet that is what we are facing : mindless austerity , fiscal correction at whatever cost .
How about the need to rebuild our economy ?
Yes , we need to get back to the 3 % level , but we need a longer time frame .
I fully accept that many of the difficulties are self-inflicted and I am not looking for sympathy , but I am saying that mindless austerity will destroy our small , open economy that , two years into the crisis , still has four businesses closing every day .
( PL ) Madam President , the last few days have been full of reports about the lethal effects of using psychoactive substances , or what are known as ' designer drugs ' .
This problem , because of the growing wave of intoxications and even fatalities , particularly among young people , is also highly visible in Poland .
The ingenuity of the producers and retailers of designer drugs is winning out against the legislation of the Member States .
They put lethal drugs on the market much earlier than the Member States manage to ban their sale under national law , and among the people who buy them , the conviction arises that designer drugs , because they have not been banned , are not harmful either .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
Designer drugs are as harmful as illegal drugs and are even , in fact , more dangerous , because they more quickly lead to dependence .
In view of the very serious social problem of designer drugs , which is growing with every passing day , we must take resolute and effective action as quickly as possible .
The European Commission , out of concern for the health of thousands of young people , should urgently undertake a broad range of activities to inform people about the harmfulness of designer drugs and the dangers associated with their use , and should also prepare new legal measures .
Madam President , as reported in the Financial Times of 6 October , the research Commissioner , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn , has warned of an innovation emergency in Europe .
We need to stimulate private sector research funding through a variety of measures , such as venture capital financing initiatives .
However , the European Union proposals , intended to prevent a repeat of the financial economic crisis , lump venture capital - key to driving small innovative start-ups in the EU - together with speculators such as hedge funds .
Venture capital is the honeybee of alternative funds owing to its ability to pollinate emerging businesses and drive growth in the global economy , as exemplified by Google , Facebook and Skype .
Venture funds provide access to capital , business expertise and often the market place itself for innovative private start-ups and SMEs .
They provide stable support and investment for a period of between three and seven years on average .
We also need to bridge the gap between ourselves , the US and Japan .
I think we should heed the words of the Research Commissioner , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn .
( IT ) Madam President , I would like to report to Parliament that last Sunday , during the Pope 's visit to Palermo , the Italian Constitution and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union were suspended .
Freedom of expression and of thought and the inviolability of private homes were trampled over .
On this occasion , the Italian police insisted on the removal of a banner bearing a phrase from the Gospel : ' My house shall be called a house of prayer , but you have made it a den of thieves ' , while the same police force put up posters that were homophobic and against common-law couples .
Inside the bookshop Altro quando , the owner had put up a banner bearing the phrase ' I love Milingo ' .
The police entered the private premises and seized the banner without any court warrant and using methods that were unedifying even by their own standards .
It is paradoxical that in a lay and democratic State , as Italy is supposed to be , public freedom of expression is suppressed by the authorities in order not to offend the papal sensibilities , while Prime Minister Berlusconi is able to swear in public without this representing a problem for the Church .
On this occasion , all the lay and religious institutions yet again rode roughshod over democracy in Italy , increasing the unbridgeable gap that has now emerged between institutions and the public .
( RO ) In spite of the recovery measures adopted by governments in European countries , the recent demonstrations and strikes highlight that the situation is still far from improving .
Unfortunately , it is precisely these recovery measures that governments are aiming to use to plug the budgetary gaps and pay off the expensive loans taken out with banks , which are causing a new crisis , reflected in the immediate drop in incomes and the decline in European citizens ' quality of life .
The time may have come for governments in the European Union 's Member States to change their attitude by putting the interests of citizens with increasingly empty pockets above those of the banks , which are still managing , by some miracle , to earn large profits .
Basically , if anyone needs to lose in this game , it should not always be the man in the street .
( ES ) Madam President , I am also going to talk about Venezuela , because there are some people who do not understand that democracy is not just about casting votes .
Democracy is being able to do so with security , freedom and equality , and in a democracy and under a system of freedoms , private property must also be respected .
Unfortunately , at present in Venezuela , the public and their businesses are under threat .
In this respect , I would like to mention one business , Agroisleña , which was founded by people from the Canary Islands and on which more than 1 000 families depend .
It has been unfairly expropriated , and like so many other businesses , after many years of hard work , it is failing , following capricious decisions by those who think that anything goes .
First , land was confiscated , now businesses are being confiscated , so who knows what will be next ?
It is time for the people of Venezuela to feel free and for businesspeople to no longer feel defenceless and permanently under threat .
As has already been said , it is time for Venezuela to be a genuine democracy where there is no doubt that terrorists will not find refuge .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to draw attention to the International Transport Workers ' Federation ( ITF ) ' s action week , which will be manifesting itself in Istanbul this weekend .
The reason for the international day of solidarity is the aggressive behaviour of a global package delivery company against its own employees , who want to form a trade union .
Unfortunately , Turkish labour law is not yet up to European standards , and this fact is often exploited to the full by employers .
Under Turkey 's Labour Act , a trade union can only be active in a company once it has achieved a rate of unionisation of over 50 % .
Let me say that again : over 50 % .
UPS , the US-based package delivery company , has acted in a crude manner to put a stop to the campaign to unionise .
The company fired 157 employees without notice after they had organised themselves into the competent transport workers ' union TÜMTIS and were working towards recognition as a union by UPS .
Thousands of UPS employees have now been battling since May to have their colleagues re-instated and for better working conditions .
This pro-company labour law and its brutal methods mean that Turkey is a trade union-free zone .
( ES ) Madam President , on 18 October , a trial will begin in the Turkish city of Diyarbakir of 28 leaders of the Democratic Turkey Party ( DTP ) .
They include 14 representatives elected by the public : 12 mayors and two municipal councillors .
Their crime is peacefully defending their political positions , which could cost them between 15 years and life in prison .
The banning of the DTP and the arrests that I have mentioned are one more example of the persecution being suffered by the Kurdish minority in Turkey .
These events were expressly condemned in the resolution that we adopted on 10 February analysing the progress made by Turkey in 2009 in moving closer to the Union , but we do not think that sufficient progress has been made .
If we are consistent and we wish to help the victims and help Turkey to move forward in the right way , we can do so .
During this period , let us support the movement of solidarity with the Kurdish cause .
I would therefore like to urge the Commission and Parliament to send an official representative to the trial in Diyarbakir .
( RO ) The worst thing that can happen during an economic crisis is for a political crisis to come on top of it .
This is what is happening in Romania , experiencing the sharpest economic decline in Europe which is emerging from the crisis .
Austerity measures of unprecedented severity are being implemented by a government which is indifferent to the hardships endured by millions of Romanians , virtually doomed to suffer from cold and hunger and being unable to buy medicines .
The social protests which we have been seeing recently reflect the mood of citizens in despair at the prospect of being forced to face the harsh winter conditions with dramatically reduced incomes .
At the same time , shocking violations are taking place of the right to free expression , as has already been mentioned this evening during the plenary debate in this House .
The fraudulent enforcement of a pensions law targeted at the poorest section of the population forces me to ask Europe 's institutions to focus the attention required on the absolute crisis which Romania is engulfed in and to rebuff the anti-democratic abuses in this country .
( PT ) I would like to highlight here an event that took place in Portugal yesterday and which is of the greatest importance for the country , for Europe and for the future of humanity .
The Champalimaud Foundation inaugurated a centre for research into cancer and the neurosciences .
Mr Champalimaud was an entrepreneur who left one third of his personal fortune - EUR 500 million - to scientific research in these areas .
I salute the President of the Champalimaud Foundation , Dr Leonor Beleza , who has established stringent criteria for marrying excellence in scientific research with clinical practice .
I am sure that the goal of putting Portugal and Europe at the forefront of excellence in this area of scientific research will be fully achieved .
The Champalimaud Foundation will attract world-renowned scientists to Portugal and Europe .
From the Tagus estuary , it will start a new chapter in Portuguese and European scientific research , letting the world know about new worlds .
( SK ) At the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe tomorrow , there will be a vote on the report by the British socialist , Christine McCafferty , entitled ' Women 's Access to Lawful Medical Care : the Problem of Unregulated Conscientious Objection ' .
We must completely condemn this report , which amounts to an unprecedented and serious interference in , and threat to , the sovereignty of Member States , the principle of subsidiarity and the fundamental right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion .
The report focuses particularly on the area of so-called reproductive healthcare for women , and abortions , sterilisation and also , if I may quote , ' pain-relief by life-shortening means for terminally ill patients ' , which means active euthanasia .
This Council of Europe document even demands that Member States oblige healthcare providers to provide a requested treatment to which a patient is legally entitled regardless of their conscientious objections .
Moreover , it calls for the creation of some kind of register of people who exercise an objection , and then proposes that they be somehow persecuted .
It is unacceptable to give in to this trend for regulating conscientious objection in Europe .
( ES ) Madam President , it is irresponsible to question the firmness of Spanish foreign policy in terms of the fight against terrorism , and it is wrong to accuse the Venezuelan Government of colluding with the training of ETA terrorists on its territory , because there is no evidence of such collusion .
There is international dialogue and cooperation in Spain 's brave fight against terrorism within its borders and outside them , and there is dialogue and cooperation with Venezuela , which has been asked to take specific action in this case .
Instead of demanding the breaking of ties and confrontations , let us leave the police , judicial and diplomatic authorities do their work , which has resulted in unprecedented success and results in the fight against terrorism in Spain .
This item is now closed .
Health care systems in Sub-Saharan Africa and Global Health ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs De Keyser , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health .
Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for having stayed this far .
This report actually responds to a communication from the Commission on global health , but we wanted to adopt an angle that was rather exceptional and concentrate a good deal more on the mutual schemes that are currently thriving in Africa .
Allow me to digress a little .
The state of health in Africa is actually quite dreadful , despite all the international aid , and this is due to a large number of factors , whether they be climate change , the financial crisis , war , bad governance in certain countries , or the greed that is provoked by the very riches found in Africa .
Add to this the major pandemics such as Aids , malaria , tuberculosis , and so on , and this set of factors means that we find ourselves facing a genuine disaster .
So I must first of all pay tribute to the work of the NGOs and of certain churches too , which are doing a truly remarkable job in emergency conditions , in conflict zones , but this cannot represent a long-term response , it is not a sustainable response .
There are what are called vertical funds , which have been mentioned and which are used to fight major diseases , such as Aids , malaria and tuberculosis , for example .
They attract a lot of money and are quite attractive to private aid efforts , since people feel they are giving to a cause that is being kept well under control .
In reality , however , these funds too , while certainly achieving their objective , cover only a small part of the problem , because , unfortunately , more deaths are still caused in Africa today by the lack of sanitary infrastructure , the lack of drinking water - children die of dysentery - or the lack of a local dispensary , than , alas , by Aids or malaria .
Hence , the attention that has been drawn to a movement that has been emerging since the 1990s , represented by initiatives consisting of insurance schemes but , above all , of mutual schemes , which have sprung up just about everywhere in different African countries .
The objective of these mutual schemes is , of course , to involve people in the management of their own health .
Let us not close our eyes : they will not be self-sufficient , they will not succeed in providing all the financing for care or for access to medicines , but in combination with other funds , with other subsidies , they do nonetheless ensure the provision of health care and medication , and on top of that participation , a kind of social dynamic that has taken root .
There are hundreds of them ; they exist in various countries and in various sectors .
There are women 's mutuals , café owner 's mutuals and so on .
The challenge for us , then , is to support this social dynamic , to finance it , and to coordinate it , while at the same time telling ourselves that perhaps one day , it will become self-sufficient , but not yet today .
Therefore , although these mutuals can exist , they can do so only if , of course , there exist alongside them what are called horizontal systems .
That is to say , why insure yourself or pay for any episode of ill health , for surgical intervention , if there is no hospital , if there is no doctor , if there is no medication ?
Therefore , as a corollary , we believe that the European Union should not only support , coordinate and sustain these mutuals , but also lay great stress on horizontal systems , on basic health care , even if it means calling on vertical funds partially to finance this ' horizontal ' care , this element of basic care that is necessary , that provides the balance that enables the mutuals to exist .
It is that set of problems to which the report refers .
I have run out of time but I shall perhaps reply to Members who have some concerns about reproductive health , which is mentioned in this report and is an issue I set great store by .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs De Keyser has already said nearly all there is to say .
I would like to dedicate this minute to a baby boy who I met on 1 December 2009 in Luanda , when we were in Angola for the ACP-EU Parliamentary Assembly .
The baby boy was at the end of his life , he was dying due to malnutrition in his mother 's arms in the Divine Providence Hospital in the centre of Luanda , near the place where we were doing our work and near the stadium that was being built for the African Cup ; in other words , he was surrounded by plenty .
Yet this was not an isolated case : every day in Luanda , children are still dying of hunger , due to malnutrition , in the arms of their young mothers who have not been taught anything about nutrition and who are often left to their own devices .
For a Christian , sights like this constitute a sin - a great sin ; for a politician , they are a sign of the failure of our policies ; and for the ruling class of that country , Angola , they are also a sign of greed and the unfair distribution of wealth .
I believe the reasons why that child had such a fleeting existence on the earth give us much food for thought and I hope my testimony will contribute to this reflection .
( SK ) Despite certain reservations which I have against this report , I would first like to congratulate Mrs De Keyser .
She has demonstrated , as so many times before , her grasp of development policy and how she cares about living conditions in various parts of the world .
The level of health care in sub-Saharan Africa is deplorable .
However , I am concerned that Mrs De Keyser has failed to accept at least some of my amendment proposals .
It cannot be right for us to talk positively about the final documents from Cairo and Beijing , and yet when I refer to them , they are not accepted .
This is only because , according to some Members , certain paragraphs perhaps do not align with the European policy on reproductive health .
It is regrettable that we are unwilling to respect the importance of national and regional particularities and the historical , cultural and religious diversity of states in sub-Saharan Africa .
The health of the local inhabitants can only suffer as a result .
( SK ) The general declaration of human rights recognises health as one of the fundamental human rights .
I personally believe that this right must be viewed in close connection with the actual right to life .
In Sub-Saharan Africa , these rights have a very specific and precarious context , and I would therefore like to emphasise the need for the European Union to take a responsible and humane approach in the area of health care .
Firstly , I would like to mention that the European Union should not promote the termination of pregnancy as a right , since this so-called right is not recognised in any international documents as a so-called fundamental human right .
On the contrary , the Union , as a defender of human rights worldwide , should act progressively in support of programmes to protect mothers with children in its development policies , and promote outcomes that are also compatible with the right to life and protection of the unborn child .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise again that the EU and the Member States should not incorporate into trade agreements provisions on intellectual property rights which prevent poverty-stricken people in developing countries from having access to basic medicines and which contribute to the high mortality rates in these regions .

Madam President , my colleague , Mr Piebalgs , could not be here in person , and it is on his behalf that I shall make a number of comments and remarks .
To speak quite truthfully , once again , the Commission is always at the disposal of Parliament , and I am very pleased to have heard Mrs De Keyser and the other speakers on a subject that has been a personal interest of mine for a long time .
Besides , Mrs De Keyser , in my office as Commissioner for the Internal Market and Financial Services , it is not by chance that , in addition to the visits that I now make every week to each of the capitals of the Union and after the first visit that I had to make to the United States , since almost all of our transactions are transatlantic ones , I was anxious to make my second visit outside the Union to Addis Ababa , at the end of July , to meet the leaders of the African Union .
This is because our fates are bound up one with the other , and for many years now , I have been arguing for a new policy of partnership between our two great continents .
With respect to many subjects linked to the crisis , which in any case concern or relate to our own preoccupations - for example , cooperation between our markets , the fight against money laundering , financial regulation , the fight I want to wage remorselessly against excessive speculation in agricultural commodities , notably in Africa where many countries depend on imports for their food - I and my colleagues decided , following that visit , to take up and intensify our cooperation .
While I congratulate you on behalf of Mr Piebalgs and for my own part on the quality of your report , in which you describe the health care situation in developing countries , I should add that we are not talking about Africa alone .
A few weeks ago , I was in Haiti to follow up the visits made by my colleagues Baroness Ashton , Mrs Georgieva and Mr Piebalgs , and it was clear that , even outside Africa , there are challenges to be overcome in disease prevention and public health in the poorest countries .

As Mr Rinaldi said , there is the fact that nearly 30 million people die prematurely every year in developing countries from causes that could be treated with the amount of money devoted in the European Union or the United States to pet food alone , or , if we are looking for another comparison , with about 2 % of global military spending .
I find that situation quite simply unacceptable .
Viable social policies , including for health , should be at the heart of a state 's basic functions , within a framework of sustainable and inclusive growth .
Health is not only a universal right , but also a part of economic development .
Health systems based on per capita expenditure of less than EUR 30 per year , which is 50 times less than the EU average , will never be sufficient to keep health professionals in post , ensure the availability of essential medicines or offer people equal access to care .
On this point , I should like to tell you , on behalf of Mr Piebalgs , that we shall continue to insist that the European Union honour its commitments in terms of the level and quality of public development aid to those third countries that most need it .
As far as the Commission is concerned , support for health systems remains a priority commitment of our foreign policy and a strong component of our political dialogue with third countries .
Echoing Mrs Záborská 's concern , third countries are not , in fact , all in the same boat .
There is a great difference , as you said , between the developing countries and the less-developed countries in Africa , for example .
Moreover , we are trying to promote this concept through the Commission 's active participation in global initiatives such as the Global Fund to Fight Aids , Tuberculosis and Malaria , as well as by interacting with other public and private players active in this field .
Mrs De Keyser , you have rightly paid tribute to the work of the NGOs , which I consider to be exemplary .
Again , a few days ago in Haiti , I saw that they play a remarkable as well as a decisive role in the administrative or public aspects of the various actions undertaken by the Union , fund sponsors or the World Bank .
Adequate social and health policies are essential in order to achieve concrete results in Europe as much as in developing countries .
Merely ensuring that a substantial amount of resources are dedicated to supporting our European partners cannot be enough .
We must also make sure that our internal policies are consistent , for instance , the policy on migration of health professionals or on the trade in medicines , in such a way that the global impact of internal policies can also be of benefit , or at least cause no harm , to those most in need of them in the world .
In my own sphere of competence , I should like to make two points that may be of interest to you , Mrs De Keyser .
Firstly , in the draft Single Market Act , which we are getting ready for 27 October , I intend to give priority to the major sector of social business and to work towards a statute for the European Foundation .
In amongst all that , there is encouragement that we should be giving , here at home in Europe , to structures , to NGOs , to social enterprises , which could be supported in their work to help the poorest countries or developing countries , notably in this sphere of health .
Next , there is a second area that concerns me just now , in fact , and that is counterfeiting .
In the plan that I shall be presenting to you in the autumn , on fighting piracy and counterfeiting , I have provided for several sections that we shall be financing and supporting ; on technology for detecting counterfeit goods , on communicating with the European public , and on training personnel in customs or at the external frontiers of the Union .
However , I should also like to have a section - and I have asked my colleagues for this - on cooperation with the countries where these counterfeit goods originate and where they could cause considerable harm to health , particularly if they are counterfeit medicines .
We shall be returning to this subject in due course .
On the basis of the analysis that I have quickly outlined for you , the Union has adopted the conclusions on the Union 's role in global health .
They are our reference point when intervening in matters of health .
As I said , the resources for official development aid are not sufficient , and there is one point on which the analysis in your report proves just how pertinent it is .
In Europe , we have numerous ways of financing health services , and each one has its strengths and weaknesses .
There is no single , perfect solution to fit all local circumstances .
It is clear that a purely voluntary insurance scheme , based on private finance mechanisms , would not be sufficient to provide equal and universal access to health care , either .
Hence , the essential role that public authorities must play in regulating and financing health services in order to establish or ensure principles of fairness and inclusion .
We are very much relying on Parliament 's contribution to this effort in order to strengthen and enhance the solidarity of the people of the European Union and of the other Union players in this area , notably the NGOs .
I believe that our Union has much to learn , but also much to share with the rest of the world , and that we can provide added value in this area .
We must clearly translate all this into the approach that we take to health policy in developing countries , and I , for my part , am pleased to be able to reply to you and to take advantage of this opportunity to express my personal commitment to these issues .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The inability of African countries - which are often weak countries that have recently emerged from conflict situations , or that lack sufficiently robust institutions or adequate resources - to apply effective public health policies and , in particular , to guarantee access to adequate health care services , constitutes a major challenge and a global responsibility .
It is essential for there to be a worldwide EU vision on health with guiding principles that must be applied to all relevant strategic sectors .
Investment in education and capacity building will produce positive effects on health worldwide , and I call on the European Union to actively support the training of qualified health care professionals .
It is essential for EU Member States to ensure that their migration policies do not prevent health care professionals from being available in third countries .
I call for the commitments made under the EU strategy for action on the crisis in human resources for health in developing countries to be made good .
The EU must facilitate circular migration as a means of reducing the brain drain from countries that are in difficulties .
The state of health of the population in sub-Saharan Africa poses one of the toughest challenges for the EU 's humanitarian and development policy .
I believe that the tragedy of the situation is best encapsulated by the fact that the inhabitants of this region have a life expectancy which is approximately half that of a European citizen .
The report spells out very clearly the causes of this and emphasises the remedies required , as well as our share in the responsibility for this .
The international funds allocated to health care are half the amount allocated to education .
Without devaluing education in the least , I believe that this disproportion reflects an oversight which must be corrected in future .
Furthermore , the developed countries ' encouragement of the exodus of doctors and nurses from African states allows the current disaster to continue .
I think that greater discernment , especially from EU countries , when it comes to recruiting specialists in similar key areas , would promote significant progress in improving Africa 's health care system .
Unfortunately , the universal right to health care is still very far from being a reality .
Millions of people are still without access to basic health care , life expectancy in many countries is still scandalously low , and millions of children still die from diseases that can be prevented and cured .
This situation is all the more serious because whether it continues or is brought to an end depends on political decisions .
The predominant force in these decisions has been the interests of large economic and financial groups .
The pharmaceutical multinationals continue to prevent the cheaper production of medicines that would enable the lives of millions of people to be saved .
International financial institutions continue to impose so-called ' structural adjustments ' by maintaining the odious foreign debt of countries in the developing world , and imposing cuts and privatisations on the health sector when shortages are already enormous .
A real contribution to improving the health care systems of these countries would require , firstly , the immediate rejection of the so-called ' economic partnership agreements ' , the implementation of which , in the manner that the EU is seeking to impose , will worsen dependence relationships and have an even greater impact on these countries ' priorities ; and also an end to their foreign debt and a proper development aid and cooperation policy .
Documents received : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23 : 25 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 05 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
EU cohesion and regional policy after 2013 - Future of the European Social Fund ( debate )
We apologise for the slight delay caused by the traffic .
I would recommend that everyone walk to Parliament for three reasons .
The first reason is to arrive on time .
The second is because it is healthy .
The third is that it causes less pollution .
So , let us all walk to Parliament !
The next item is the joint debate on the oral question to the Commission , by Danuta Maria Hübner , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on EU cohesion and regional policy after 2013 - B7-0466 / 2010 ) ;
and the Commission statement on the future of the European Social Fund .
author . - Mr President , in the years to come , growth in Europe will be supply-driven .
Sustainable and competitive investment patterns will be crucial .
Cohesion policy is a major source of European public investment and must work as a catalyst for structural change by investing in research and innovation , resource efficiency , new and sustainable jobs and infrastructure .
It must not merely be a financial tool for investment .
It is a policy that generates new resources , adding to growth potential .
It will require an adequate macro-economic and financial framework to achieve its full impact .
The key issue for post-2013 reform of cohesion policy is how to make it more effective in generating growth , jobs and competitiveness for the European economy in a sustainable way .
Social , economic and territorial cohesion is , according to the treaty , a basic principle of European integration .
It must therefore be a policy applicable to all Europe 's citizens , and not one restricted to the poorest regions .
This is because it is not a subsidy policy based on the principle of compensation for the past , working as a supplement to national objectives , but rather a European policy for the future .
It must take into account the post-crisis territorial reality at regional level , looking for the most effective solutions to the challenges and opportunities of different European territories .
It must be made an integral part of the implementation of the EU 2020 strategy and its flagship initiatives .
We are intensely aware of the necessity to ensure that cohesion policy and its cumulative effect over the whole territory of the Union is one of the key instruments which will enable the Union and its Member States to achieve the ambitions of EU 2020 .
Cohesion policy must contribute not only to reducing productivity gaps generated by the crisis , but also to putting productivity gains on track .
It must invest in better links between leading regions and those that are catching up .
It must better exploit territorial cooperation potential .
The Regional Development Committee of the European Parliament has reached a position as to how it sees cohesion policy post-2013 .
Over the years , many parliamentary resolutions have stressed the necessity of maintaining a strong , comprehensive cohesion policy , well equipped with sufficient budgetary means to permit regions and cities to expand their development potential .
In these exceptional times , we are convinced that they must all be encouraged and assisted to invest in ground-breaking ideas , in new technologies and in innovation .
Regions and cities carry the key to re-energising Europe in order to overcome its extraordinary difficulties and to successfully achieving the transformation of our economy .
We hope and believe that the European Commission shares our resolve to ensure that cohesion policy remains the Union 's major all-inclusive tool .
It is therefore to afford the Commission the possibility of explaining its view of the future that we have tabled this question .
Mr President , Commissioner Andor , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Parliament for giving this topic such a prominent place on the agenda at a time when Brussels is having the last of its ' open days ' , with over 6 000 stakeholders in the city and more than 130 events and seminars intensively working on the issue of the relevance and the future shape of regional policy .
As has been said more than once , regional policy and cohesion policy need to be very intensively linked to the Europe 2020 strategy in future , including in the next funding period , so that we really do achieve the European added value that we talk about again and again and that now needs to be realised .
It is important , in this context , that we coordinate Union policies better in order to truly deliver a common offering , an integrated approach , including towards the Member States .
The keywords must be focus and flexibility .
We must focus on a few priorities from the Europe 2020 strategy that are important to us and we need flexibility in the tailor-made solutions in the implementation in the regions and in the Member States .
I think it is also important that we develop a system of incentives that operate on the basis of clear agreements on objectives with the regions and the Member States so that , alongside proper financial management , which has been very important , and will continue to be so in future , the elements involved in focusing on results , too , are actually brought more strongly to bear .
This is because it is absolutely crucial that , right at the beginning of a period , we also agree with the regions and the Member States what our objectives are and that we also agree on and lay down measurable targets and then strive to implement these accordingly through the projects .
Ultimately , one thing that can and should bring about good cohesion policy , with its varied elements , is being the engine of growth in the European Union .
We have a Stability and Growth Pact .
It is a cleverly put-together cohesion policy for all the regions , which ultimately bear the responsibility for ensuring that the growth element of the Stability and Growth Pact takes effect , so that Europe , and its national economies as a whole , remain competitive globally and are able to further improve their position in the international context .
It will therefore also be necessary to adapt and develop the framework of support accordingly .
What is required , in other words , is an increase both on the product side and also of the volume of finance involved that enters the realm of financial engineering , in the knowledge - and against the backdrop of the overstretched budgets of the Member States - that , in this regard , we need to do more to develop products for private individuals in order to co-invest in certain regional projects , in particular , those that also guarantee a source of revenue , so that we leave other funding available for projects that are just as necessary but that cannot guarantee any revenue in that sense , such as investments in the education and training sector , in modernising universities and laboratories and so on .
Over the next few weeks , we will be presenting , together , the 5th cohesion report and its conclusions .
The report will put forward much of what I have been able to say in these few minutes , and much else besides .
Regional policy , cohesion policy , however , is a kind of policy that is capable , including under the auspices of shared management , of making European policy something that European citizens can see and grasp .
Two million projects , as in the current period , can only be realised if we work together with the Member States and with the citizens in the regions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the economic and social situation in Europe continues to pose enormous challenges .
Unemployment has risen sharply , with the rate expected to reach 11 % at the end of this year .
Furthermore , poverty continues to be a daily reality for many Europeans including children .
Whilst it is true that we are slowly emerging from the economic crisis , it is equally clear that our recovery needs to be based on solid foundations , and at this time , we cannot be entirely sure about these foundations .
At the same time , we must not lose sight of the long-term challenges .
Issues such as the ageing population , rapidly changing technologies , climate change and other environmental challenges all need to be addressed with urgency .
The European Social Fund has been the main instrument at EU level for investment in human capital and social inclusion .
For over half a century , it has been a concrete proof of solidarity between European citizens and it should continue to be so in the future .
The ESF is one of the key tools at our disposal in reaching the Europe 2020 headline targets , particularly those on employment , education and poverty reduction .
We need full alignment between the ESF and Europe 2020 as it will be a major instrument for implementing the integrated guidelines .
Our new Europe 2020 strategy sets out common objectives for the entire Union .
However , Member States will choose their own individual paths to follow in order to reach these objectives with the support of the ESF .
For this to happen , the future scope of the ESF should be broad enough to ensure that all Member States , regions and local stakeholders can design operational programmes that address their particular needs .
Nevertheless , a broad scope should not lead to a fragmentation of the instruments .
The Commission and Member States should work together to establish core priorities , particularly on employment .
We should work towards improving the visibility , effectiveness and delivery of the Social Fund .
The forthcoming budget review will show how the Commission envisages the future architecture of the Union 's budget in order to achieve the political objectives agreed in Europe 2020 .
In addition , it will launch the debate between Member States and the European Parliament .
I look forward to the contribution of this House to that debate .
The ESF should contribute to territorial as well as social and economic cohesion alongside other EU funds .
This should be facilitated by establishing some common rules for all funds to make coordination between them easier .
The Commission has already made a proposal for a new financial regulation laying down some common rules and we will put forward some specific proposals in the course of 2011 .
European citizens expect to see EU-level funds focused on results and achievements .
We need to put in place systems to monitor the performance of the actions supported by the ESF and we need to think about moving to more results based delivery systems .
Access to the funds should be simpler and also more user-friendly .
The discussions on the future of the ESF are at a decisive stage now .
The messages we have received from you are very clear and will make an important contribution to the work that lies ahead .
The Commission will present its proposal for the new ESF together with the other structural funds by mid-2011 .
We have a clear mandate to support the Europe 2020 strategy , namely by using the ESF as its financial lever to help translate our policy objectives into reality on the ground .
Mr President , Commissioner Hahn and Commissioner Andor , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to see you seated here together .
That demonstrates your desire to work together towards the overall objective of social , economic and territorial cohesion .
I have also read the letter you addressed to Mr Barroso concerning cohesion as part of a single integrated structure and I trust that you will stand by that position .
That would enable you to be more effective than if you were to go with an opt-out and allow the various funds to operate separately .
Thank you very much for that .
These new , difficult , times call for a new policy .
We can see evidence of that now in the Commission in connection with the Europe 2020 strategy .
In that context , cohesion is at the very heart of the implementation process .
The European added value , which is what we so ardently want the debate on our future to yield , is nothing more or less than a part of the implementation and is important for the 2014-2020 period .
What does this come down to ?
Do not give carte blanche when it comes to the European State aid map .
Objective 2 must be retained , because it is very clear . Abandoning this objective would lead to a renationalisation of this segment of European cooperation and we do not want that .
The Regional Development Fund and the Social Fund should continue to operate together .
My second point is that the horizontal , integrated character of the funds is vital for the entire spectrum of Europe 2020 .
Sure enough , the ' earmarking ' that Mrs Hübner introduced for the Lisbon Strategy did work at the time .
The Lisbon Strategy has been successful , especially in regional and urban environments , in bringing Europe closer together .
European cooperation within and between Member States brings balanced territorial development in Europe a step closer and creates opportunities for all regions .
Finally , allow me to add that we must improve things .
We must have greater synergy between the Rural Development Fund , the Social Fund , the Regional Fund and the Research and Development Funds .
That is attainable and would lead to better results .
I would like to put one final question to both Commissioners : do you want to introduce the Territorial Pact in the run-up to the Spring summit , as an opportunity for increasing the involvement of regions and towns ?
The Committee of the Regions has made a proposal to that effect and I would recommend that you consider it , at the same time as you consider the wording of our resolution .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , in the European Union , cohesion policy means that we aim to lend our support to the weaker regions .
It is an expression of major European solidarity .
Solidarity , however , is never a one-way street , and my group therefore backs the principle that all the regions of the European Union must be able to participate in our cohesion policy .
For us , this also means that we will not support any measures of renationalisation and that we do not want to see cohesion policy fragmented into sector-based policy approaches .
We do not need any extra transport or climate protection or energy efficiency funds , but we do need to work on how we reconcile the challenges we face with a sound cohesion policy .
It is therefore clear to us that , alongside a strong Objective 1 area , we also need a strong Objective 2 area , and appropriate transitional rules .
One thing is for certain , and that is that regions need our support at the European level .
The European Union needs strong regions , too , and there is therefore a give and take in both directions .
Of course , we need to review our priorities - clearly , we do need greater efficiency .
My group is therefore four-square behind the proposal , in order , for example , to be able to coordinate rural development much better together under the umbrella of cohesion policy than in the past .
Of course , we also back improving infrastructure , supporting businesses and supporting sustainable economic development .
However , sustainable economic development is only possible if we bring the employed - the people - with us .
In other words , we need employment policy approaches , we need education , we need training , we need people to integrate into the labour market .
That , in turn , is only possible in collaboration with the European Social Fund , under the umbrella of cohesion policy .
We support this , but with dedicated rules , which there did used to be in the past .
We need to really make an effort to improve this and significantly strengthen the social side of cohesion policy .
In the forthcoming discussions and negotiations , my group will be going in to bat for improving and simplifying the usability of the fund .
We need a simplification of the application processes so that , first of all , fewer errors are made , and , secondly , so that access for those people who really want to work can be made easier through this European cohesion policy .
We will strive to ensure that , in these negotiations , a stronger partnership principle really is implemented .
I believe that Parliament 's role has been strengthened now that the Treaty of Lisbon is in force .
My group will be arguing the case for this partnership principle .
Mr President , I think it is right and proper for us to be championing the cause of a coordinated cohesion and regional policy .
This is extremely important in order to deliver efficiency and to be able to use the money well , despite the limited amounts in question .
I must warn , however , that the plan is to achieve this efficiency by applying one and the same set of rules to everyone .
The funds are very varied , have very different target groups and different contents .
With that in mind , coordination is very important but the same rules are not .
That is exactly what we are experiencing with the European Social Fund at the moment , which is to say that it would be extremely well received by just those little communities , municipalities , if - just as the speaker before me said - for these small bodies on the ground , in particular , such an enormous amount of time and effort did not have to be spent in order to actually be able to access and use this money .
That is exactly what we need though , as unemployment , poverty and socially excluded people are to be found in every Member State of the European Union , not just in certain regions , but in every Member State .
With that in mind , I find it particularly important that the European Social Fund , in particular , should truly continue to be available to minorities , which , to an extent , also includes young people , but also the elderly and often people from an immigrant background , in future and actually , that it should be more available , in order to give these people the chance to enter the labour market , as that is precisely what we are aiming to achieve .
The Europe 2020 strategy represents our attempt to achieve greater inclusion in the labour market for the different groups .
I hope that that will not remain simply a goal ; instead , we now have to genuinely provide the measures and the instruments to achieve it .
The European Social Fund is a very effective tool in this regard .
We just need to optimise it and , above all , make it useable .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased about this debate as it represents a first attempt for us to reach compromises on a very major project that will occupy us for the next few years .
The most important thing in these compromise resolutions of the European Parliament is the discrete nature of the cohesion policy and a clear commitment to that .
It will play its part in the Europe 2020 strategy , but it also has its own value , as it is cohesion policy that holds the EU together , at its core .
No region in the European Union is shoved to one side .
Social cohesion also means that no one , from the poorest of the poor , is pushed aside in the European Union , and instead , everyone is given a chance .
However , prosperity does not just mean economic growth , as we have seen in the past how there can be a growth of GDP in many regions , but an intensification of social differences at the same time .
I therefore consider it very important that , in this resolution , the impetus is given for us to develop other important criteria alongside the GDP that make it clear what prosperity means and what needs to be done in a region .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are very proud of our achievement in having this fixed in the resolution , even if only cautiously .
We propose that the criterion is one which includes examining whether it is possible to support a region or not .
That would result in a very different picture .
Thus , the resolution comes out very clearly in favour of a ' GDP beyond ' and we hope that the Commission takes up this stimulus .
That also means that we will finally get away from one-sided development .
A further Commission study - namely , the Commission 's Regions 2020 study - shows that climate change has an alarming and detrimental impact on regional development .
We therefore need to stop it .
The study shows that a third of the population of the European Union would have to abandon their homes if we failed to stop climate change , as they would either be unable to find work or to live in their homes any longer .
This makes it clear that there are three sides to regional development .
All three of these sides must be given equal weight in the future reform of the structural funds and also taken into consideration in the support given .
One key interest is economic , social and territorial cohesion .
That means that ecological issues and criteria , too , represent a key element in the prosperity of regions .
Allow me to briefly enunciate one more thought about what has been negotiated here between Members , namely , the wording about how the ESF is to be dealt with in the joint package .
I believe that the oral amendment is well worded and allows us a great deal of free scope and I therefore ask you to support it .
Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , in the discussion on future cohesion policy , we are all , first and foremost , defending our own interests .
For this reason , it will be very difficult to find a meaningful and rational consensus that will win the support of as many Members as possible .
In my view , the first key question is what financial resources we should allocate to the cohesion policy .
Personally , I am convinced that existing resources are more or less sufficient .
The cohesion policy should , however , become one of the main spending priorities of the European budget .
As the European budget is constrained , and Member States have seriously ailing public finances and cannot allow more money to be sent to Brussels , it is also necessary to state clearly where cuts might be made .
In my view , this includes , for example , direct payments to farmers , money for the globalisation fund or the administrative costs of European institutions .
The second key question is what we should finance from the European funds .
In the draft resolution on the European Social Fund , much is being said about the fight against poverty , support for the social model , etc .
That is all very well , but in the first place , our economy must prosper , people must have work , and companies must produce and provide services .
Therefore , European funds should be geared towards investment , and not consumption .
The funds should make possible modernisation which , in line with the principle of subsidiarity , cannot be taken on by the state , the regions , communities or families .
Reducing the economic disparities between regions and Member States must continue to be the main goal of the cohesion policy .
Therefore , the only rational criterion is the level of GDP .
On behalf of my group , I can say that we are interested in a cohesion policy that will be comprehensible , simple , flexible , unencumbered by excessive bureaucracy , and focused on investment and smart growth .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to a fundamental conflict which is already becoming apparent in relation to the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
The Treaty of Lisbon recommends that the ESF should focus primarily on active labour market policy .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left believe that it is necessary for the ESF to be applied more broadly in future to general social policy and , most importantly , to be used much more effectively to combat poverty and social exclusion .
In future , the European Social Fund should also play an effective role throughout the entire European Union and should not concentrate solely on specific regions .
However , we think that there should be a greater focus on special problems in the regions , which could be accommodated more effectively via the cofinancing rates .
Financing for the European Social Fund should at least stay at its current level .
It should be a minimum of 1 % of the gross budget of the European Union .
We believe that to be absolutely essential .
I would like to highlight one other problem .
The proposed increased focus on the results naturally gives rise to the question with regard to the ESF of which indicators and benchmarks will form the basis for evaluating the results and what that ultimately means in terms of preparation for the project promoters in each case .
These promoters do not have reserves which would allow them to make additional payments or repayments .
If the ESF is to remain in existence and play an effective role , we need to have a clear overview of this issue in advance .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , it has been suggested that the Commission will withdraw regional development funding to all but the most economically weak areas of the Union post-2013 by removing Regional Competitiveness and Employment Objective funding .
Although many areas of Wales benefit under the Convergence Objective , reflecting the country 's economic shortcomings , as many as seven Welsh regions are now threatened with losing EU money .
EU funding to Wales , currently worth GBP 280 million , could be withdrawn .
Financial support to numerous projects created under the auspices of the Regional Competitiveness Programme could be stripped , threatening thousands of associated jobs .
Has the Commission thought , at the very least , to draw up an impact assessment to judge the social and economic consequences of cutting funds ?
What transitional measures are being proposed ?
Spending on debt-ridden eurozone countries , including Greece , was pursued with little hesitation and amounts to a trillion euros over three years .
Wales also suffers high unemployment levels and will be greatly affected by forthcoming UK Government civil service cuts .
Another threat to Wales could be the proposed renationalisation of structural funding , which could see Britain undersold on entitlement to support .
The UK , as a net contributor , would likely be expected to bear the heaviest fiscal burden .
The EUR 55 billion spent on regional competitiveness and employment funding account for just 6 % of the entire EU budget .
The UK will continue to pour increasing amounts of money into Brussels , yet the one area where some of that money is recouped - albeit very little - is the area the Commission are looking to axe .
It is , of course , my opinion that the people of Wales would be better off if the UK left the EU .
That way , we could save billions and be the sole dictators of where much-needed financial provision is channelled .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we have reached a pivotal moment in the debate on the future of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
At a time when employment has become the number one preoccupation of all countries and all European regions , I am proud of the resolution Parliament has proposed today on the future of the ESF .
This text is responsible , concrete and opens doors to the future .
Now more than ever , our territories need a cohesion policy and thus , support from the European structural funds .
The ESF has been in place since 1957 and was established by the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community , the Treaty of Rome .
Its legitimacy is not in doubt .
My position on the future of the ESF is simple and clear and can be summarised in three points .
First , a European Social Fund must remain focused on employment , combating poverty , of course , but by getting people into work and not by other means .
Today , employment must have our full attention and must be our priority .
I am convinced that a person who returns to employment is also a person who regains his human dignity .
Second , an effective European Social Fund must have clear , pragmatic rules that do not discourage operators .
That is why I support my political group , which is calling for greater visibility for the ESF , particularly to improve its uptake .
Just imagine , budget allocations are sometimes returned unused to the European Union , while unemployment rates have never been so high .
Third , and finally , we need a fund that is included in the broader framework of a strong European cohesion policy .
Decisions must be taken on the ESF with partners that are as close to the ground as possible .
Commissioners , can you assure us that the ESF will meet these expectations ?
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for this opportunity to debate before the Commission deliberates on these proposals .
Employment , poverty , the economic , financial and social crisis in the European Union , and the subsequent austerity measures in the budgets of the Member States , force us , at European level , to fully address the issues of employment and social policies and to regard the European Social Fund ( ESF ) as a tool of EU economic policy and the EU budget for meeting not only the treaty objectives of economic , social and territorial cohesion but also the objectives of the strategy , the draft of which the Heads of State or Government have just accepted , which include increasing the employment rate and combating poverty .
In this context , with the ESF now under review , I would like to send out some signals to Commissioner Andor .
We think that the regions are the effective authorising bodies of European public expenditure .
However , that does not mean that the instruments of economic policy must be reduced to the imperative of territorial cohesion .
Cohesion also includes economic and social cohesion .
It may be scheduled by the regions , but it must meet economic and social objectives that concern all parts of the European Union .
Commissioner , when you review these rules , I urge you to take account of the experience gained in the implementation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , where the capacity exists for individualisation and for adaptation to each of the workers concerned , which may also be useful for the European Social Fund .
I also urge you to link in some of the objectives of our Europe 2020 strategy : employability , employment , the fight against poverty , and research and development .
Research and development is certainly very important for Galileo and others .
Commissioner , as regards social innovation , there is an immense wasteland , which I urge you to explore using the ESF with , no doubt , in this case , somewhat different cofinancing deals .
I fully endorse what Mrs Zimmer said : employability cannot be the sole objective of the ESF .
There is also the question of combating social exclusion and taking into account the most vulnerable sections of the population - the young , women , people with disabilities and the Roma population , to name but a few .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like to say a word on the conditions of use of the ESF .
We know everyone says : ' There is Kafka in the home , there is Kafka in Brussels . '
There are rules for the use of the ESF which are too difficult to implement .
Therefore , let us think about a kind of geometry which varies depending on the quality of the use of public expenditure by the regions .
Where regions are happily capable of being authorising bodies , let us relax control .
Where there is a need for administrative support , let us invent new mechanisms .
And , finally , as regards the return of the money that is not used in the budgets of the Member States , I urge you to imagine abolishing this rule , which is not the right way to use the European Social Funds to further employment and social inclusion .
( RO ) Social inclusion is a particularly important topic which is well integrated into regional policy .
As we are all aware , it entails much more than simply job creation .
The resolution on the European Social Fund emphasises the role it plays in achieving the EU 2020 strategy objectives .
Without regional policy instruments , this strategy has no chance of being successfully implemented at national , regional or local level .
As a result , as long as regional policy and social policy are interconnected policies which operate successfully together , I believe that we should not agree , under any circumstances , to the separation of the European Social Fund from the Structural Funds .
Such a decision would pave the way for funds to be allocated on a sectoral basis , thereby creating an undesirable precedent for this .
The European Social Fund must remain part of the Structural Funds , especially as it has proven its effectiveness in every region of Europe , given that it is actually a key weapon in the battle against the economic crisis , in addition to the European Regional Development Fund .
We need a strong , well-funded EU regional policy in order to achieve social , economic and territorial cohesion .
I therefore believe that the regional aspect must continue to enjoy its appropriate place as part of both the revised EU budget and the future budget .
We must reject any attempt at renationalisation .
The regional policy is not a charity policy , but an EU policy intended for all regions , which will generate economic growth , innovation and competitiveness , making it an instrument available to every Member State .
If we want solutions which are appropriate to the needs and realities which we are going to face in the future as well , we must maintain the same framework . By that , I mean both the basic principles and the sums allocated .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to draw your attention , ladies and gentlemen , to an aspect of this resolution , which is of central and not secondary importance to me , and which can give the policies of regional cohesion their full meaning .
The challenge is to identify the best instrument to enable us to measure the state of development of the European regions as accurately as possible and to have at our disposal the best decision support instrument , especially for deciding on eligibility for European funds .
It is about having a political compass to guide us towards this ' targeted approach to territorial development ' , to quote the proposed resolution , towards this integrated approach .
What is this guide on which to base our regional cohesion policies ?
Today , we have just a single indicator , gross domestic product , which is an excellent indicator and an excellent instrument for measuring economic growth and the production of wealth .
However , regional development issues are not confined to increasing gross domestic product .
People 's well-being cannot simply be expressed as an index or a curve .
If it could , we would be in danger of ending up with an indicator that gives nothing more than a distorted , partial and therefore one-sided view .
To pursue regional cohesion policies that are relevant to the objective of the sustainable development of the regions - which , I would point out , is our shared objective - the gross domestic product index must be supplemented by other instruments of measurement , particularly in the social and environmental spheres .
It must be possible to assess the level of unemployment , insecure employment , education , health , environmental quality , air and water quality , protection of resources , access to basic services , etc .
In conclusion , therefore , we need to do our utmost to establish , alongside gross domestic product , a battery of social and environmental indicators to facilitate regional cohesion policies whose aim is sustainable development based on the three pillars of economic factors , social factors and the environment .
( FR ) ( started off-microphone ) ... has more than 250 regions in its 27 Member States .
Not all of these regions are homogeneous .
There are major differences between them in terms of wealth , development and standard of living .
To reduce these differences and to make the regions more competitive , the European Union implemented a regional cohesion and convergence policy based on solidarity and endowed with the appropriate financial resources : the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the cohesion funds .
Nevertheless , despite the progress made , it would be illusory to believe that these differences will disappear in 2013 , or even in 2020 .
Consequently , it would be advisable to maintain the principles of cohesion policy and the accompanying financial resources beyond 2013 .
Naturally , this regional cohesion and convergence policy must be pursued alongside other strategies , such as the EU 2020 strategy .
However , it must be pursued independently of this strategy and we must ensure that it does not appropriate or absorb any of the funds allocated to cohesion policy under the pretext of regionalising a specific objective of the EU 2020 strategy .
Parliament must maintain a watchful eye on this , as it is essential for all regions , particularly those that are lagging behind , notably the outermost regions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , future regional and cohesion policy must be aligned with the Europe 2020 strategy priorities , and therefore it must be focused on the objectives of sustainable growth , social inclusion and employment .
It needs to support the effective development of the European regions by levelling out the differences between them and enhancing the specific characteristics of the more marginalised areas which are still facing regional development challenges .
The projects must take into account the less developed regions , which have been most severely affected by the crisis .
New challenges such as population density in certain areas and depopulation in others , in mountain areas , in particular , along with climate change , must be addressed through concrete actions that strengthen local and regional involvement .
The multi-level approach must stimulate the integrated development of disadvantaged areas by involving local and regional authorities as well as civil society .
I urge the Commission to take into account the specific characteristics of each region , namely the regional dimensions of the various levels of development , and to simplify the management and control procedures for financed projects in order to ensure their effective and prompt execution .
( BG ) This topic is particularly important for me , as five of the six Bulgarian regions are in the top 10 poorest regions in the European Union .
The reason for this is that those who led Bulgaria into the European Union misled the nation into thinking that as soon as Bulgaria joined , billions in assistance from European funds would come raining down on the country .
We all know that this has not been the case .
Those same people were hoping to get their people into key positions to cream off commissions from the appropriation of European funds .
Now that the Bulgarian people have voted them out of office , there is nobody to step forward and take their place to help Bulgaria absorb European funds effectively .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a reluctant admission but Bulgaria is a new country .
It cannot measure itself against France , Germany and the other founder members .
We need your know-how to enable these policies relating to these funds to reach the people for whom they were intended , and for there truly to be a policy of convergence .
( DE ) Mr President , today we have seen fundamental agreement across all the groups in Parliament .
We want a strong cohesion policy and structural policy in all the European regions .
It does not matter whether we are talking about a net contributor or one of the poorer Member States ; structural policy remains the strongest expression of European solidarity .
We are helping the poorest regions to catch up with their neighbours , but we are also helping the stronger regions to remain competitive .
Europe will only be able to develop sustainably in areas such as environmental protection , industry and energy supplies , and to conquer global markets , if it can make the best technologies even better .
To ensure that we achieve these objectives , we need clear and fair rules .
This means that the poorer regions must remain the central focus of cohesion policy .
The lower the gross domestic product ( GDP ) of a region , the more help it must receive from us .
Anyone who questions the use of GDP as an indicator , such as the Greens and , unfortunately , some Liberals and Socialists , is attacking the very roots of European solidarity .
GDP is the guarantee that social force , education and job opportunities are fully taken into account .
Poor regions often cannot provide all these things on an adequate level and they also lose out when it comes to protecting the environment .
Therefore , GDP must remain the reliable indicator for regional policy .
We need to rely on our local authorities and federal states when it comes to regional policy .
We want to implement the Europe 2020 strategy on the basis of the tried and tested principle of the joint development of programmes , joint administration and regional cofinancing .
For this reason , the calls for independent EU funds for employment , climate protection and energy must not be allowed to become reality .
If we were to replace regional policy with a stronger sectoral policy , the only winners would be new EU agencies , and our local authorities and federal states would be mere onlookers with regard to regional policy and cohesion policy .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament has taken up a clear position on behalf of the regions .
This has to do with accepting the European idea .
We cannot force people to accept it .
The acceptance has to develop from the bottom upwards as part of regional policy .
( ES ) Mr President , in the next few months , we are going to have to discuss and decide upon the future organisation of the Structural Funds , which are essential for bringing us out of the crisis and tackling the Europe 2020 strategy .
I think that when the time comes , it will be important to learn from experience and uphold two decisions : the decision to maintain the European Social Fund ( ESF ) within the body of basic rules regulating the Cohesion Fund and cohesion policy , but also , at the same time , the decision to maintain the objectives , rules and budgets of the ESF without distorting them .
Why is this ?
It is because , ladies and gentlemen , the ESF needs to continue to provide training , and to prepare workers for entering the labour market and for social cohesion , as that is why it was created .
We need it now and we will need it in the next few years , and not only for building roads .
This is because Europe 's main assets are its people , and if the EU wants to play a role and maintain its social model , it will have to continue to train its people .
We cannot use our resources any better than if we use them for the purpose for which they were created .
This does , however , have to be done within the overall structure , working in a balanced way with synergies within territorial cohesion policy .
Mr President , Article 4 TFEU lists the competences shared between the Union and the Member States .
After the internal market , social policy is the next on the list , followed by economic , social and territorial cohesion .
That gives an indication of the priorities in the treaty .
Following on from that , Article 9 clearly states that in defining and implementing its policies and activities , the Union should take account of requirements linked to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection , the fight against social exclusion , and a high level of education , training and protection of human health .
This issue is highlighted in Article 10 of our resolution on the future of the Social Fund and is , to me , of crucial importance .
That gives us our framework .
I agree with many of the speakers who have argued that we need a framework to establish synergies between all European policies and the Structural Funds .
Indeed , these must act as drivers that will help us to achieve the EU 2020 targets .
I also agree with Commissioner Andor when he says that EU citizens expect results based delivery systems .
There is also a strong argument for greater visibility of these funds , and an urgent need for simplification .
I regularly speak to voluntary , community , and other groups who access these funds .
They have serious issues with the levels of bureaucracy and red tape that confront them .
But it is not just that usual red tape : there is also uncertainty over interpretation of the rules and regulations .
We have discussed this issue of simplification again and again in committee and in plenary , and yet nothing has changed for the better .
In connection with rules and regulations , a colleague recently asked me why there is an insistence on ' pouring sand into every moving part ' .
Given that context , this issue really needs to be dealt with .
Perhaps we can begin to get it right this time .
Finally , I would once again like to emphasise and ensure that Article 9 , or the ' social clause ' , permeates all our policy decisions , because that really will lead to cohesion in the EU .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to express , first of all , our commitment to regional development policy .
We consider the region to be the appropriate level at which to structure European economic policies .
Indeed , it has a natural ability to withstand globalisation and , consequently , to sustain employment and ensure its fair distribution throughout Europe .
Secondly , territorial cohesion policy must , in our view , form part of the long-term future .
The threshold of 75 % of GDP will naturally be renewed in 2014 .
However , do people think that if the poorest regions pass the 75 % threshold in future , European territorial cohesion will be complete ?
Can the gap between 75 % for the poorest and 150 % or more for the richest - twice as much - be taken to represent the fulfilment of Europe 's objectives in territorial cohesion terms ?
We should therefore take a long-term view of European cohesion policy .
The threshold of 90 % seems to me to be an objective that we can actually set today , while at the same time clearly prioritising those who are still under 75 % .
Finally , with regard to the priorities of this policy : many people have spoken of social cohesion , particularly through the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , of the fight against global warming and of territorial cooperation beyond borders , which is also a priority of the Commission ; I shall not dwell on this matter .
I would like to focus on the promotion of Europe 's diversity .
It is expressed primarily at the level of the regions and their cultural heritage , and it is an asset that will be taken into account and emphasised within the context of regional development policy .
Mr President , Parliament 's Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis has concluded that one of the key instruments to aid economic recovery should be that of cohesion funding across all regions of the EU .
My nation of Wales is currently in receipt of cohesion funding , and given how badly the private sector in this region has been affected by the economic downturn , I and many others recognise the value of these funds to potentially transform the economy .
Funds , of course , need to be put to good use in sustainable projects , hopefully with many SMEs benefiting both directly and indirectly in order to ensure the return on investment for a future investment programme in these regions to use .
The cohesion funding should be a mechanism for stimulating economic growth across the EU , but needs to have a specific goal as supporting SMEs and entrepreneurs who are the backbone of our economy .
Investment , not spending , should be the goal , pre- and post-2013 .

( EL ) Mr President , the debate on so-called cohesion policy in the European Union has not highlighted basic characteristics such as : firstly , the fact that no EU cohesion policy can eliminate the inequalities in growth caused by the capitalist method of production , which operates solely on the criterion of profit for capital .
Secondly , the fact that the money made available by the European Union to the regions is not intended to satisfy grassroots needs ; it is intended for projects needed by capital .
Thirdly , the fact that the debate on cuts in resources serves the interests of the large capitalist groups and , fourthly , the fact that the plans of capital for future cohesion policy serve speedier capitalist restructurings and the anti-grassroots EU 2020 strategy , which is also being used in Greece to reform the state on the basis of the Kapodistrias and Kallikratis plans .
Thus , in my opinion , it would appear in this matter that socialisation of the means of production alone can resolve the problem and bring about real cohesion on our continent .
( LT ) We all know very well that the objective of European Union cohesion policy is to reduce development disparities among EU Member States and regions .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that in implementing this large-scale programme in regional policy , it must cover all of Europe 's regions and I agree with the opinion that this policy should not be nationalised .
We must ensure stable and sustainable economic growth and job creation .
A strong and properly financed EU regional policy is the basis for ensuring social , economic and territorial cohesion .
As always ( as before ) , greater attention should also be devoted to regions lagging behind .
It is good that in the next programming period , there are plans to earmark financial resources for investments required to implement urban and also suburban projects , without reducing rural funding , because cities have a positive impact on the economy of surrounding rural areas .
In this case , the most important aspects of discussions should be the following : the scope of EU cohesion policy , the validity of objectives , the link with the 2020 strategy and opportunities for implementing EU cohesion policy and simplifying its procedures .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund are financing instruments of EU regional policy which aim to bridge the development divide between the regions and promote regional cohesion .
The future challenges faced by our cohesion policy , such as globalisation , demographic change , climate change and energy supply , interact with one another in a very complex way .
On account of our limited resources , we should focus on our key priorities and make an increased effort to identify synergies between the different policies .
I support the call for a simple , fair and transparent transition system for cohesion policy after 2013 .
The restructuring of the policy depends on whether all the parties involved - the regions , the Member States and the EU - are in a position to respond quickly to these new challenges .
( HU ) Now that the individual policies and directions for the 2020 strategy are already on their way to being implemented in practice , we must realise that we know next to nothing about their funding or financial background .
It only follows that by underlining the importance and necessity of the cohesion policy , in a sense , we also want to ensure that during the upcoming budget debates , the common European policy at issue becomes consolidated , not fragmented .
While there is no doubt and it has been pointed out by many that the creation of workplaces and the increase in employment are very high on the list of priorities , we also know that European labour markets are experiencing structural tension .
While , in some areas , workplaces often lack people with the right qualifications or skills , elsewhere , highly qualified people struggle to find a job due to a lack of appropriate workplaces .
It is obvious that the European Social Fund has a pivotal role in counteracting this situation , with policies designed to eliminate these differences and bring them closer together .
We are not talking about large-scale projects .
We are talking about small projects and more flexible adjustment .
While we endorse and support the concept of a single policy and the exploitation of synergies in the context of cohesion policy , I would also like to emphasise that where the Social Fund is concerned , we need a higher degree of flexibility and transparency and fewer rules .
In this sense , there should be separate rules that apply to the Social Fund , and I welcome the Commissioner 's statement about introducing a result-oriented assessment , considering that the biggest problem with these policies - one that also undermines their authority - is often that we are unable to see the results of funds spent in specific areas .
Mr President , I am sure that Commissioner Hahn does not need to be persuaded that cohesion policy is one of the most successful policies of the EU , the results of which have influenced the lives of millions of citizens , wherever they live in Europe .
I am sure that Commissioner Andor does not need to be persuaded about the successful delivery of the social policy aspects of cohesion policy , thanks to the strong synergy of the ESF and ERDF .
Nor do the other two Commissioners dealing with EU funds in rural development and fisheries need to be persuaded that they are more effective working together with other funds , as they used to be , than on their own , as in the current period .
I am among those who expect that in the next period , we should have proposals for even stronger synergies between a strong cohesion policy and all the other funds , based on the fact that all of them together can deliver far better results than each one on its own .
But for some reason I fail to understand , there are voices inside the Commission that are calling for an approach of sectoral instruments , ignoring ( in my view ) the realities on the ground .
To conclude , what we say in our resolution , which I strongly hope and believe will be adopted by a very large majority later today , is supported not only by this House but also by the majority of Member States , all 271 regions of Europe and thousands of local authorities .
In my opinion , if the Commission follows the path of sectorisation of EU resources , we will arrive in a unique and conflictual situation where the Commission will be on one side and everybody else - Parliament , the Council and the regions - on the other side .
In the coming weeks , the side which believes that future EU policies would be best covered within an integrated approach to planning , implementation and delivery will have to engage in a serious fight with the side which believes that sectorisation of EU resources is the way to go .
Be sure that the latter will find this group against them simply because it is the wrong way to go for Europe .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners , cohesion policy is not simply a matter of solidarity : it is partly a means for us to create added value for Europe as a whole .
There is a good deal of expertise in our region as well as very strong potential based on natural resources , for example .
We can only achieve these targets , which are also closely linked to Europe 2020 , through an effective cohesion policy which covers the whole of Europe and has adequate funds in its budget for the period starting in 2014 .
It will be important in the next financial period that we continue to try to level out the differences between countries with respect to GDP .
In addition , it is absolutely vital that the present Objective 2 regions and the special challenges they face are taken into account .
Furthermore , I would appeal to you , Commissioners , with reference to Article 174 : sparsely populated regions , mountainous areas and islands must also be considered in the next period of cohesion policy , with respect to funding too , as has been the case hitherto , and with much success .
Finally , I wish to express my gratitude for having the opportunity to take part in this very important debate .
( PL ) Mr President , I think that when planning changes which are so strategic , we should take very careful note of past experience .
This experience tells us clearly that where money was spent on hard infrastructure investments and in accordance , primarily , with the GDP criterion , the expenditure brought advantages to the entire European Union , both to Member States which are net contributors to European funds and to those which are net beneficiaries .
Acceleration of the process of reducing disparities in the level of infrastructure strengthened the common market and facilitated investment , which , after all , continues to flow mainly from net contributors to net beneficiaries .
This gave clear European added value , which is something we have talked so much about today .
Therefore , it is with concern that I look at a situation in which we are planning a reform of cohesion policy and adding new criteria - very vague social and ecological criteria - to the system for distribution of these funds .
This money should continue to serve the poorest regions as defined by measurable criteria , in particular , concerning the achievement of hard infrastructure objectives .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that the aim of the European Social Fund is to narrow the prosperity gap and promote economic and social cohesion .
However , today , in the year for combating poverty , Europe is in recession , we have unemployment , we have businesses closing and , therefore , the attainment of this objective hangs in the balance .
Commissioners , in my opinion , therefore , you should immediately revise the priorities of the European Funds , including the European Social Fund .
However , Commissioners , I should like to say to you that we see the absurdities and paradoxes in your economic policies .
In other words , you - the Commission , the IMF and the European Central Bank - have imposed a miserable memorandum on Greece , which cuts public spending , cuts wages , cuts incomes ; at the same time , however , in response to my questions to the Commission about why there is a delay in the take-up of Community funds by Greece , the reply was : the inadequate liquidity of public finances ; in other words , the essence of its political memorandum .
Please could you explain to us , Commissioner , how Greece can increase take-up ?
Is there not an absurdity , a paradox in your economic policies ?
( SK ) At present , we are giving almost one third of our budget to the EU 's cohesion policy in the 2007-2013 period .
Under a number of new proposals , some of this budget would be redirected after 2013 towards fulfilling the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , in the Committee of the Regions , representatives of the cities and the regions warn us against making a significant reduction in contributions to regional policy .
In my opinion , we should pay very serious attention to their objective arguments .
It is , for example , clear to us that we must continue to support these regions , which currently fail to achieve even 75 % of the average gross domestic product of the European Union .
However , the financial resources allotted to them should be mainly directed as a matter of priority towards constructing basic infrastructure , supporting human resources or employment , greater investment in science , research and innovation , and the target of green growth .
We should also try to improve links between regional and local structures and to reduce the bureaucratic burden .
Through a well considered , balanced regional policy of this kind , we might finally also help to make the new Europe 2020 strategy truly successful .
Mr President , at a time when Member States are reducing public spending , in the UK our government is seeking to overhaul the benefits system to make work pay more .
I do believe , then , in this context , that funds such as the ESF have a vital role to play in ensuring the employability of those who are hard to reach and low-skilled .
We in Northern Ireland receive significant funding from the ESF administered through the Department for Learning and Employment , and I note that in a recent House of Lords enquiry into the ESF , it was noted the ESF continues to make a significant contribution to supporting economic growth in Northern Ireland , aimed at creating a knowledge-based economy with a highly skilled and flexible workforce .
It is therefore essential that future ESF projects and the money directed towards them can be considered in the context of domestic schemes , many of which have similar aims .
That level of joined up and targeted thinking can only bring greater rewards .
Regional flexibility is of the utmost importance for the successful operation of the ESF .
Post-2013 , I believe that the limited resources of the ESF should continue to be focused on assisting the hardest to reach and least skilled into work or back into work through access to training and further education .
( IT ) Mr President , this resolution is fundamental because it takes on board the important requirement for renewal connected with the creation of an anti-crisis policy for 2020 by striking a balance between necessary innovation and due respect for the fundamental principles of cohesion policy .
This is , and must remain , the pillar of European integration .
It must continue to play an essential role as an instrument for reconciling the differences between Member States while , at the same time , strengthening regional identities .
Therefore , notwithstanding the architecture of cohesion policy and having reaffirmed the value and relevance of multi-level governance , partnership and the integrated approach as fundamental principles , this resolution affirms the advantages of combining GDP , which must remain the only criterion for determining eligibility , with new and more meaningful indicators for the sole purpose of analysis and assessment ; the need to lay down new rules for the European Social Fund , which should nonetheless be maintained under the regulation on general provisions concerning cohesion policy ; and the need to simplify procedures and use financial engineering instruments , as Commissioner Hahn also stated .
Indeed , I am referring to Commissioner Hahn 's speech , in particular , to the point where he mentioned the importance of maintaining the Stability Pact within the context of cohesion policy .
That is all well and good , but to achieve that aim , the wretched agreement that stipulates that investment expenditure must be calculated within the parameters of the Stability Pact needs to be scrapped or amended , because it would be like asking for more investment expenditure on the one hand , and then punishing it by reducing it , on the other .
The challenges facing the European Union are difficult ones : employment , growth , development and competitiveness .
These are the objectives of the European strategy , which provides for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
As many people have said , these can only be addressed if the future European financial framework takes into account the importance of regional policy , in order to achieve true economic , social and territorial cohesion , and if it is able to guarantee adequate financing despite the constraints on resources by carrying forward a policy where objectives are set according to priorities and assessed according to results .
( RO ) Hitherto , the cohesion policy has been a successful instrument in narrowing the disparities between Member States and for displaying solidarity , very much a fundamental value of our EU .
However , it is vital to reduce the imbalances not only for the sake of the European Union , but also of every individual citizen and region , which requires not only human resources , but also sufficient financial resources .
The current cohesion policy requires improvements , without any major amendments .
Above all , we must reject and refuse to renationalise and underfund it .
At this juncture , when rich or less rich Member States are being hit by the effects of the economic crisis , cutting the budget allocated to the cohesion policy would be tantamount to jeopardising all the successes over recent years and the reduction in the disparities which we have been endeavouring to combat up until now .
This is why I agree with the view of President José Manuel Durão Barroso that the budget allocated to the cohesion policy in the future must be at least equal to the current one .
Otherwise , these will remain just fine words and we will undermine the European project itself .
Mr President , the resolution is strategically very well written .
We must support it .
However , we have to find where the problems are at present .
I would point out to the Commissioner that , as at 1 September , the absorption rate for the Social Fund was just 18 % , which is half as much - twice as bad - as in the previous period .
17 Member States are at less than 18 % .
Some of them are stuck at 10 % or 11 % absorption when it comes to the Social Fund .
There is no pattern here : the countries with the biggest deficit are not showing the worst absorption rates .
But the fact is that some countries were stuck at 10 % throughout 2010 .
The Commission has to clarify the situation .
If one looks at the other funds - the Regional Fund and the Cohesion Fund - the situation is no better .
The overall absorption rate is 17.95 % .
Also , 60 % of Member States have a lower absorption than this .
For some of them , the figure is three times less .
The Council has cut the funding under the draft budget for 2011 to less than EUR 1 000 million because the Member States have no clear idea about fulfilling their obligations .
We in the Committee on Budgets supported the Committee on Regional Development in its request to restore the funding to the draft budget .
The question is whether it will be possible for this money to be absorbed .
If it cannot , there is no sense talking about a bright future .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , I believe that the draft prepared by Mrs Hübner , the former Commissioner for Regional Policy , is also balanced and , in fact , good .
I understand that we all know that the crisis has created a challenge for many Member States that are net contributors , as a result of which there is pressure for the next financial perspective to be reduced in money terms .
In such a case , this major heading that cohesion policy represents is also extremely important .
However , it is important for all of us not to get confused , but be a little more conservative and not let go of two fundamentals of cohesion policy , namely , that it is an independent policy , the main objective of which is still , and will remain , the equalisation of development between less well-developed regions and the rest of the European Union , and second , that per capita gross domestic product by purchasing power parity is nevertheless the main criterion .
If we disregard these fundamentals , any other debates ( such as how better to align cohesion policy with the achievement of the European Union 's 2020 targets ) will fail to achieve anything , even with ' EU 2020 ' in the context of cohesion policy . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , we are not talking about peanuts here .
For the period from 2007 to 2013 , EUR 75 billion is available for the European Social Fund ( ESF ) and this amounts to almost 8 % of the EU budget .
As Brussels will only provide the money for the ESF when the Member States take responsibility for cofinancing , this means that there will be around EUR 150 billion on the table for creating more and better jobs .
Fortunately , ESF money is not used to fund unnecessary studies , but instead goes directly to the people who need it .
This is what makes it so valuable and what allows people to experience it at first hand , including the long-term unemployed , migrants , young people who have the opportunity to obtain the school leaving qualifications that they missed out on first time around , tens of thousands of trainees and retrainees , employees who want further training and budding entrepreneurs .
It has a wide range of target groups .
What will happen after 2013 ?
The Member States must make more effective use of the funding and we also need to take the special features of individual regions into account .
I would like to see a tailor-made , bottom-up approach and effective coordination with programmes such as Daphne and PROGRESS .
I am in favour of more flexibility , simpler controls and more transparent allocation of funding .
However , I am opposed to a separate legal framework for the ESF .
I believe it should remain within the Structural Fund regulation , which will ensure that the eligibility of expenditure is regulated at the level of the Member States .
This is why I have tabled Amendment 1 , together with 45 of my fellow Members , and I would ask you to support it in the forthcoming vote .
Mr President , we all agree that the cohesion policy has had a very positive impact so far .
This is visible and recognisable .
However , there are different ideas for the post-2013 cohesion policy .
We should further develop and adapt it to the new challenges and realities by building on its achievements and not by totally transforming the policy .
This is equally important both for its basic principles and for the future budget .
We need actions and they must be supported by adequate resources from the EU and national budgets .
The Committee on Budgets has recently stressed that an effort will be made to avoid big losers as far as future allocations from the structural funds are concerned .
I strongly hope that the new Member States will not fall into the category of big losers .
Therefore , cutting money for cohesion cannot be an option in any way .
It is not only a financial issue , but it will negatively affect the principles of solidarity .
( GA ) Thank you , Mr President . I would like to say a few words about cohesion policy .
The future of cohesion policy has been framed in the context of rising unemployment and contracting public finances across Europe .
It is likely that the BMW ( Border , Midlands and Western ) region in my country will once again fall within the 75 % to 100 % EU GDP range .
Measures must be put in place post-2013 which recognise this altered economic position in Ireland and in the BMW region in particular .
The focus of Objective 2 programmes must be building the capacity of the regions in order to effectively contribute to the development of a greener , smarter and sustainable economy in Ireland and the rest of Europe .
Regional flights in the BMW region are an economic and social necessity .
Therefore , public service obligation funding must be retained , as these internal flights would not survive economically otherwise .
EU support for cross-border cooperation in Ireland must be retained .
Cross-border cooperation can address fragmentation in border regions in terms of the labour market , trade patterns and infrastructure .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , today is an extremely important political day for the future of EU regional policy .
This is for two reasons .
The first is that this morning , we MEPs are joining forces and addressing our demands to the European Commission and the European ministers .
We want to capitalise on our successes with this crucial policy and amend it as required to make it more accessible and more visible .
We want a strong , well-financed policy that really helps to bring about economic development for all of our regions .
We want simplified rules , and we do not just want to hear them talked about ; we want them to be implemented for project leaders and potential beneficiaries .
We want outermost towns and regions to receive special attention .
I worked on this resolution when it was with the working group and Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development .
I supported the needs of potential beneficiaries and succeeded in ensuring that they were taken into account and adapted to the needs expressed in our regions .
I want a united and social Europe , founded on a conquering , ambitious Europe .
The second extremely important event of today is this afternoon 's action , where 140 regions will come together and their 140 regional presidents , together with MEPs , representing 85 % of the EU population , will embark on a symbolic march to the European Commission - we shall see each other later , Commissioner - to demonstrate the extent to which all of us , the regions and Parliament , are aware of the importance of this cohesion policy for business , citizens , the social sphere and the economy , and we shall be united this afternoon in demonstrating the extent to which this first strong political campaign is a campaign of the people , a clear signal to the European Commission , directly via the regions .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like cohesion policy from 2013 to continue to be the prime example of solidarity within the EU .
I would like cohesion policy to be a genuine response to the crisis and its aftermath , and in order to achieve this , it is essential for it to be incorporated into the Europe 2020 strategy and , specifically , into the target of job creation .
Cohesion policy needs to be increasingly participative and civil society needs to play a greater role in designing and managing the projects .
It is important that you , in the Commission , see cohesion policy as an investment rather than expenditure and as an opportunity to generate trust and sustainable development .
I do not want cohesion policy to overlook the specific needs of the social groups with the most difficulties , as that is not compatible with an integrated approach or with a more strategic concept that is investing in the sectors of the future .
In short , as we have said so many times , we need cohesion policy that is solid , well-financed and present in all the regions of the European Union .
( HU ) Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , a lot has been said today about regional and cohesion policy .
However , I would like to talk about the role of the European Social Fund , which has a fundamental role and significance in cohesion policy as well , because if large groups are falling behind , then we also have a problem with the cohesion policy .
The role of the European Social Fund will be enhanced further by the 2020 strategy , as employability is a key issue .
At this point , I would like to draw your attention to two issues :
The first is to make sure there is a second chance .
We must provide a second chance for those who have lost their jobs in the crisis which accelerated certain globalisation processes , such as the massive exodus of mass production from Europe , and for those who cannot use their skills on the labour market because there is no demand for them .
This is what we call ' skill mismatch ' .
A second chance must also be provided for those who are unemployable due to a lack of any qualifications , such as school drop-outs .
The second is that the 2020 strategy would increase the level of employment among women by 25 % .
However , this will be possible only if Member States can provide , with the assistance of the European Social Fund , the indispensable backing in the area of services , particularly childcare and elderly care .
Since the support required is often smaller in extent , payment rules would probably need to be more flexible than for projects funded from the large structural funds .
What is absolutely inevitable is to ensure that supervision and evaluation are more stringent in order to make funding more transparent and more efficient .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Hahn , Mr Andor , ladies and gentlemen , I do not need to emphasise how important cohesion and regional policy is for the process of living together and growing together in Europe .
However , I also believe that in future , regional policy and cohesion policy must focus more closely on our cities .
Cities are an important driving force behind development in Europe .
At the same time , they are currently suffering from environmental , economic and social problems .
This is why I have a particular question for Mr Hahn .
What opportunities do you think there are for highlighting the urban dimension ?
To come to the point , Mr Hahn , you recently indicated during an event which took place in this House that you had a specific percentage of the regional funding in mind which would be reserved for highlighting the urban dimension .
Is this still the case ?
If so , what percentage were you thinking of ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioners , it is surprising that before a further financial framework is agreed , we often have discussions whose purpose is to defend cohesion policy , a policy which has proved to be one of the most effective and most visible in the European Union .
In fact , discussion of cohesion policy is , to a great extent , discussion about the European Union - about what the Union is , how it is supposed to function and how it is supposed to be understood by the citizens .
We are not only talking about money ; we are also thinking of whether we are really putting in place measures which lead to economic growth .
We need to take note of the fact that cohesion policy is a very special instrument , because it combines , on the one hand , reduction of disparities with the support of measures which lead to greater competitiveness .
These two objectives are not incompatible - they make cohesion policy favourable to development .
It is worth talking about this , because the policy is not one of charity , but is , in fact , a policy of measures intended to assist development .
This is why it is part of the EU 2020 strategy .
Furthermore , it is worth saying that it is the only policy which is extremely complicated in terms of putting it into effect , because it is based on a common administration which is shared with the Member States .
This means , on the one hand , that the instruments involved are extremely difficult and the procedures are very complicated , but , on the other , it produces a clear effect of cooperation between the European Union , Member States and local authorities .
In view of this , let us not defend cohesion policy only in the context of the new economic conditions .
Let us give thought to how to improve and strengthen it .
( IT ) Mr President , Open Days have been taking place here in Brussels over the last few days .
Many municipal and regional representatives have been talking about how to address the serious problems our cities are facing and about the old and new needs affecting workers , families , and small and large production companies alike .
The economic crisis that has hit our societies has made it harder and more difficult for all of us to find suitable solutions to a new and serious social issue .
In this context , I believe everyone has come to understand that , time and again , cohesion policy has been the only real instrument the regions have had available to them for trying to provide solutions .
We can therefore say that over the last few years , cohesion policy has provided a vital fillip to the European integration process for all of the regions .
Now we are having to redefine this policy for the period after 2013 , and we are therefore at a turning point .
That is why it is vitally important to avoid certain risks .
The first fundamental risk would be to renationalise it : that would be a serious step backwards .
Next , when preparing the financing budget , we must lay down appropriate requirements with regard to the weaker areas without penalising the more competitive and more advanced regions .
Lastly , it is essential to simplify the procedures for those who have demonstrated efficiency and to make more legally binding the power to penalise those who have not .
We expect the Commission to take action along these lines .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , after four consecutive years in which the unemployment rate fell , from 2004 to 2008 , the current economic crisis has wiped out much of the progress made .
Unemployment rates across the European Union have shot up .
In Portugal , for example , we have unfortunately reached the record level of 11 % unemployment .
Another negative phenomenon is unemployment among young people in the EU .
Europe is thus going through a period of transformation and faces huge challenges .
The crisis has wiped out years of economic and social progress and exposed the weaknesses in its Member States ' economies and , accordingly , in the economy of the EU itself .
The Europe 2020 strategy is showing us which ways to go .
The EU must intensify all its efforts to promote employment and social inclusion as an integral part of its strategy to fight the economic and social crisis .
I therefore welcome the motion for a resolution on the future of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , which we are debating today , because this fund plays a crucial role in achieving the Europe 2020 targets .
This fund is , in fact , the main financial instrument enabling the EU to fulfil the strategic aims of its employment policy , through improving the education and training levels of the people of Europe .
The ESF must be strengthened as the principal driving force behind Europe 2020 , and it needs to be used by the Member States to invest in reskilling , employment , training and vocational retraining .
Lastly , I would like to point out that the ESF reform , to be carried out in conjunction with the reform of the other structural funds , should not only facilitate and simplify its management and improve transparency , but also focus funds on results and achievements that can make a difference to the general public in their daily lives .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is no doubt the Structural Funds have been one of the most effective instruments for giving shape to European policies and , above all , for ensuring the solidity of the European economy .
That is why I believe it is very important not only to reconfirm them , but also to give thought to their effectiveness by introducing some sort of flexibility between one fund and another .
I refer primarily to the European Social Fund , which is crucial today in order to guarantee the quality of future jobs in this part of the world .
It is certainly important to stimulate recovery and growth , but it is necessary to focus on competitive models that incorporate both the quality of what is produced through knowledge and the quality of how it is produced .
Quality jobs are very important for people 's dignity , as well as for their profit-making capacity .
I believe the European Social Fund needs specific and simple rules .
Simplicity is not the enemy of effectiveness and quality , and if there are strict controls , it is even less likely to lead to actions that break the rules .
I believe that simplification and greater control should be tightly linked .
That way , we can truly equip the Europe 2020 strategy with instruments that have proven to be effective , but which have also demonstrated the need for certain updates .
( ES ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank the working group led by the chair of the Committee on Regional Development , which has made it possible for us to have this debate today .
We certainly all agree that cohesion policy is the essential element for achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , and also for achieving European integration and achieving the economic , social and territorial cohesion set out in the Treaty of Lisbon that people are clamouring for so much .
What we need to start doing now , in my view , is to see what mistakes we have made and improve what we have done so far .
We all agree that the process needs to be much more flexible , there need to be fewer bureaucratic obstacles , and the controls need to be simpler .
Also , the regions with specific difficulties , such as islands , mountainous areas , cross-border regions and outermost regions , must receive specific treatment .
Gross domestic product must continue to be the main criterion , although there might be other indicators in other decision-making processes , and the regions and local bodies must play a fundamental role .
It seems that we all agree on this .
So we are going to go down this road , but the Commission should clarify for us whether this is indeed the road we should go down or whether it should be another one .
It needs to clarify whether we are going to have the same budgets , which is absolutely essential in order for no one to lose out and for all the regions to be able to make progress in terms of innovation , competitiveness , development , income and progress , especially in a time of crisis when clarity is needed more than ever .
Mr President , joined-up policies are essential to achieving results .
So is a mechanism to drive change in a dynamic way , which is best achieved , in my view , by engaging all stakeholders in a structured manner .
The fundamental role that services of general interest , including social services , play in economic , social and territorial cohesion , in job creation and improving quality of life , has so far been ignored in this debate .
At the same time as we are debating how to make EU funds more effective in delivering cohesion , Council and Commission policies on fiscal consolidation are undermining services of general interest which are essential to cohesion .
Without them , all the funds that Europe can pour into the Member States will be pointless .
Another problem is the negative impact that EU market rules are having on regional and local authorities ' right to maintain and initiate services of general interest , including social services .
Yes , let us have more effective funds which are result-orientated , but we must stop the nonsense , the madness of stripping our societies of essential public services .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe a strong and efficient cohesion policy is inconceivable .
Without the political consensus - or political cohesion if you will - required for the development and implementation of the policy , President Hübner 's questions and the related draft decision , I believe , support the political consensus between political groups , political families , and maybe even between the various European institutions .
From this point of view , I find and consider unacceptable the siren voices heard in today 's debate about the GDP as the number one and exclusive indicator and measure of eligibility for regional development support .
I would like to express my most definite and unambiguous support for the strong views of Mr Olbrycht and Mrs Mazzoni , namely , the strong views I mentioned in earlier debates in the European Parliament , also shared by Commissioner Hahn , that although GDP does not reflect all dimensions of the stage of development , it is still the most reliable indicator available .
Obviously , at Member State level , policy makers may use alternative indicators to eliminate its deficiencies , if any , and to account for environmental and social aspects of development .
However , in order to assert European solidarity and ensure that Member States can catch up successfully , it is essential that GDP remains the fundamental and exclusive indicator for the distribution of funds at EU level .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Social Fund is a tool , a basic tool with which to build a better Europe , so that we can forge the solidarity of peoples and states .
However , like every other tool , it is very important that we think about how we should use it .
Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , if we imagine the European Social Fund is a hammer , we can use it to hammer in the nails which will keep the European construct stable .
If , however , we are careless and this hammer drops on our foot , then we shall be able to walk no further .
I have used this metaphor to illustrate that , even if we create the best construct , the best infrastructure , if we forget that we are building it for the citizens of Europe , then we shall have failed .
The European construct must be stable if people are to live and prosper in it , working in decent jobs with real future prospects .
Commissioners , please never forget that the basic investment of the European Social Fund is man .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioners , cohesion policy should be maintained and strengthened in the new financial framework .
In accordance with the principles of solidarity and subsidiarity , which are fundamental principles of the Union , cohesion policy should support those regions which have the greatest distance to make up in terms of infrastructure , the economy , technology , employment or social integration and which , on the strength of their own resources , are unable to bridge this gap .
This support should be for the pursuit of integrated strategies of regional development which also contain objectives established at national and Union level .
Cohesion policy should go beyond the framework of spatial development policy and should integrate sectoral policies such as transport , energy , education , research , development and employment .
( HU ) Commissioners Andor and Hahn , the cohesion policy is the European Union 's most successful and most perceivable public policy .
It is also an important tool which will be much needed by the Union in the future as well .
The convergence of new Baltic and Central European Member States is by no means complete .
In addition , these funds are also needed by certain regions in Spain , Portugal and Greece .
However , it would be a mistake to believe that the only purpose of the cohesion policy is to promote convergence , given that it is the most comprehensive integrated investment policy supporting the objectives of the 2020 strategy .
It would be a grave mistake to split up this cohesion policy .
It would be the equivalent of breaking up the European Union .
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I think it is very important that we aim for a greater degree of harmony and synergy between regional and rural development policies in the future .
( FI ) Mr President , cohesion policy has been necessary , and it has been successful .
In my opinion , now we need to dare to look ahead and have the courage to ask whether the money today is going to the right places and having the impact it is intended to .
Money is allocated here and there , and no longer these days to the poorest regions and where it actually might be needed .
I think it is time we asked ourselves whether cohesion policy should be nationalised , with joint resources at EU level only being channelled to where there is a genuine need .
Secondly , I would like to say that bureaucracy unquestionably needs to be reduced : at present , 30-40 % of the money available is spent on that , and it is definitely much too much .
( RO ) The achievements of the European Union 's cohesion policy and the added value it can bring to the EU 2020 strategy are indisputable .
The role which this policy plays in boosting regions ' competitiveness and facilitating their increasing adaptability must also be highlighted .
Although the cohesion policy 's priorities should be aligned with the EU 2020 objectives , I think that there should be sufficient flexibility to be able to take into account specific regional features and to support weaker regions with greater needs , so that the latter can overcome socio-economic difficulties and natural handicaps , and so that disparities can be reduced .
A strong , well-funded European Union regional policy which provides benefits to every region in the EU is a prerequisite for meeting our future objectives .
( ES ) Mr President , I am grateful for the opportunity to take part in a debate that is always of great interest to Members who come from and live on islands , such as , in my case , the Canary Islands .
I am doing so in line with my participation in the debate on regional policy , under Article 174 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which took place recently , and I am only going to make three points .
Firstly , I would like to point out that this debate on the economic , social and territorial aspects of cohesion policy needs to be consistent with the financial perspectives set for 2014-2020 .
Not despite the crisis , but precisely because of the crisis , the objective of cohesion is more important than ever .
Secondly , I would like to point out that cohesion policy is not a sectoral policy , but a cross-cutting one , which means that the regional dimension of cohesion policy cannot be considered to be a specific sectoral policy , but rather it must cover energy , transport , communications and innovation policy .
Thirdly , I would like to point out that this is especially important for island territories , which are all external borders of the European Union , and therefore , they are very vulnerable in terms of security to illegal trafficking and also to threats from globalisation .
( DE ) Mr President , as we know , 27 EU Member States with a large number of regions , cities and communities and a population of 500 million have , of course , a huge variety of different needs and problems .
In addition , every EU initiative on a Brussels level has regional and local effects .
Since the 1970s , structural aid has been available for disadvantaged regions in order to ensure that the growth of the economy and of prosperity is geographically balanced .
However , looking at the current situation , we seem not to have come any closer to achieving these goals .
For example , the billions paid in subsidies to the regions of Ireland and Greece have not protected them from feeling the full force of the financial and economic crisis .
Those regions which lost their status as Objective 1 zones during the enlargement in 2004 are not much better off .
Their situation has only improved in statistical terms , in other words , on paper , but it is a well-known fact that you cannot eat paper .
Large regions may be showing strong growth , but they can , at the same time , contain small regions which are fighting for survival .
Therefore , we need to make cohesion policy more efficient and the individual projects more sustainable .
( RO ) I believe that the European Commission should explain clearly and in detail how synergy is going to be achieved between the cohesion funds and common agricultural policy funds , given that harmonising the operation of these funds would generate more added value for the EU 's actions and would also boost our efficiency at achieving our objectives .
Last but not least , I support those who have called today for the rules governing every kind of fund to be simplified , both at European and Member State level .
I also support fellow Members who have stated that GDP must remain the main criterion for determining eligibility for assistance .
Mr President , Wales has benefited hugely from structural funding .
It is therefore not surprising that I support the current basis of cohesion policy .
I believe that structural funding should be made available to all regions across the EU and that adequate support should be provided for regions that no longer have convergence status .
I believe competitiveness should be maintained , and would therefore urge all colleagues who are interested to attend this afternoon 's march , organised by the Committee of the Regions .
Finally , I believe the European Social Fund should remain part of cohesion policy and not be moved out to sectoral projects .
I look forward to the publication of the fifth Cohesion Report , around 9 November .
In particular , I look forward to talking about some of the details , including simplification of the process , particularly for applicants .
I also look forward to discussing the definition of an urban area .
That is a very important issue for us to discuss .
We must also , of course , ensure that cohesion policy and structural funds have an adequate budget in the future .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , if we look at the aims of cohesion policy , it clearly has European added value .
It demonstrates European solidarity by reducing regional asymmetries and contributing to economic , social and territorial cohesion .
To be able to do that , therefore , it must have the necessary budget appropriation .
Cohesion policy must also be flexible enough to address regional specificities , particularly those of the less-developed regions , and gross domestic product should be kept as the main eligibility criterion .
The European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development needs to be coordinated with cohesion policy funds so as to raise efficiency and maximise results .
I also endorse and call on the Commission to carry out an evaluation of the absorption of cohesion policy funds so that measures to improve the absorption rates of these funds can be adopted with the greatest urgency .
( FI ) Mr President , Europe 2020 was , in the wake of the deepest crisis in European economic history , supposed to represent a new beginning .
The debate that has taken place subsequently , however , has been dominated by talk of budgetary discipline and little else .
It seems that those who say that we need to make more cuts get the loudest applause .
The Council is making cuts , the Member States are making cuts , and now it appears that here too in Parliament , the general feeling is that the EU budget should also be cut .
That is not the way to build the future .
Soon the European Union will have no cohesion policy , no regional policy , no employment policy , and no economic policy : it will only have a financial policy .
Commissioners Hahn and Andor , are you concerned about this general climate of cuts ?
I believe that the debate going on here right now is a little naive .

( PL ) Mr President , your statement , Mr Hahn , that cohesion and regional policy is in good condition and should be a policy which is close to the citizens , incorporating different , well-designed instruments , is - it seems to me - a good answer to the question which has been asked in this Chamber today .
Overcoming the crisis , which has been a difficult one for all of us , and achieving the objectives of the 2020 economic strategy , necessitate cohesion policy and clear objectives , both for Member States and for regions .
We have designated this year as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
We are also going to continue with this objective until 2020 .
We will not achieve this without the European Social Fund being incorporated into cohesion policy .
This is what local authorities expect , too , and this is also being said by the Committee of the Regions , which represents them .
We should , therefore , take very strong account of their opinion in this Chamber .
( ES ) Mr President , it is well known that territorial cohesion , along with the economic and social prosperity of the Member States and their regions , need communication networks that facilitate and allow genuine free movement of people , goods and services across borders .
They need these networks to guarantee greater coherence between mobility systems , greater coherence between the objectives of economic , social and territorial cohesion and the planning of trans-European networks , which are frequently ignored or are carried out in parallel without ensuring that the necessary defaults are in place .
However , so far , European policy regarding trans-European networks has met with a pitiful and resounding lack of funding , both from the European Union and from the Member States , especially in the cross-border sections , which everyone considers to be no-man 's-land .
It is true that in those Member States that have succeeded in coordinating the two policies , there has been a multiplying effect that has fast-forwarded historically backward regions , towns and their citizens , including them in the cohesion that we all want to see .
This is why , in order to achieve the major objective of reducing disparities and bringing regions and citizens closer to our area of prosperity and welfare through better channels of communication , we need to add a serious discussion to the post-2013 debate regarding the urgent need to guarantee sufficient funding for the trans-European networks once and for all .
( PL ) Mr President , cohesion policy covers and unites various wide-ranging developmental objectives , as well as the expectations not only of the regions , but also of various social groups .
The achievements of cohesion policy and experiences gained from it show that it can and should be the policy which meets the new challenges contained in the ' Europe 2020 ' strategy .
Accelerated economic growth does not always translate into a reduction in poverty .
This is why the European Social Fund plays such an important role and why we need to coordinate the various political strategies .
Job creation and an education and retraining system which is fit-for-purpose are becoming exceptionally important .
Cohesion policy is the basis for implementing the sustainable development of urban agglomerations and rural areas , taking into account their specific character and possibilities .
Proper coordination of the various political strategies will allow the Rural Development Fund and other funds to reduce any delays in development and to take into account the specific character of less developed areas , including rural areas .
( PT ) Cohesion policies are not just another instrument of European integration but can be seen as a real embodiment and dynamic proof of the European project itself , in the sense of a community of citizens sharing values of social justice and solidarity .
In this context , we can understand the insistence that cohesion policies should be targeted at all the regions and that the eligibility criteria should be expanded beyond the current focus on per capita gross domestic product in order to make them fairer .
Nonetheless , we must never lose sight of the primary and ultimate purpose of the cohesion policies , which is to achieve an equal standard of living for all Europeans , and that always means paying special attention to the poorest regions , such as some of the outermost regions , which effectively need measures specific to them .
( RO ) I would like to ask the European Commission to ensure that the European Union 's future economic , social and territorial cohesion policy allocates large sums to the transport sector , especially for intermodality , and also to energy efficiency in residential buildings .
I think that these investments will , on the one hand , create jobs at local and regional level , while also promoting economic well-being and development for small and medium-sized enterprises in these sectors .
Last but not least , Commissioner Hahn , I hope that after 2013 , we will have a separate financing line for the European Union 's Danube region strategy .
I should mention that the European Union 's Baltic region strategy has EUR 20 million just for 2011 .
The European Union 's Danube region strategy may become one of the European Union 's most successful projects .
( RO ) The timing of today 's debate on the cohesion policy after 2013 is just right if we also consider that the Open Days are taking place in Brussels .
The fact that numerous participants from most of Europe 's regions have come here to present their initiatives , efforts and results , as well as their dissatisfaction in a variety of areas of regional development , strengthens my view that the EU 's cohesion policy delivers concrete results .
One particular aspect being considered during the current programming period is how efficiently current funds are being used .
We will have to focus on implementing measures aimed at increasing the level of absorption of the allocated funds , especially in those regions facing difficulties in this respect .
This is why efforts must continue at European , national and regional level to simplify the implementation of the cohesion policy .
A proper balance must definitely be maintained between simplifying procedures and ensuring efficiency and good financial management in order to produce a policy which is easy to implement with a raised profile .
( GA ) I do not have much time , Mr President .
Therefore , I will focus on just a few points .
Mr President , firstly , there can be no renationalisation of the ESF just as there can be no renationalisation of CAP .
We need more , not less , Europe .
Secondly , there is a dire need for simplification in the process of application .
I have met groups who did not bother to apply , even though they are entitled to funding , because the application was so complicated .
Some actually had to hire an expert to do the application for them .
This is ridiculous and must stop .
Thirdly , I think there is a need to keep both Objective 1 and Objective 2 .
I represented my group in Mannheim and I saw the benefits of Objective 2 .
I think that is important .
Finally , I want to say that there is also a need - even though some of my colleagues in the EPP do not agree with me - to look at GDP as not being the exclusive criterion .
It should certainly be the main criterion , but not the only one .
I think that is a debate we need to have and I look forward to it .
( PT ) The European Social Fund ( ESF ) is probably the instrument that does the most to promote cohesion .
It therefore needs to be closely coordinated with the Regional Development Fund .
It is essential to take a local approach to the problems that need solving : in other words , global vision for local action .
Local and regional authorities are the ones that know best what the situation is like on the ground , how much investment in job creation they need , and what the most suitable measures are to promote employment in their regions .
We have to take account of the positive experiences of the regions .
In the Azores , an outermost region where unemployment generally reaches record levels , the unemployment rate is now 6.5 % , the lowest in Portugal .
That is largely due to the forward-planning strategy used for employment , which sets out which factors to address and how to achieve the desired targets , and also to the use of the ESF as an operational instrument of this strategy , acting on education and training and furthering employment .
Applying cohesion policy across the board is the only way to ensure the success of the Europe 2020 strategy .
( PL ) Mr President , cohesion policy or regional policy could be one of the key drivers of the European Union 's development .
This is a policy which is more citizen-friendly than most , which concentrates on practical aims and on solving practical , important problems .
This is why we need to complete matters of territorial cohesion within the framework of cohesion policy .
Road building , high-speed rail links and complete cohesion , which will increase mobility throughout Europe , are key issues .
As far as the European Social Fund is concerned , it appears that we will be unable to implement the ambitious proposals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Today , one third of Europeans do not have vocational qualifications .
I think that this fund , to a large extent , should today invest precisely in vocational training and lifelong learning , and should bring about an increase in the qualifications held by our European society .
Moreover , this fund can be targeted not only at issues of social inclusion , but also at greater vocational mobility of European citizens .
( SK ) Regional development policy is a key element in the economic , social and territorial development of the European Union , and its systematic modernisation in response to new trends therefore deserves special attention and must be a priority for the European Union even after 2013 .
The wealth of experience from the past must lead to the elimination of repeated errors , to greater efficiency , and to the rapid and high quality implementation of the cohesion policy , as well as to a smoothly functioning partnership and greater transparency .
I firmly believe that implementation of the cohesion policy must , in future , be more geared towards results and the quality of results , which requires better monitoring and evaluation of the efficiency of the programmes implementing regional policy and the cohesion policy , so that resources go into infrastructure , science and research , and the fight against unemployment - for companies and for citizens - so that the regions can develop and catch up with the best .
( IT ) Mr President , I should like to express my support for maintaining the European Social Fund 's own budget and rules , albeit with a view to its greater integration with all the other Structural Funds .
However , the rules need to be revised in at least five areas : we need more simplification and more monitoring of results and not just of procedures ; we need to really make the most of experience such as that gained in the Italian regions over the last two years , to offer integrated packages of guidance , training , retraining and support to help integrate workers who have been made redundant or who are unemployed into SMEs ; we need to promote training partnerships between educational training institutions , universities and businesses in order to provide opportunities for continuous training that take into account the need for new skills ; we need more transnational projects , which , until now , have only been experimental ; and we need more national and transnational work-study initiatives for young people .
I believe that it is on the basis of these points , among others , that we need to reconsider the prospect of introducing new rules for the European Social Fund .
Mr President , we are talking about cohesion and regional policy .
As some of you may already know , there is a leaked document on the future of the common agricultural policy towards 2020 , which also addresses the territorial challenges of the future .
So there are links between all of our policies .
In each of them , we want an adequately funded policy framework .
I have a few points in relation to the resolution .
We also need coherence in Member States .
We have seen where Member State policies have undone the good work of cohesion and regional policy .
This week , we met members of regional authorities who spoke about the huge level of frustration when they are trying to access funding .
Their voice must be not just heard but listened to and responded to .
I support this resolution .
( HU ) The European Union 's cohesion and regional policies are extremely important , not only in order to increase competitiveness , but also to put the concept of a single Europe into practice .
I think we all agree that a truly united Europe will only be built in the medium and long term if the levels of economic development are balanced across Europe .
It is indispensable for the efficient implementation of the EU 2020 strategy and for reaching its objectives that regions with different levels of development all benefit from the process .
This is why it is vital to keep cohesion policy funds available to less developed regions at their current level .
We must prevent Europe splitting in two due to the deceleration of the catching-up process of Member States that joined the EU starting from 2004 .
( SK ) In all of these strategies and frameworks , we must bear in mind the fundamental fact that Europe is not a project to construct an open-air museum .
It is not a communist utopia where everyone works and everyone gets what they want .
The European Social Fund is not a tool for implementing such ideas .
It is a tool for assisting development but , first and foremost , it provides assistance to those who cannot help themselves .
If people are struggling with employment , housing , food or health , we must help them - that is what solidarity means .
It does not mean artificially created jobs which deform the labour market , and it does not mean the levelling out of social and regional differences , which smacks of egalitarianism .
Unless we want to share the fate of Prince Potemkin , we should avoid using the word ' social ' more often than the word ' responsible ' .
The global financial crisis is a warning for us against the unrealistic and the irresponsible .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks for today 's presentation and for the subsequent fruitful discussion .
It fills me with enormous optimism .
The fact that there is agreement on the need for a cohesion policy is undoubtedly good news for everyone , and the fact that there is agreement within this Parliament is , of course , even better .
I would like to thank the Commission for preparing to facilitate the drawdown of funds .
I had the opportunity to review its proposal , and it is certainly a step in the right direction .
Finally , I would like to note that cohesion has an absolute and a relative dimension .
The absolute is what we all understand as support for the poorest regions , but the relative dimension , within individual states , is equally important .
I am interceding in order to ensure that it is not forgotten .

( DE ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank Mr Hahn , the former Austrian Minister for Science and Research , for starting a new debate which will make a major contribution to promoting growth in Europe .
If every small and medium-sized company in Europe were to create one additional job , we would have no more unemployment in Europe .
Therefore , we should be thinking about how we can enable these small and medium-sized businesses to hire new employees and also to play a more active role on international export markets .
However , the research and transport infrastructures are also important concerns .
The Commission has major tasks ahead of it when it comes to restructuring the East-West connection , for example , from Paris to Budapest , or the North-South connection .
New jobs , which are urgently needed in Europe at the moment , can be created in these areas .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , cohesion policy is the great pillar of European solidarity .
It is through cohesion that we achieve the objective of reducing regional disparities and stimulate harmonious development throughout the European Union .
We must establish a framework for the forthcoming 2014-2020 period that can enhance the effectiveness of regional policy .
Good governance must be encouraged at all levels through the greater involvement and participation of regional and local bodies , with respect for the principle of subsidiarity , as laid down in the new Treaty of Lisbon .
The special circumstances of the outermost regions must not be forgotten .
This group of regions faces major challenges and must continue to benefit in future from special provisions regarding the implementation of European policies .
Gross domestic product must remain the principal eligibility criterion , but we must take other indicators into account to provide a more complete picture of the regional situation .
Mr President , this has been a very lively and committed debate .
I would like to thank everyone involved .
I would also like to remind everyone and to repeat and reinforce the fact that regional policy is an investment policy which covers all the regions .
It should be regarded as an integrated policy , which is why it definitely focuses on cities .
However , this is also because different policy areas are concentrated in the cities , including energy wastage , reducing energy consumption , energy use , transport and social problems .
These are all factors which we need to look at in an overall context .
We very much support the calls for a simplification of the rules .
However , I would like to ask for your understanding in this area , because we also have to take into consideration taxpayers ' requirements .
Several speakers have referred today to the need to make the situation simpler , but we must do this by putting in place standardised rules for the different funds , as far as this is feasible and possible .
I would like to thank you for the discussion and for the backing of Parliament .
However , I would also like to call on you to make your voices heard at a national level , in order to enlist support for the causes you have spoken about today , so that regional policy remains at the heart of European policy in future .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , for me , too , this has been an extremely useful and helpful discussion about the future of cohesion policy and , within that , the future of the European Social Fund .
I agree with everyone who stressed that this is a crucial financial instrument to support the Europe 2020 strategy and its three objectives : it is smart , sustainable and it involves inclusive growth .
Within inclusive growth , we have to support both targets : to increase employment and reduce poverty .
The two are interlinked , and we have to make the ESF capable of serving a wide range of objectives within a social agenda .
It is clear that the discussion identified the major threats to cohesion policy , such as sectoralisation or nationalisation , or weakening the overall capacity by reducing the size of the envelope .
We have to avoid these trajectories and identify the issues requiring further action .
We have to ensure that there is innovation in terms of what the ESF funds , and in terms of how the ESF is funding these objectives .
I am completely open to working with Members on particular issues such as simplification , improving evaluation , strengthening conditionality , exploring the opportunities of financial engineering and cooperating with other sources of finance , because the challenges are enormous .
We are aware of the absorption problems , especially in Greece in a few years , and we are working hard with the services and with the Member State authorities to eliminate the obstacle to more rapid disbursement .
It is in the common interest of the Commission and the Member States to make progress on that . But it is very clear and , together with Commissioner Hahn , I think we all agree that we have to ensure that there is a robust cohesion policy in the future , and my goal is also to ensure that within that , there is a strong and visible European Social Fund .
I have received two motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) and Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .

The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
By voting today , Thursday , 7 October 2010 on a resolution , the European Parliament is demanding that the Commission give thought to significantly improving cohesion policy instruments .
Thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , cohesion is no longer just economic and social ; it is also territorial .
Regional policy is one of the spearheads of European integration .
It is the second heading in the Union 's budget , after the common agricultural policy .
Europe needs to adopt an integrated strategy for the development of its regions .
The development of cross-border transport links is one of the major challenges of this policy .
One of the priorities in this area is the route across the Pyrenees between France and Spain , which specifically concerns the European constituency of the South West .
At the moment , the road and rail links do not meet expectations .
Some regions , although linked from a socio-economic point of view , do not today enjoy adequate means of communication .
The various projects that the Commission is due to carry forward in this geographical area will be carried out in the medium and long terms .
They therefore deserve to be included in the discussion on cohesion policy after 2013 .
In the current economic and social crisis , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) is one of the principal European Union financial instruments for combating mass unemployment as well as poverty and social exclusion .
Moreover , this fund plays a significant role in the areas of the education of workers , lifelong vocational training , the improvement of work opportunities and the integration of workers into the labour market .
I agree that in order to achieve the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , especially in the areas of employment and social affairs , we must strengthen the ESF and increase its effectiveness , while improving this fund 's financing procedures .
Currently , this fund 's financing system is far too complicated and therefore , it is very important for the Commission to simplify the financing procedures for the structural funds and make them more flexible , because only this will enable Member States to use money allocated from the ESF as effectively and efficiently as possible for the creation of new and better jobs .
In terms of financing from the structural funds , we must not forget transparency and the strengthening of control over money earmarked for aid .
Furthermore , I call on the Commission to distribute ESF money in an even more effective and targeted manner in future and to take all possible measures to ensure that EU money goes directly to people experiencing poverty , who need that aid the most .
Only a more effective and stronger fund can contribute to reducing unemployment and poverty in Europe in the future .
I consider the resolution submitted on the basis of the oral question to be important in many respects .
It is certainly worth mentioning that the common position presented in the draft resolution emphasises the call based on experience from the current programming period for the structure of the cohesion policy for the period after 2013 to be simple , fair , and transparent .
I consider GDP to be the main criterion for determining eligibility for assistance within the framework of regional policy .
It is possible , however , to discuss the addition of other measurable indicators for determining eligibility for assistance within the framework of regional policy , insofar as their significance can be proven .
At the same time , I consider it important to maintain the European Social Fund as part of the regulation on general provisions relating to financial resources within the framework of the cohesion policy .
We need to emphasise that this fund should have its own rules .
In the formation of regional policy and cohesion policy after 2013 , I consider it absolutely necessary to coordinate these policies in the area of rural development with the other pillar of the common agricultural policy , so that the two policies do not work at cross purposes and lead to mutually contradictory goals .
The Structural Funds contribute to hundreds of economic , social and cultural projects in every region of Europe , with action taken as close as possible to the citizens .
Their role in the success of the EU 2020 strategy is crucial .
Like the vast majority of my colleagues in the Committee on Regional Development , I feel it is imperative to guarantee for the future a strong and well-financed cohesion policy that is aimed at all European regions .
Last year , it was rumoured that the European Commission might be planning a partial renationalisation of the Structural Funds .
That is unacceptable .
I shall fight to safeguard the European added value of cohesion policy at regional level .
Some people would also like to concentrate the Structural Funds even further on the poorest regions .
This is madness : cohesion policy is not meant to be a policy of handouts ; the so-called rich regions also experience many social and economic structural problems .
Cohesion requires solidarity between all regions .
It would be worth examining the relevance of the criteria used to assess eligibility for the Structural Funds .
While GDP must remain the main criterion , the Commission should also look at other indicators that might better account for regional difficulties .
We all know that the European Social Fund is the main financial instrument available to the European Union for supporting Member States ' employment policies .
We are currently facing a crisis scenario at EU level and Member States have different capabilities for managing the situations triggered by the economic and financial crisis .
I welcome the intention behind the ' European Platform to combat poverty ' of ensuring economic , social and territorial cohesion which will benefit from suitable financial support .
However , I think that support from the European Social Fund must be based on solidarity .
The future European Social Fund must support regions ' efforts to train human resources so that they are able to comply with their development guidelines at the lowest possible labour costs .
, in writing . - During its history , the ESF has always adapted to the current economic priorities of the EU .
It is evident that the ESF has to adapt itself again , because circumstances have changed .
It has to be adapted to the EU 2020 strategy , where raising employment is a key goal .
It has to adapt to the crisis .
The ESF is not a crisis management tool per se , but now it has to function during a period of crisis .
We should not forget that , even when macro-economic crises are over , employment levels may remain low .
Unemployment has risen in Europe .
Some European countries are forced to introduce budget cuts , which threaten jobs , especially in the public sector .
The majority of public workers are women .
Therefore , public sector lay-offs threaten women in the first instance .
Enhancing women 's labour market participation is a key goal for EU 2020 and for all reasonable political decision makers - women 's participation is particularly important in order to protect and reshape our social model .
Therefore , we should help those who lose their jobs due to budget cuts .
Some countries would favour the ESF being nationalised to some extent in the next budget . But I strongly believe that the European Social Fund has to remain an integral part of EU policies .
When we talk about the future of the cohesion policy and particularly about the objectives , priorities and structure of the policy , we must mention the EU-wide integration of EU and regional energy markets and the strategic infrastructural network promoting the use of renewable energy sources , because urban and rural development projects financed from structural funds constitute a very important part of EU energy investments .
These include district heating investments , certain energy efficiency projects and local and regional energy network development projects .
We must improve the future use of existing EU funds in a way that supports energy efficiency measures , and encourage a wider use of structural funds and Cohesion Fund sources for this purpose .
As regards energy policy , the funds used for research , development and demonstrations should be doubled by 2020 compared to the current level .
This should include a significant increase in funds allocated to renewable energy , smart grids and energy efficiency .
One instrument that could help achieve this objective is the European Union 's post-2013 cohesion and regional policy .
in writing . - It will be crucial to link and accommodate the EU future cohesion policy to the EU 2020 strategy , because only this link can provide for sustainable economic growth , competitiveness and the creation of new jobs .
At the same time , we should not allow the cohesion policy to be fragmented .
EU 2020 will be an important component of the future cohesion policy ; however , it cannot become its substitute .
A radical simplification of the rules of financing is badly needed in order to make EU funds better available at the local and NGO level .
These levels offer the best potential for a meaningful and well-targeted use of EU means .
At this point , the often excessive bureaucratic accountability takes more time and energy than goes to the real working out of the projects .
Such an imbalance is an increasingly serious practical and moral obstacle for further progress .
When preparing the framework for the next financial period , it will be important to engage in time the representatives of the regions and the business sector .
Their experience and practical sense should be seen as a valuable contribution in efficiently implementing the future regional policy and in obtaining additional resources .
The draft motion for a resolution of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is correct in highlighting the importance of supporting SMEs and creating synergies between the structural funds , because while the European Social Fund is a success story , errors are still made and it continues to struggle with many problems , especially during the financial and economic crisis .
Moreover , the opportunities provided by and the positive effects of the European Economic Recovery Plan will also decrease in the future .
Under the plan , the provisions of the General Block Exemption Regulation ( Regulation ( EC ) No 800 / 2008 ) had previously allowed Member States to provide , on a temporary basis , additional subsidies and compensation for the employment of people with disabilities , subject to a number of conditions .
As regards the simplification proposed for the ESF , it is not the issues related to the management of the fund that should be the main focus .
Instead , the priority should be to make sure that synergy ( cross-subsidies and eligibility ) is actually achieved in the course of planning and implementation by Member States .
Furthermore , the continued increase in the number of experts without useful qualifications should be curtailed , because unemployment in disadvantaged groups should be reduced .
At the same time , experts ' networks and professional cooperation should be strengthened .
One framework for achieving this could be the development of cross-border cooperation based on intra-regional connections .
Last but not least , let me comment on what Commissioners Hahn and Andor said : issues of urbanisation and sustainability should be given more attention as well .
The reduction of burdens on families and of the disproportionate distribution of tasks within society which makes it difficult to start a family , as well as improving accessibility , are essential in reaching and ensuring a more active and healthier old age .
The cohesion policy is vital to the European integration process .
We need a uniform EU-level regional policy which will bring about sustainable growth , job creation and modernisation across the whole European Union .
We will successfully achieve our objectives only through viable synergy between all the European policies and by means of suitable budgetary instruments .
The regional aspect must be fully considered as part of the proposed EU budget review and in the future financial framework .
The cohesion policy after 2013 will need to provide an easy , transparent transition , based on a suitable quantifiable assessment of past experience and a proper evaluation of the specific economic and social features of the regions involved , thereby also ensuring tangible progress for them .
GDP must remain the main criterion for determining eligibility for assistance under the regional policy .
However , other indicators must also be accepted after carrying out an extensive evaluation proving their viability .
The principle of subsidiarity , multi-level governance , strategic planning and simplified implementation of the regional policy must be linked effectively in order to achieve an ideal balance between quality , performance and financial control .
I should like to say a few words .
Those who are well informed know that debates on the future shape of this policy are now starting to become more intense .
Sometimes , the question is even raised as to whether this policy should exist at all .
The cohesion policy has its supporters , but also its critics .
I would like to mention the fundamental idea behind the creation of the cohesion policy in 1974 - the principle of solidarity between the economically more advanced and the economically weaker areas .
In the EU , significant differences remain , and until they are evened out , the problem-free implementation of the idea of free movement of services or capital is unthinkable .
There are a number of expert studies showing that the cohesion policy functions in principle , and creates the desired added value , and I therefore see critical voices more as a warning against procedural failures and a call for improvement in the future .
We know that the situation has changed since 1974 and that the cohesion policy is now an important instrument for the development of European regions and towns .
This is also a strong argument for it to continue and to encompass the entire territory of the EU .
It is necessary to have a discussion on the level of support in different regions , which will result from negotiations between the Council and Parliament .
I trust that the Commission will come forward with good proposals .
I would like to express my firm belief that with the right set-up , the critics will fall silent and will defend the existence of the cohesion policy for all EU citizens .
I am grateful to Mrs Hübner for her responsible work .
All the issues included in the resolution are of current concern to Latvia .
Unfortunately , in the cohesion policy programme , Latvia is represented by a single region .
By contrast , Poland , for example , consists of 16 regions .
In this connection , blatant violations are taking place in the application of EU structural funds in Latvia .
I have received many reports that far from promoting the application of EU funds , officials in the Latvian Ministry of Economics and the Ministry of Regional Development are impeding this process by demanding illegal payments from ordinary people in Latvia .
The application of funds is not helped either by the fact that Latvia counts as one region .
This gives politically committed forces the opportunity to ' put a brake on ' projects in those local authorities where their political parties are not represented .
By the same token , they give the green light to those who are included in their tight circle of corruption .
All of this gives no opportunity for a region such as Latgale to make full use of the funds earmarked for the implementation of cohesion policy .
A general review of the application and effectiveness of EU structural funds in Latvia needs to be carried out urgently .
I am prepared to play an active part in such a review .
Despite assurances from the Commission and the Council , Cohesion Policy is at risk because the size of its budget is making some people envious .
This policy , which promotes the balanced development of Europe 's regions , accounts for one third of Community expenditure between 2007 and 2013 .
It is important to remember some of its principles : Cohesion Policy should continue to be a Community policy , retain substantial financing , ensure decentralised management of funds and multi-level governance , and retain an overall and integrated approach in order to meet the complex challenges which all European regions have to face .
Although GDP should remain the main criterion in determining the eligibility of regions for European grants , it has been a struggle to get an ongoing consultation on other criteria .
With its humanist tradition , Europe should remain at the forefront of the debate on new ways to assess our fellow citizens ' wealth and well-being .
Finally , territorial cooperation deserves particular attention in the next Cohesion Policy .
This objective is the embodiment of Europe in the everyday lives of our fellow citizens and makes an ' ever closer union among the peoples of Europe ' possible .
European regional policy after 2013 must cover all the regions , while being sufficiently flexible to take into account regional and territorial differences .
In order to exploit fully the potential for growth of the regions and to achieve economic , social and territorial cohesion in the European Union , it is essential for us to focus on the goal of competitiveness , as well as on cohesion .
In particular , we must take into consideration small-scale problems in wealthy Member States .
We must also pay particular attention to the needs of mountain areas , as we plan and implement structural measures .
The specific geographic features of these areas give rise to particular problems which must be reflected in coordinated strategies and measures .
Alongside the urban dimension , the development of rural areas under the umbrella of regional policy is particularly important .
By coordinating sectoral and territorial measures , we can maximise synergies and avoid possible conflicts .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Extension of the provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 and Regulation ( EC ) No 987 / 2009 to nationals of third countries who are not already covered by these provisions solely on the ground of their nationality (
2 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Mr Lazaros Stavrou Lazarou , CY ) (
3 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Mr Gijs M. de Vries , NL ) (
( BG ) This morning , activists from some environmental organisation took it upon themselves to deface sixteen of the twenty seven national flags of the Member States of the European Union .
Whatever the point , whatever the cause , I believe , and I am certain that you will support me , that defacing national symbols should not be tolerated .
Furthermore , defacing the Bulgarian national flag is a criminal offence under the Bulgarian criminal code , and the guilty party has to be handed over to the appropriate authorities .
I am sure you will agree , regardless of the cause , that defacing national symbols of Member States must not be allowed .
4 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Spain / Galicia Textiles (
5 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Denmark / Danfoss Group (
Mr President , today 's vote presents no particular problems and it respects the consolidated procedure .
The most recent statistical framework shows a steady increase in requests received from Member States in favour of a fund that operates with a different degree of flexibility .
The European Commission has already given a sign of its confidence in the Fund by allocating new resources under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) budget line .
This is a sign of pragmatism , which was also reconfirmed by the Committee on Budgets this week .
Therefore , Europe 's commitment to its citizens has been reconfirmed by Parliament 's determination to find room in the 2011 budget , despite its greatly reduced margins , to give substance to this fund .
6 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Denmark / Linak A / S (
Voting time
Τhe next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
Mrs Kheira Leila Ettayeb , chair of the Committee on Education , Training , Higher Education , Scientific Research and Religious Affairs in the Algerian Council of Nation , and Mr Pier Antonio Panzeri , chair of the delegation for relations with the Maghreb , co-chaired the meeting relating to the 10th Intergovernmental Meeting of the European Parliament and Algerian Parliament .
I trust that the meetings you had in the European Parliament were fruitful and make a positive contribution towards bringing the two institutions closer together .
1 .
2008 discharge : European Police College (
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following on from the unanimous vote in the Committee on Budgetary Control , the decision to refuse to grant discharge that has been submitted to you today is vitally important for our institution .
Firstly , I am keen to remind you of the professionalism and the efforts made by the other regulatory agencies to comply with standards of good administration .
These efforts should not be tainted by the bad example set by the European Police College ( CEPOL ) .
That is why Parliament must assume its responsibilities as a discharge authority and refuse to grant CEPOL discharge for the financial year 2008 in the circumstances of which we are aware .
Thus , Parliament cannot accept the serious managerial failings of the former director , and , what is more , it cannot condone the fact that the management board has not assumed its responsibilities by adopting the necessary measures .
Finally , given that the College has been experiencing major difficulties since 2006 and that progress will not be seen until 2014 , it is no longer acceptable for the College to need at least nine years to reach an adequate level of good administration .
To conclude , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their work on this matter .
2 .
Third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of Member States (
rapporteur . - Mr President , we have a very important vote ahead of us and I would kindly ask colleagues to lend strong support to granting a visa-free regime to Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
Those countries deserve it .
I would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Mr Sven Alkalaj , and the President of the Albanian Parliament , Jozefina Topalli .
It is they who will deliver the positive news from our institution .
( Applause )
3 .
Failures in protection of human rights and justice in the Democratic Republic of Congo (
4 .
World day against the death penalty (
5 .
EU action on oil exploration and extraction in Europe ( vote )
Mr President , paragraph 7 calls for a review of the EU 's capacity for immediate response to accidents and for a European action plan .
In the second part of that paragraph , there is a specific reference to the Arctic zone .
The oral amendment is in addition to that second part and reads , ' moreover notes that the Mediterranean , Baltic and North Sea area has to be taken into consideration ' .
Mr President , I propose inserting a little qualification about drilling operations in order to avoid any misinterpretations in cases where third countries are also involved .
Concerning drilling operations , I would like to insert ' by EU and third countries ' .
Please support this .
( PL ) In my capacity as rapporteur , I would like to thank you for voting .
The aim was , in cooperation with the European Commission , to define the highest standards possible for oil drilling operations in European waters .
At the same time , I would like to express sympathy and solidarity with my Hungarian fellow Members and what they are currently experiencing with the toxic spillage .
We should also create the highest standards possible for dangerous waste in Europe .
Voting time ( continuation )
Formal sitting - 20th anniversary of German reunification
Dear colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , let me , on your behalf , welcome to the European Parliament all our honoured guests .
Thank you for coming .
Many of us remember - some of us who are very young will know it from history - the reunification of Germany 20 years ago .
Four great world leaders were there : the President of the United States , George Bush senior , the leader of the Soviet Union , Mikhail Gorbachev , the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Margaret Thatcher and the President of France , François Mitterrand , and , of course , the foreign ministers of the four countries , negotiating the reunification treaty .
One of the foreign ministers is today with us .
I am very glad to welcome to the European Parliament Mr Roland Dumas .
We are very glad to see you .
We also greet both German leaders at that time : the Chancellor of West Germany , Helmut Kohl and the Prime Minister of East Germany , Lothar de Maizière .
Welcome to the European Parliament , 20 years later .
The European institutions played a very important role in German reunification .
I should also like to say on behalf of all of us : welcome home , Enrique Barón Crespo , former President of the European Parliament .
Enrique , it is your home !
Thank you for coming .
And last , but certainly not least , the President of the European Commission in those times , President Jacques Delors .
We are very glad to see you .
We are very grateful and we remember very well your speeches from those times .
You were a great supporter of German unity and it was very important for all of us .
There would be no reunification of Europe without the reunification of Germany .
Those days were momentous for our continent and we can be proud of it and we will forever remember those days .
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation )

Mr President , Mr Delors , ladies and gentlemen , as I look around , I can spot many well-known and familiar faces here and I am very pleased to see all of you again .
It is a great honour for me to be able to speak to you on this occasion today in the European Parliament .
This makes it clear that the reunification of Germany was by no means just a national matter , but also a fundamental European issue .
I could even say that by unifying Germany , we have put an end to the misguided nationalism of the European peoples .
Therefore , I want to use the opportunity presented by this anniversary and my speech to call on all the people of Europe to strive to achieve all of the things that unite us .
Today , 7 October , is an appropriate day for this occasion because it marks the founding of the German Democratic Republic ( GDR ) 61 years ago .
For 40 years , the Day of the Republic was celebrated lavishly and even ostentatiously on 7 October .
However , I became Prime Minister in order to abolish the GDR and to lead the East Germans into unity .
At no point did we have the opportunity to resolve the open German question except in the context of European unity .
The European Union , based on the foundations of the Treaty of Rome , has shown that the countries of Europe have learnt the right lessons from the horrors of two world wars .
In 1957 , Chancellor Konrad Adenauer ensured that the treaties enshrined the full membership of the East Germans in the case of reunification .
This turned the intention behind the preamble to the German constitution , which refers to acting on behalf of those who have been prevented from participating , into a practical policy .
As a result , the German question always remained on the agenda , because it was also one of the keys to overcoming the division of Europe .
The two things are inextricably linked : the war which was started and lost by Germany and the Iron Curtain which divided Europe .
One particularly tragic aspect of this was that those people who were particularly hard hit by the Iron Curtain were the same people who had suffered most under National Socialism .
Neither the uprisings in East Berlin in 1953 and in Poland and Hungary in 1956 , nor the Prague Spring of 1968 , succeeded in seriously shaking the foundations of communist rule .
However , from this moment on , many people across the Eastern bloc states knew that the system that we lived under could not be reformed , but only overcome .
This insight represented a bleak hope which we continued to cherish in the face of difficult circumstances and the behaviour of those in power , but which most people , including me , believed would not be fulfilled in their lifetimes .
Freedom had no voice .
It was a time of oppressive silence and paralysis .
However , all of this changed in October 1978 with the election of a Polish cardinal as Pope .
His faith and his words alone unsettled the intolerant regimes .
Firstly , the Polish people and then the whole world realised that this man said what he believed and believed what he said .
John Paul II was the first conspicuous sign of the winds of change which would blow across Europe from then on and which , in 1989 , would become a storm of upheaval .
( Loud applause )
The strikes in Danzig in 1980 and the founding of the first free trade union in the Eastern bloc made it clear that a process had been started that could no longer be stopped .
The decisive factor in all of this is that none of the peoples were fighting just for themselves .
Anyone who called communism into question was doing so on behalf of everyone .
Perhaps that is an ironic result of internationalism .
Tadeusz Mazowiecki and Lech Wałęsa not only changed their own world , but also ours .
We Germans have a great deal to thank the Polish people for .
( Loud applause )
Today , we should also remember the names of other figures who were representative of many people .
I will only mention Andrei Sakharov and Václav Havel , who had already pulled stones out of the wall in Berlin long before it actually fell in 1989 .
( Applause )
I would also like once again to emphasise our respect and gratitude towards Hungary which was the first country to be brave enough to open its borders .
( Applause )
It was a time when people acted on behalf of one another , because of their longing for freedom .
This upheaval was a genuine joint effort and its most important result should and must be a lasting European community .
Therefore , we should see these experiences as a challenge to search in Europe from now on for the things which unite us .
( Applause )
I will not forget how John Paul II in his speech at the Brandenburg Gate in 1996 said , looking back , that people had been separated from one another by walls and lethal borders .
In this situation , the Brandenburg Gate in November 1989 bore witness to the fact that people were shaking off and destroying the yoke of oppression .
The closed Brandenburg Gate stood as a symbol of separation .
When it was finally opened , it became a symbol of unity and a sign of the fact that the call in the German constitution for the completion of the unity of Germany had been achieved in freedom .
Now , people could rightly say that the Brandenburg Gate had become the gate of freedom .
I would like to add to what he said , if I may do so as a Protestant from Brandenburg and a descendant of the Huguenots , that with the fall of the Berlin Wall , the Brandenburg Gate has become a symbol of European unity .
We Germans would not be doing justice to our national unity if we did not see it as a contribution to the unity of Europe , following the historical events which I have outlined here .
( Applause )
The first and the only free elections to the East German Volkskammer on 18 March 1990 resulted in a parliament which represented a true cross-section of the population and expressed the vitality and persuasive power of democracy as a form of government .
A total of 93.4 % of the electorate turned out to vote in the elections .
I believe that this is a record which will not be matched in the near future .
No one was left untouched by these elections .
History will see them as astonishing proof of the fact that we East Germans , after liberating ourselves in the autumn of 1989 , succeeded in introducing democracy to our country in the spring of 1990 .
The people of the GDR acted confidently and responsibly and did justice to their newly acquired freedom .
Democracy and freedom are not simply abstract concepts .
They permeate and define all aspects of our lives .
On the 20th anniversary of these elections to the Volkskammer , I said in the Reichstag , and I would like to reinforce this once again here , how important it was that the Volkskammer immediately made it clear to all our neighbours that the changes in the GDR and the reunification of Germany were not a cause for concern .
The parliament immediately , and of its own free will , admitted responsibility for the whole of German history .
It bowed its head before the victims and guaranteed our Polish neighbours secure borders .
It also asked for forgiveness for the GDR 's involvement in crushing the Prague Spring .
It did all of this before choosing a new government , because the new era after the end of the Cold War was to be a time of reconciliation , peace and community .
This admission of responsibility alone represented the beginning of the work of the only freely elected East German Parliament .
Everything that followed was linked to this admission and was the consequence of it , so to speak .
This admission remains valid even now that the GDR has come to an end and it represents an obligation to search in everything we do for those things which unite us in Europe .
The East German Parliament gave me the responsibility of putting in place the process which would bring about the unity of the two states .
I would like to emphasise that all of us at that time were only able to achieve those things that had long since become clear as a result of the people 's enthusiasm for unity .
The elections on 18 March 1990 were also a plebiscite on the German question .
However , we still had to devote ourselves to drawing up treaties and putting in place regulations covering an almost endless number of problems .
All areas of society were subjected to fundamental change .
The German states were reintroduced , the separation of powers was re-established , the state under the rule of law was restored and education , the police and the administrative bodies were all democratised .
One decisive factor was the reintroduction of local self-government which went back to Stein and Hardenberg 's reform of Prussia and which allowed the people to take part in free local elections on 6 May 1990 .
We also drew up the major national treaties on the economic , currency and social union , the treaty of unification and , finally , the 2 + 4 treaty with the Allied powers - I am very pleased to see Roland Dumas here - which we signed in Moscow on 12 December .
( Applause )
In those six months , we achieved a huge amount and we are justified in referring to this as the most hardworking parliament in our history .
I remain grateful to this day for the fact that all our partners were highly committed comrades-in-arms .
There are so many names which I could refer to at this point , but I would just like to mention Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev and George Bush senior .
The speech about a common European house was one of the main starting points for Gorbachev 's policy of glasnost and perestroika .
It finally opened a door to unity for the Germans .
For this reason , we should never forget that Russia is an important part of this European house and that our partnership with Russia is essential to our survival .
( Applause )
On the basis of the Atlantic Alliance , George Bush provided special protection for our right to self-determination .
I would also like to mention the name of Jacques Delors , who achieved a great deal as President of the European Commission and who provided us with indispensable help in the process of bringing about German unity .
He was a true friend to the people of Germany .
Many thanks !
( Applause )
I remain certain that the reunification of Germany would not have received such broad acceptance and cooperation if it had not been supported in the old Federal Republic by Helmut Kohl , who is undisputedly a very great European .
( Applause )
Two important things came together here .
In an unrivalled act of self-liberation by peaceful means , the East Germans overthrew an oppressive regime and brought down the wall .
Through democratic elections , they succeeded in bringing about fundamental change .
With heads held high , the East Germans said ' We are the people ' and then , a few weeks later , ' We are one people ' .
Those who achieved so much in such a short time should be full of self-confidence and pride .
They have every reason to believe that they can withstand what we are now referring to as a crisis and that they will emerge stronger from every crisis .
We have experience of transformation .
( Applause )
On the other hand , we have also realised that we are part of this great community of European peoples and part of the Atlantic Alliance .
Other states and peoples have also defended our freedom and have done everything in their power to help us to achieve unity .
Therefore , it is important for us to remind ourselves and future generations that we Germans were ourselves responsible for the defeat and division of our country .
We have our friends , neighbours and partners to thank for our unity and freedom .
( Applause )
However , reunification did not just create the Germany that we know today .
It also , of course , brought about fundamental changes in the old Federal Republic and throughout Europe .
This process of change is continuing undiminished .
Our people and our country were able to stop running round in circles over the German question .
Instead , they could seriously dedicate their efforts to achieving the other great objective which is embodied in the German constitution and that is , promoting peace throughout the world by acting as an equal member of a united Europe .
Now we want to be , and we are in a position to be , the driving force behind European unity and a guarantor of peace in the world , because we have achieved our unity peacefully , in cooperation with our neighbours , and we largely owe it to those neighbours .
However , above all , we see this task as a valuable service provided by our country .
This will allow us to put something into practice externally which internally represents the decisive content of democracy .
Democracy is much less a type of state and much more a genuine service offered by everyone to the community and for the common good .
More than any other type of regime , democracy calls for everyone to take action and to become involved .
The same applies to the social market economy , which is more than just an economic system .
It requires and encourages a sense of responsibility among all citizens .
It puts the common good before self-interest and it uses property in the service of the community , without which it cannot be guaranteed .
In one way or another , we must keep saying to ourselves that the important issue is to replace division with participation in our country and in Europe .
However , participation does not mean that everyone is given something .
Instead it means that everyone can contribute something and needs to participate .
I am increasingly concerned about the growing contempt for the rights which form the foundation for our freedom .
The authenticity and the power of democracy come solely from the attitude of the citizens .
This concept of citizenship is what allows us to live together as a community and encourages us always to search for those things which unite us .
We are part of a community of peoples who guarantee the rights of citizens , strive for peace and prosperity and want to live in peace .
In my opinion , the continent on which we live will have a positive future if it can find the centre point of these values of justice , democracy , peace and freedom and if it can find the unity which we lost after the Second World War .
We spoke about the Western alliance , the Eastern bloc and the East-West conflict ; we had East and West Berlin ; our world was divided into East and West , but it no longer had a centre .
An honest search for the things which unite us is also a search for our centre .
Sometimes , it almost makes me feel irritated that all the things which we went without in East Germany and which we longed for over many years are now taken for granted and go almost unnoticed .
I am thinking of freedom of travel , of speech , of trade , of the press and of religion .
I am thinking of the right to free and fair elections with a secret ballot and the right to codetermination .
People nowadays take all of this so much for granted that they hardly notice it any more .
There is always a risk that no attention will be paid to these things and that they will not be valued .
Sometimes I feel disturbed when I remember how often people tend to gamble away what they have achieved , because they take it for granted and no longer appreciate it .
They also make too little effort to expand their achievements .
( Applause )
We are often faced with difficult tasks .
Now that we have enlarged the European Union , we also need to give it more depth .
However , these tasks are still much more appealing than a relapse into conflict .
It is so much better to work together to overcome crises and resolve problems than to face them alone .
( Applause )
The greatest disaster for the peoples of Europe would be a return to a lack of unity .
For this reason , and in particular on a day like today , let us search for all the things that unite us .
The rights and the freedoms which I have referred to form the heart and the centre of our society and of the European Union and our community of values .
These are the things which unite us .
From this centre comes the decisive and perhaps the only important duty which is imposed on us as citizens of Europe .
We should be prepared to defend these rights and freedoms .
The defence of freedom lies at the heart of Europe .
( Applause )
We have learned that freedom is indivisible .
It is not possible for one part of a people to be free while the other part lives under an oppressive system , as was the case for us in Germany .
The fall of the Berlin Wall and of the Iron Curtain in Europe has not only freed the East Germans and almost all the people of Eastern and Central Europe .
It has also made the freedom of the whole of Europe complete .
For this reason , the peoples of Europe can only find the things that are their own in the truest sense of the word within the community .
We must preserve freedom within our community in order to ensure ourselves a positive future .
The last century , with its climaxes and terrible low points , has taught us one thing .
History is not a mysterious destiny that is visited on peoples .
History is simply the things which people do .
However , it is more difficult to influence people 's actions by calling on them to change than it is by setting them a good example .
Those things which apply to individuals also apply to members of parliament , governments and entire peoples .
We cannot demand that our citizens take a freedom-loving , democratic approach to life .
We have to set them an example .
Therefore , I am asking you for just one thing today and I am making an urgent call to the peoples of Europe : Let us search for , promote and defend the things which unite us in everything we do .
I am grateful that I was permitted to take on responsibility and that as a citizen I am , of course , still responsible for Brandenburg , which is my home , for a united Germany , the fatherland that I love , and for Europe , whose unity will determine our fate and our future .
Thank you very much .
( Loud , sustained applause )
As you have shown , Mr de Maizière , our reunification - the reunification of Germany - started even earlier because we changed our attitude , our approach to our common European history and our common European future .
But the most exciting moment was , of course , on 3 October 1990 .
You will have realised that I did not welcome to the European Parliament former President of the European Parliament , Hans-Gert Pöttering , because Hans-Gert , you are one of us .
You sit here every day and work with us , but we are very glad that we are sitting in your honourable place among us .
Now we have our second honoured speaker , Jacques Delors .
First , he was appointed as an advisor to the Prime Minister of France , Jacques Chaban-Delmas .
Later , for two and a half years , he was a Member of the European Parliament .
Probably not all of us remember that .
Later , he was also a Minister of Economy and Finance .
He had two terms in office as President of the European Commission .
He led the single market project and was a key player in the preparation and implementation of the Maastricht Treaty , which was very important for the whole European Union .
He was the founder and the President of the think tank Notre Europe , and some other initiatives .
( Applause )


former President of the European Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr de Maizière , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , Excellencies , Members of the European Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , barely a year elapsed between the fall of the Berlin Wall and the reunification of Germany .

During the whole of 1989 , the peoples of Europe expressed themselves : in Poland , the events that had begun with the Gdańsk strikes in the summer of 1980 led to the Belvedere Agreements between February and April 1989 , followed by the first free elections on 4 June 1989 ; in Czechoslovakia , the people commemorated Jan Palach 's sacrifice by fire ; in Hungary , they marked the solemn funeral of Imre Nagy , at last rehabilitated ; in Bulgaria , President Zhivkov was forced to stand down ; and , of course , in East Germany , increasing numbers of people took part in peaceful demonstrations .

The people 's demands were gaining strength and , on 2 May 1989 , the opening of the border between Hungary and Austria enabled some East Germans to cross over to the West .
We therefore witnessed a moment in time when history accelerated , and we must admit that it took us all by surprise .
Some of us knew intuitively that there were growing imbalances in the communist countries , but no one could have known that the lid would blow off so fast .
1989 was a year of profound change in many parts of the world , with , as I recall , the fall of the Pinochet dictatorship in Chile and the Tiananmen uprising in China .
To come back to Europe , the events of 1989 could , at any moment , have triggered brutal repression or resulted in bloody conflict , leading to a period of prolonged instability and threats to peace .
This did not happen .
This is the second lesson , after the one learned from the popular uprising .
We , who have lived through these events , must bear witness to them .
Indeed , new generations must be taught about the events of that period , since they did not experience them first-hand .
Today , they live in prosperity and peace , while seeing the tensions and revolts that are shaking the world from afar .
Therefore , the only images of violence and hatred they see are through the prism of the media .
Yet they must store in their memories the all-important fact that it was thanks to the wisdom of a number of world leaders in the years 1989 and 1990 that Europeans were able to live through a transition that was admittedly emotional , but free of any significant bloodshed and dangerous contamination .
( Applause )
I will not name all those leaders - Mr de Maizière has already done so - whose calm under pressure and whose wisdom I have just lauded , for fear of forgetting someone , offending sensibilities , or being misunderstood .
Some of them , I should add , have unfortunately suffered the ingratitude of their peoples and their successors .
History , I am sure , will correct these errors and omissions and will shine the light of truth on these events .
However , let us return for a moment to the shock of the fall of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989 .
Even before politicians and diplomats had time to catch their breath , the European Community had to respond , if only in terms of the provisions of the Treaty of Rome to which Mr de Maizière has referred .
On 11 November , having convened an urgent meeting of the members of the European Commission , I was interviewed on German television and I asserted that the East Germans were free to choose , and that there was a place for them in the European Community .
I added , and I quote : ' We are a great community within which we shall together build our destiny to better harness history in the interest of all . '
At the time , it was not possible to say more .
It was my duty to send a message of welcome and hope to our East German friends .
At the same time , I tried to allay the fears and anxieties felt by many people .
From that moment on , many meetings were held between leaders across the world , between the United States and the Soviet Union , between the latter and the Europeans , and between East and West Germany and the four allied powers of World War Two , the ' Two-plus-Four ' Process .
Meanwhile , progress was being made in the negotiations between the Federal Republic of Germany and representatives of the German Democratic Republic , and primarily between Mr de Maizière and Chancellor Kohl .
This raised many questions , it should be said , within the European Community in light of this radically shifting political landscape .
However , the European Community could ultimately only approve and support reunification of the two Germanies , which it did at the European Council meeting held on 24 April 1990 in Dublin .
In acting in this way , and in taking note of the assurances given with regard to the lasting and fair nature of the arrangements made in the ' Two-plus-Four ' Process , the Community remained true to the values for which it stands : peace , mutual understanding between peoples , and solidarity , especially with all Germans in the East and in the West .
Moreover , I cannot help but think that throughout the dark years , the Community 's very existence , and not just its material prosperity , always stood as a reference point and a beacon for the peoples living under the communist yoke .
Indeed , let me just remind you : the Community was moving in concert with these events .
As early as July 1989 - as Mr Dumas will remember , as he was one of the people involved - even before the fall of the Wall , the Commission had persuaded the G7 to adopt a plan to help the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The spirit of openness and a favourable predisposition towards enlargement had already been formally confirmed .
Nevertheless , after the fall of the Wall , the German question , it has to be said , was a major concern .
What path would reunited Germany choose ?
On 19 November 1989 , on the initiative of Mr Mitterrand , an extraordinary European Council met to pave the way for regular consultations between the two Germanies and their partners .
A long presentation by Chancellor Kohl summed up the situation which , of course , was still necessarily in flux .
History had begun on its accelerated course .
The European Parliament was also very active and attentive during this time .
Its debates reflected the questions being asked about the future of Germany and the risk , feared by many MEPs , of a slowdown in the European integration process , after the boost given by the Single European Act of 1987 .
On 28 November 1989 , Parliament adopted a very important resolution affirming , and I quote : ' All European peoples , including the Polish people , have , in accordance with the Helsinki Final Act , the right to live within secure borders as currently defined . '
In this way , the European Parliament referred to one of the most difficult debates , which was resolved by maintaining the Oder-Neisse border .
On 17 January 1990 , I stood before the European Parliament as President of the European Commission and stated that , and I quote : ' East Germany is a separate case .
It belongs within the Community , if that is what it wants . '
This prospect led your Parliament to set up a temporary commission to study the impact of the German reunification process on the European Community .
That commission , which was composed , I must stress , of highly experienced individuals including several ministers for foreign affairs , effectively dispelled doubts about the integration of the East German Länder , and paved the way for it .
This is a useful reminder for sceptics of all persuasions that , thanks to the European Parliament , the concept of a pluralist and living democracy is not a vain hope but a reality .
The commission demonstrated it on that occasion .
( Applause )
All things considered , we should not underestimate the achievements and influence of European integration , regardless of the obstacles standing in its way .
Of course , I will not attempt to single out the most important facts and ideas that were able to influence this great liberation movement .
Undoubtedly what comes first is the people 's ability to stand up to oppression , to express their thirst for freedom , and to quietly display their courage .
However , it would be remiss of me not to recall the appeals made by John Paul II , and particularly his call made to the Polish people at a critical juncture : ' Have no fear ! '
Nor can I forget West Germany 's firm but open and generous policy towards the GDR during the years leading up to the fall of the Wall .
Freedom triumphed , but with freedom come obligations .
The treaty on the reunification of Germany presented two challenges .
The first was for the people of West and East Germany to understand each other .
This was met with great presence of mind , understanding and generosity .
The second was economic and social , and equally difficult to meet .
It required a tremendous effort in the form of massive annual transfers , from the West to the East , of resources amounting to 4-5 % of West Germany 's national product , or , ladies and gentlemen , EUR 1 400 billion over 20 years .
This is without mentioning the other contributions in the form of technical assistance , which was required to restructure the East German economy .
A single figure illustrates the scale of this achievement : over a twenty-year period , per capita income in the GDR went from 40 % to 73 % of the West Germans ' income .
The effort will continue over the years to come thanks to the ongoing payment of the solidarity tax - if I am not mistaken , it will continue until 2019 .
The Germans themselves agree to this .
Work still needs to be done to change mindsets as much as economic and social structures .
For its part , the European Community contributed by extending economic and social cohesion policy , which MEPs know well , to the Eastern Länder .
While the sums pledged were not on a par with the efforts made by the Germans , the European contributions clearly indicated East Germany 's status as a fully fledged participant in the European adventure , the increased human and technical exchanges and the regular dialogue between the European Commission and the leaders of the new Länder .
It had been my wish for the Community to do more , but the German leadership , worried about how its partners would react , asked me not to take the Structural Fund effort any further .
Ladies and gentlemen , 20 years later , at a time when , the financial crisis aside , many people are questioning European integration , the 27 Member States are faced with an historic responsibility : to deepen European integration , or to live day to day as a result of compromises that may well be necessary but that do not bode well for the future .
( Applause )
Today , as we joyfully celebrate German reunification , how can we fail to ask Germany what future it sees for Europe ?
Reunified Germany is the economic powerhouse of the 27 countries that make up the Union .
To cite just one figure , Germany produces 25 % of the total GDP of the Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) .
I refer to the EMU because , whether we like it or not , it is the strongest link between the European nations that share the same currency , with the rights , but also the obligations , that this entails .
Many people in Europe perhaps tend to forget this .
( Applause )
In geopolitical terms , Germany is today poised between the European Union and the rest of the large European continent .
This is a strong and , in many ways , attractive position , which raises many questions both within and outside of Germany .
The Germans themselves agree with this view , as the White Paper on security in Germany clearly shows .
I quote : ' An important role in the future shaping of Europe , and beyond , falls to united Germany because of its size , population figures , economic power and geographical location at the heart of the continent . '
We are therefore no longer in the pre-1989 period , when Germany showed restraint and tact , for reasons that everybody could understand and even be thankful for .
This very restraint caused successive German governments to take the lead in European integration , especially when it came to abandoning the mighty Deutschmark - and I say the mighty Deutschmark because it is 10 Marks and is the symbol of Germany 's rebirth - in exchange for the euro , for the single currency .
These remarks , far from being nostalgic , are an appeal by one of Europe 's activists , and are directed not only at Germany , whose reunification we are celebrating , but at all the Member States .
Are the values handed down to us by the founding fathers of Europe still meaningful ?
Do they still prevail ?
The legacy we have been given has more to do with why we want to live alongside one another than with the treaties , which are merely necessary institutional agreements .
However , I would not wish to end on this slightly pessimistic note , with this question mark hanging over matters .
No , emphatically not .
What I retain in my memory and in my heart is that night of 3 October , when the President of the European Parliament , Mr Barón Crespo , and I had the pleasure and honour of being invited to that memorable evening gathering in the former Reichstag .
The leaders of West and East Germany enthusiastically came together in an atmosphere marked by solemnity and joy .
All Europeans would have shared that deep emotion .
After the ceremony I wanted to experience what a nation was feeling by going out on to the streets of Berlin .
There , too , I saw only solemnity and joy ; there was no fanfare or ostentatious demonstrations .
It was a quiet night that everyone was savouring by reflecting on the separations of the past , on the anguish of families torn apart by an arbitrary act of history ; a quiet night during which I thought of our Europe , freed from hatred and conflict , a Europe that I wanted to be at the same time united , strong and generous .
You will surely agree that so much remains to be done to consolidate our achievements and progress into the future .
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
We remember , Mr Delors , your speech at the College of Europe in Bruges at the beginning of 1990 .
It was about German reunification , and German reunification , in your words , was the best way for better coordination in Europe and a better future for Europe .
It was a great and visionary speech .
Thank you very much for your speech today as well .
Let me thank our honourable guests from Spain , from France , from Germany , and the presidents of our institutions , the Commission and the Council , for being together with us .
We will now hear the European anthem .
1 .
Conference on Biological Diversity - Nagoya 2010 ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( FR ) Mr President , I will be very brief .
I should like to express through this short point of order both my admiration for the great musician Beethoven and my disapproval of the fact that we are regularly subjected to a European anthem which has disappeared into ...
( Protests )
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , I am outraged by those statements .
( Applause )
Out of respect for freedom , peace and for what our citizens suffered , I simply request , if these gentlemen wish to be respectable and respected by myself , that they no longer accept the salary of an MEP , paid for by Europe .
( Applause )
Mr Gollnisch , I am a very nice and patient man .
You do not have the floor .
This is not a point of order .
If you continue shouting , you will be taken out of this room politely .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to ask you to consider that the exact and original wording of paragraph 35 of the resolution , which is put to the vote and which stresses that corporate social responsibility should include biodiversity , is the French version , and that that should be the version used .
Moreover , the word ' social ' , which has disappeared from the English version , should be reinserted and the version corrected .
( FR ) Mr President , you invited us to vote for the original text of paragraph 16 .
However , there was a separate vote beforehand , and paragraph 16 was amended .
There were two separate votes .
Therefore , we voted for the original text but not for the amendment .
Mr President , before we take the final vote - and although I am very happy with the fact that we adopted Amendment 1 - I think that Ms Bélier of the Greens is right .
In fact , you called out to vote on the original paragraph .
On the screens , we then saw that we voted on Amendment 1 .
To be fair to the Greens , I think we should take the vote on Amendment 1 again .
If Amendment 1 is adopted , the original paragraph falls .
It may have been because I speak Greek , which is not a particularly well-known language , and I speak it fast in order to help everyone here .
I believe - I may be wrong - that I first put Amendment 1 to the vote by roll-call vote and that I then put to the vote ...
( Objections )
OK , I will trust the House .
My guess is , if my recollection is correct , that Amendment 1 will be rejected and then the original text will be adopted , but I will do it .
I will go back to Amendment 1 by roll-call vote .
The vote is open .
( Amendment 1 was adopted by roll-call vote )
2 .
Basel II and revision of the Capital Requirements Directive ( CRD 4 ) (
3 .
Health care systems in Sub-Saharan Africa and Global Health (
4 .
EU cohesion and regional policy after 2013 ( vote )
5 .
Future of the European Social Fund (
( HU ) We would like to make the addition ' but with its own rules ' to proposed Amendment 1 , which was submitted by 40 members .
I have agreed on the oral amendment with the others , including the Members submitting the proposed amendment .
Voting time ( continuation )
We shall continue with the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes ) .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( NL ) Mr President , my fellow member , Mrs Mathieu , suggested in her report that , for the time being , we refuse to grant discharge to the European Police College in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2008 .
Naturally , my group , the delegation of the Dutch Freedom Party ( PVV ) , thought that that approach was quite right .
To be precise , the dossier on the Police College reads from beginning to end like a Hercule Poirot whodunit .
Poor management , an accounting system vulnerable to fraud , many financial irregularities and , in particular , ' creative ' budgetary spending , unauthorised use of funds , and the list goes on .
In fact , the situation was so bad that , in the end , OLAF , the European Anti-Fraud Office , was forced to step in .
It is a positive thing that an investigation is under way and that action is being taken against fraud .
However , would it not have been better if we had prevented the fraud right from the start ?
How could this have been allowed to happen ?
Why were the controls in place so obviously inadequate ?
Again , we have a situation where our citizens can only look on and shake their heads .
On behalf of Dutch citizens , we explicitly request that you put an end to this entire European police puppet show as soon as possible and simply leave real police work to the Hercule Poirots of individual Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this initiative in order to condemn the mass human rights violations and the use of rape as a weapon of war against women , boys , girls and babies ; in order to ask for those implicated to be held responsible ; in order to demand more commitment from the United Nations following the failure of the actions of the United Nations Organisation Stabilisation Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ; in order to demand a political solution to the armed conflict , which needs to happen by resuming the dialogue on the peace process ; and in order to demand greater commitment from the Great Lakes region to promoting peace and stability in the region .
Mr President , I was pleased to vote in favour of this proposal .
At the last plenary session , we voted to ask the Iranian Government to suspend the execution by stoning of Sakineh Mohammadi-Ashtiani .
That was done pending a review , but that review is most bizarre .
She has now allegedly been found guilty of murder , despite the fact that another man had already been found guilty of that murder .
He has now been released on the basis that Ashtiani 's children forgave her father 's killer .
This murder allegation is based on court documents which do not stand up .
We need to use our influence to bring more pressure to bear on the Iranian Government to suspend the execution permanently , and maybe to grant her the asylum in Brazil offered by the Brazilian President .
( SV ) Mr President , according to UN reports , at least 8 300 rapes were committed as a weapon of war in eastern Congo in 2009 .
During the first quarter of 2010 , 1 244 women were raped .
There are an average of 14 rapes per day that we know about , because over and above these figures , the numbers of unreported cases are huge .
The fact that this has continued without strong condemnation from the international community is appalling , and Europe , too , has a particular responsibility when it comes to Congo .
Sexual and gender-based violence must always be seen as a war crime and a crime against humanity .
It is scandalous that the international community has turned a blind eye for so long to the attacks that the women and children of Congo are being subjected to .
I am therefore very pleased to see the commitment shown by the UN Special Representative , Margot Wallström .
Her work will help to direct the world 's gaze towards Congo and its leadership .
It is now high time that we all opened our eyes .
This is why I wholeheartedly support this resolution that has today been voted through by this House .
Let us never turn our backs on Africa 's women and children again .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this undoubtedly important resolution because it raises the level of protection and guarantees with regard to future drilling in all seas , but especially in fragile seas and in those that have specific features that must be duly taken into account .
Equally important is the attempt to draw attention to the responsibility and financial liability of operators who perform this profitable activity , which requires necessary precautions in order to prevent what has happened elsewhere , such as in the Gulf of Mexico , from happening in our own seas .
Clearly , environmental protection does not mean denying the right to take entrepreneurial initiatives , but it does require a precautionary approach - as Commissioner Oettinger referred to it - in cooperation with other third countries to ensure the safety of our seas .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that oil exploration in Europe is an extremely important issue .
For this reason , I submitted a written question on this subject in July .
The serious incident that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico in April is a warning bell that we cannot afford to underestimate .
In fact , there is a risk of similar episodes occurring in Europe , too .
On 21 May , a platform in the North Sea , from which 200 million tonnes of petroleum are extracted each year , was evacuated because of a serious accident risk .
We must never forget , ladies and gentlemen , that if a disaster of this kind were to occur in a closed sea such as the Mediterranean , its inestimable wealth of biodiversity would be compromised to an unimaginable extent , as Mr Iacolino just highlighted .
According to European Commission data , the oil platforms in our seas produced around 200 million tonnes of petroleum in 2008 .
These figures are still too high for an economy that must necessarily free itself of fossil fuels .
The Danish Government 's pledge to achieve complete independence from these types of energy resources by 2050 has been in the news recently .
That decision will entail many difficult decisions , but it must serve as an important benchmark for all of the European Union 's future environmental policies .
Mr President , I would like especially to stress my support for Amendment 11 , which demands that , in the Commission 's future strategies , measures should be included that officially recognise the rights of native peoples to manage the natural resources of their territories and to benefit from their use .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted against this report and I am prepared to explain the reasons why .
The initiative undoubtedly has its merits , because it pays a great deal of attention to a world , the sub-Saharan world in particular , in which the right to health care is still not confirmed as it ought to be .
However , compared to more important topics , which , in my opinion , include the protection of mothers and children , or rather the protection of pregnant mothers and their unborn children , particular emphasis was placed on reproductive health aspects , on which we expressed some concerns .
However , I am convinced that , in future activities carried out by Parliament , we can increase the attention paid to those communities in which the infant mortality rate - I repeat - is still particularly high and can no longer be tolerated .
( SK ) I was unable to vote for the Mrs De Keyser 's report for the simple reason that I do not understand what the European policy on planned sexual and reproductive health means .
I would like to mention something of which I have personal knowledge .
An important professor , a gynaecologist , abandoned his university career and made a financial and professional investment in improving health in Sub-Saharan Africa .
He built clinics , in which he operated on women suffering from fistulas following difficult births .
After several years , when he had already helped many women , he asked for funding from the European Union in order to expand his work .
The response was negative and the reasoning absurd .
He had apparently failed to fulfil the requirement to support sexual and reproductive health in his projects .
I do not know what could support the sexual and reproductive health of women more than curing fistulas in the area of the genital and excretory organs .
I therefore logically assume that , according to the European institutions , sexual and reproductive health is simply an abortion and anti-conception policy .
These are the reasons why I was unable to vote for the report .
( CS ) I voted in favour of the resolution on the future of the cohesion policy .
I want to stress that we have been working intensively on this topic , even though the official programme documents are not yet available .
In this way , we are showing our determination to be a key , indispensable player in decision making on new rules for structural funds in the period after 2013 .
However , I do not support the idea that it is necessary for the European Social Fund to have its own rules .
I see in that the danger of creating an opportunity to remove the social fund from the cohesion policy in order to bring it closer to the richer countries and , conversely , to distance it from the reach of poorer ones .
I would not like to see such a development , and no one who depends on a strong and effective cohesion policy could wish for it .
I agree with the European Social Fund having its own rules to the extent that they apply to tasks and the thematic definition of its activities .
On the other hand , rules in the areas of geographic eligibility , aims , guidance , monitoring and concrete mechanisms should remain common .
Mr President , having voted for this resolution , I would like to make three comments .
First , it will be crucial to link and accommodate future cohesion policy to the EU 2020 strategy , because only this link can provide sustainable economic growth and the creation of new jobs .
We also need to strengthen the role of social measures within the cohesion policy in order to address the changing democratic situation .
Second , we badly need a radical simplification of the rules of financing in order to make EU funds better available at local and NGO level .
Often , we face excessive bureaucratic accountability that takes more time and energy than goes to the working-out of the projects .
Third , when preparing the framework of the next financial period , it will be important to engage , in time and on an equal level , representatives of the regions and the business sector .
Written explanations of vote
The draft regulation , which is intended to ensure that third-country nationals are subject to the same rules for coordinating social security entitlements as EU nationals under the revised rules now represented in Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 and its implementing regulation , provides an opportunity for the European Union to guarantee a decent standard of social protection for all citizens .
We must reaffirm the importance of ensuring that all European and third-country nationals receive equal treatment in relation to social security provision , because this principle is contained in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and is an instrument that helps complete the process of simplifying the current rules .
Sharing , maintaining and furthering the values on which the EU is based , such as respect for human rights , must necessarily be accompanied by shared rules that are applied in exactly the same way without conditions or limitations of any kind .
Therefore , I proudly and resolutely support the Italian position , which entails approving the regulation , because it will enable us to achieve a single system for the implementation of Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 , and I hope that all of the other Member States will also revise their positions and transpose the new rules into their national legislation without delay .
I voted for this recommendation submitted by the European Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs because , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the changes to the legal foundations , the European Union is again obliged to review the rules applicable to the citizens of third countries .
This recommendation by Parliament applies to the draft regulation , which is intended to ensure that third-country nationals who are legally resident within the EU and are in a cross-border situation are subject to the same rules for coordinating social security entitlements .
This recommendation by Parliament proposes to approve the regulation offered by the Council and not to delay any further because the new regulation would simplify the administration of procedures and would guarantee the equal treatment of legally resident third-country nationals in the field of social security .
Moreover , in terms of combating illegal immigration in Europe , this regulation clarifies the rights of Member States with regard to their powers concerning the decision for an individual to be legally resident on their territory .
Nationals of third countries legally residing in a Union country whose lives involve a relationship with the legal system of another Member State often find themselves in situations where they are unprotected or enjoy conflicting rights .
There is an urgent need to prevent such situations .
For these people to be treated fairly , they should be given rights and duties that are , as far as is reasonable , equivalent to those of the citizens of EU countries .
This equivalence can be amply justified and coordination between legal systems can be seen as a matter of justice , not least where social benefits are concerned .
The aim of the resolution is to ensure that nationals of third countries who are legally resident in the territory of a Member State , and who are in a cross-border situation concerning at least two Member States , are subject to the same rules for coordinating social security entitlements as EU nationals under the revised rules now represented in Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 and its implementing regulation ( Regulation ( EC ) No 987 / 2009 ) .

When the Commission proposal was first introduced , the European Parliament was consulted and agreed two amendments , replacing references to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and also pointing to a high standard of social protection as an objective of the European Union , present in the existing Regulation ( EC ) No 859 / 2003 .
I voted for this resolution so as to ensure the adoption of the new regulation to guarantee equal treatment as regards social security for legally resident nationals of third countries .
in writing . - ( FR ) As Jean Lambert 's report advocated , to my mind , it is essential that non-EU nationals and their families who are legally resident within the European Union have the same rights and benefits as European citizens concerning access to social security .
With this vote , the European Parliament puts an end to unacceptable situations of discrimination .
Nonetheless , I am disappointed that certain countries such as Denmark and the United Kingdom are not taking part in these coordination schemes for non-EU nationals .
How can the European Union succeed in setting up simplified and harmonised procedures for non-EU nationals when some Member States prefer not to follow this common approach ?
There is , admittedly , a real risk of an ' à la carte Europe ' , yet faced with the reluctance of some , entrenched in their national identities , we must act .
in writing . - The draft regulation is intended to ensure that third-country nationals who are legally resident within the EU and are in a cross-border situation concerning at least two Member States are subject to the same rules for coordinating social security entitlements as EU nationals under the abovementioned regulations .
The adoption of this legislation constitutes a major step in ensuring equal treatment to third-country nationals across the territory of the EU .
These people are often the victims of great discrimination on our territory and pursuant to this legislation , third-country nationals will be able to move within the EU with the same guarantees when it comes to their social security entitlements as EU nationals .
Ladies and gentlemen , I was overjoyed at the positive result in today 's vote in Parliament on the liberalisation of the visa regime for Western Balkan countries .
After the scrapping of the visa requirement for the citizens of Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in December 2009 , corresponding decisions regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania have been eagerly awaited .
Opening the European Union to further Balkan nations will bring many positive results for all parties concerned .
Firstly , this is an unprecedented improvement for ordinary citizens who can now experience the European Union for themselves and can travel freely in all the Member States .
Secondly , this is another extremely significant step towards the aim of stabilising the situation in the region and creating a positive climate for further reforms and the future integration of all Balkan countries into the European Union .
However , we should also take the corresponding decisions on visa requirements for the citizens of Kosovo .
The inhabitants of this country should not remain the only totally isolated nation in the Balkans , and the privileges linked with free travel throughout Europe should also be extended to them .
I am extremely happy with the initiative taken by the European Parliament to abolish the visa regime for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
This is a further step towards the inclusion of the Balkan countries in Europe , and it has my strong support .
This text ensures the provision of social protection for non-EU nationals throughout the EU .
In that sense , it represents a step forward .
It is , however , regrettable that the situation of illegal immigrants is totally ignored .
People living illegally also have the right to be protected .
In Europe as elsewhere , it should be forbidden to declare that any human being , whoever they are , will not be protected .
No nationals of third countries living in EU territory who are legally resident should be subjected to discrimination of any kind .
They must also have , where necessary , access to social security without any conflicts between the various legal systems of the Member States .
That is why it is so important to adopt this directive .
in writing . - The draft regulation is intended to ensure that third-country nationals who are legally resident within the EU and are in a cross-border situation concerning at least two Member States are subject to the same rules for coordinating social security entitlements as EU nationals under the revised rules now represented in Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 and its implementing regulation ( Regulation ( EC ) No 987 / 2009 ) .
When the Commission proposal was first introduced , the European Parliament was consulted and agreed two amendments , replacing references to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and also pointing to a high standard of social protection as an objective of the European Union , present in the existing Regulation No 859 / 2003 .
Both these amendments have been incorporated into the position of the Council at first reading of 26 July 2010 as recitals 4 and 7 .
The Council is proposing a small number of amendments : it has included some recitals relating to the participation of certain Member States under the proposal 's legal basis of Article 79 ( 2 ) ( b ) .
( Recitals 17 , 18 , 19 . )
Regrettably , Denmark is not participating in the coordination arrangements for third-country nationals .
Ireland has opted to participate , but the UK has chosen not to participate and will therefore continue to operate the existing rules .
I support the nomination of Lazaros Stavrou Lazarou as a Member of the Court of Auditors .
His skills in the areas of public administration , the International Tax Programme and economics are outstanding , as is his vast experience in the supervision , monitoring and auditing of public accounts , and in combating fraud , both in his country and at European level .
From his hearing and from how he has performed his duties , I would stress his acknowledgement of and the value he attaches to the importance of implementing IT systems and automating services , as well as the decentralisation of procedures so as to make public information and institutions more efficient , transparent and reliable .
in writing . - Although the vote was secret , I have no problem in acknowledging that , as Lazaros Stavrou Lazarou fulfils the conditions laid down in Article 286 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU , we have delivered a favourable opinion on his nomination as a Member of the Court of Auditors .
The nomination of Gijs M. de Vries to the Court of Auditors will definitely represent an added value for the institution , not least at the level of guaranteeing institutional cooperation within the European Union and of evaluating the resources of the Member States ' supervision entities .
Of his experience with the Netherlands Court of Auditors , his national government and the European Parliament , I would stress his commitment to overseeing the legality of public procurement processes and his determination in combating fraud and corruption , as well as his guarantees of responsibility , independence and suitability in the decision-making processes of the Court of Auditors .
in writing . - Although the vote was secret , I have no problem in acknowledging that , as Gijs M. de Vries fulfils the conditions laid down in Article 286 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU , we have delivered a favourable opinion on his nomination as a Member of the Court of Auditors .
The Court of Auditors is an institution that inspects the European Union 's income and outgoings to verify their legality , as well as verifying good financial management .
It operates with complete independence .
Within this spirit , the nomination of the individuals of which it is made up must be governed by capability and independence criteria .
So , on the Council 's initiative , individuals from several EU countries have been put forward for the Court of Auditors .
They all submitted their curriculum vitae , responded to a written questionnaire and had hearings before the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The majority of them argued their cases well enough to justify their nomination to the Court of Auditors , where they will carry out their duties capably and independently .
I voted in favour of this report .
I too , like the rapporteur herself , believe that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund must support workers made redundant as a result of structural changes in global trade patterns .
The fact that the budget authority has already approved eight proposals for mobilising the fund in 2010 highlights the flexibility of the procedures , proving that we have successfully identified new resources and are allocating them rapidly enough to Member States .
I also welcome the fact that the Commission has identified an alternative source of payment appropriations to the unused allocations from the ESF .
I support this initiative to help people who have been made redundant by the 82 businesses in Galicia to re-enter the labour market .
This does not , under any circumstances , replace the responsibilities of the businesses under national legislation and collective agreements .
Given that Spain has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 703 redundancies in 82 enterprises operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 14 ( manufacture of wearing apparel ) in the NUTS II region of Galicia , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I agree that , in accordance with Article 6 of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) Regulation , it should be ensured that the EGF supports the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment .
I also reiterate that assistance from the EGF must not replace actions which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor measures restructuring companies or sectors .
A total of 702 redundancies at 82 textile firms justifies the Spanish authorities ' application to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The rising number of redundancies in the Galician textile and clothing industry is adding to the external perception that all its European counterparts are in a similar weak position ( not least in my country , where this sector has been particularly badly hit ) due to exposure to international competition , particularly from developing countries , where production costs are lower .
The international crisis that is now being felt has helped to exacerbate this state of affairs .
I hope that the workers who have been made redundant will soon be able to resume their working lives .
In the face of the impact of this global economic and financial crisis on the labour market , I would stress the importance of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) being properly implemented .
Unfortunately , very little use is made of the EGF : of the EUR 500 million in funding made available through it this year , only 11 % was requested to fund aid plans for workers who have been made redundant .
Given the high rate of unemployment , this situation is worrying and incomprehensible .
I would also stress the fact that , following successive warnings and reports , an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused ESF funds has been set up .
Given the effects of this crisis , which are especially being felt in the textiles sector , I would stress the importance of this plan of EUR 1 844 700 in support of the 703 workers made redundant from 82 companies in Galicia 's textiles sector .
In contrast to this initiative of the Spanish Government , I find it regrettable that the Portuguese Government has not intervened in this way in the districts of Braga and Viana do Castelo , which border Galicia and have high rates of unemployment because of successive companies going out of business .
Three more applications have been made to mobilise the Solidarity Fund , each corresponding to a factory closure in Europe , including that of a Galician textile factory , in Spain .
Altogether , several hundred more workers have been made redundant .
It is worth remembering once again that this sector is also enduring a serious crisis in Portugal , where it is suffering the effects of the liberalisation of world trade particularly intensely , while none of the actions needed to safeguard it have been taken .
These effects may now become even worse following the decision to intensify the liberalisation measures for Asian textiles .
This step was taken on the pretext of providing humanitarian aid to Pakistan , whereas in reality , it fulfils the desires of the major importers in the European Union .
Every new application to mobilise this fund increases the urgency of the measures that we have been advocating , which are aimed at combating unemployment effectively , boosting economic activity , eradicating jobs with no security , and reducing working hours without cutting pay .
These measures also involve fighting company relocations and , overall , require a complete break with the neoliberal policies that are visibly causing an economic and social disaster in the countries of the EU .
I voted for Mrs Matera 's report on mobilising the Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the workers of the clothing industry in Spain .
As I said in September during the debate on the EGF 's future after 2013 , I am disappointed that this fund , set up to support workers made redundant ' for reasons of recession or globalisation ' , is currently not financially guaranteed in the European budget .
Indeed , I do not believe that tapping into the financial resources of other European programmes to finance the EGF is a viable solution in the long run .
Therefore , when the Committee on Budgets voted for mobilising the EGF for the Spanish employees mentioned in the Matera report , I pointed out , along with the Belgian Socialist MEP Mr Daerden , the need to work towards defining a separate budget heading for this funding .
What is at stake here is the European Union 's credibility in supporting citizens affected by economic instability .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Spanish textile industry workers sacrificed in the name of sacrosanct globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could vote against the beggarly sum that the European elites are granting them .
However , the little which is being given may relieve their hardship .
This does not make the logic of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the relocation of textile production .
It sanctions the appetite for profit of socially irresponsible billionaires like Manuel Jove .
In the kingdom of the Eurocrats , the only price to be paid for a clear conscience is the community .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of relocations that occur in the context of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in various countries , particularly China and India , often to the detriment of countries that respect workers ' rights .
The aim of the EGF is to help workers who are victims of the relocation of companies , and it is fundamental in facilitating access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , so we should now grant this aid to the 703 workers made redundant from 82 clothing industry enterprises in the region of Galicia .
That is why I voted as I did .
I am delighted to see the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund being utilised in the affected regions mentioned previously and I totally agree with this .
I believe , namely , that the entire process , from drawing up applications through to processing and obtaining the final decision of the budget authority , has so far been rather cumbersome and complex , according to the experience of many countries .
For example , in 2009 , the contributions requested from the fund were , on average , around EUR 5 552 700 , and 30 of the applications submitted by 13 Member States related to 17 branches .
However , the budget authority last year approved 10 financial contributions from the EGF amounting , in total , to EUR 52 349 000 , which represents just 10.5 % of the maximum annual sum that can be used from this fund .
One of the reasons is principally a lack of experience with the processes of the fund and the long period of financial uncertainty when awaiting the decision of the budget authority .
I believe that the simplified procedures for assessments and decision making introduced at the end of 2009 will simplify and speed up the submission of applications for support from the fund and will accordingly bring effective assistance to employees who have lost jobs as a result of changes in the structure of world trade .
The same applies to this case as to the previous Danish case .
Employees who are being made redundant through no fault of their own , or because of the financial and economic crisis triggered by speculators in the USA and the United Kingdom , need rapid help .
Spain has already submitted an application for financial assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) on 5 February 2010 as a result of redundancies in 82 companies in NACE Revision 2 Division 14 ( manufacture of wearing apparel ) in a single NUTS II region , Galicia ( ES11 ) in Spain , and has supplemented this application with additional information by 11 May 2010 .
The application complies with the requirements for determining the financial contribution as laid down in Article 10 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 .
The Commission proposes to mobilise an amount of EUR 1 844 700 .
The EGF should , therefore , be mobilised in order to provide a financial contribution for the application submitted by Spain , which is why I have voted in favour of Mrs Matera 's report .
I voted in favour of this report and also the two following reports concerning the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I think that the European Union must support people who have become unemployed as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
Today 's reports have shown that help is needed both by countries in economic difficulties like Spain , and by one of Europe 's richest welfare countries , Denmark .
At the same time , I must unfortunately say with regret that , up to now , we have not had the opportunity to vote for a similar report affecting Estonia .
I hope that our government learns from the actions of other Member States and also participates in supporting our unemployed .
In February 2010 , Spain submitted a request for assistance to use the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in connection with the redundancies which were made in 82 firms from the Galicia region participating in the clothing sector .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on the mobilisation of the EGF for granting aid to those made redundant .
Trade deregulation in the textiles and clothing industry has brought about far-reaching changes in global trade patterns , with the upshot being a general trend to relocate production outside the EU to countries where production costs are lower , such as China and Morocco .
Furthermore , the economic crisis has also triggered a large number of bankruptcies in the textile industry , resulting in a huge wave of redundancies .
There were 32 700 redundancies in the Galicia region between 2007 and 2009 , including 4 414 in the textiles industry , with women accounting for 80 % of the redundancies .
I believe that the procedure for allocating these funds must be simplified to make the EGF easy to access for firms affected by the impact of the financial and economic crisis and by the changes in global trade patterns .
I must stress the important role played by the EGF in reintegrating redundant workers into the labour market .
Ladies and gentlemen , like Spain and Denmark , Lithuania is aware of the potential good that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) can do .
Lithuania received a total of EUR 2.9 million in aid from the EGF , which was earmarked for workers from the construction and household goods manufacturing sectors that were badly affected by the crisis .
However , the fund still has to prove its worth .
Set up as a rapid counter-measure , now the EGF has slowed and become complicated due to bureaucracy .
The main drawback is the necessary mobilisation of the fund .
On average it takes 294 days to approve applications .
As the Financial Times wrote this week , more than 37 000 workers throughout Europe are still waiting for aid from the fund .
To date , only EUR 140 million of the EGF 's total amount available ( EUR 2 billion ) has been paid out .
The fund 's money is also distributed unevenly .
Only 6 % of payments are granted to projects in countries where the gross domestic product is lower than the EU average .
The EGF must be more flexible if we want to avoid drowning in uncertainty .
Many Member States , including Lithuania , are suitable candidates for other funds , which require less cofinancing and bureaucracy .
Given that Denmark has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 1 443 redundancies in three companies of the Danfoss Group operating in the NACE Revision 2 Divisions 27 and 28 in the NUTS II region of Syddanmark , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I agree that the functioning and the added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework mid-term review
Additional support for redundant workers is also proving necessary in a country that few would imagine would be affected by such hardships , as it is generally regarded as being more able to compete in the global market than most other EU Member States .
Nonetheless , even Denmark is now feeling the effects of globalisation , which is affecting it in sectors that one might have thought would be more immune to competition , such as the manufacturing of electrical goods , machinery and equipment .
This worrying fact alerts us to the severity of the economic crisis in which we are immersed and to the need to find increasingly effective and creative ways of increasing Europe 's ability to compete while , at the same time , helping workers who have been made redundant return to work .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is one such mechanism .
in writing . - ( PT ) I would stress the potential contribution of this assistance plan financed by the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the reintegration of redundant workers and their social rehabilitation to a particularly tragic case like three companies of the Danfoss Group going out of business .
All of these companies were located in Syddanmark , Denmark , and all of them went bust over a three-month period in 2009 , affecting 1 443 workers in a sector - the manufacture of machines and electronic equipment - that has been particularly hard hit by this crisis .
I would stress again that , unfortunately , the EGF has been very sparingly utilised in the face of Europe 's high rates of unemployment .
Of the EUR 500 million in funding made available through the EGF this year , only 11 % was requested to fund aid plans for workers who have been made redundant as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I would , however , stress the fact that , following successive warnings and reports , an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused ESF funds has been set up .
I voted for Mrs Matera 's report on mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the workers of the Danfoss Group in Denmark .
As I said in September during the debate on the EGF 's future after 2013 , I am disappointed that this fund , set up to support workers made redundant ' for reasons of recession or globalisation ' , is currently not financially guaranteed in the European budget .
Indeed , I do not believe that tapping into the financial resources of other European programmes to finance the EGF is a viable solution in the long run .
Therefore , when the Committee on Budgets voted for mobilising the EGF for the Danish employees mentioned in the Matera report , I pointed out , along with the Belgian Socialist MEP Mr Daerden , the need to work towards defining a separate budget heading for this funding .
What is at stake here is the European Union 's credibility in supporting citizens affected by economic instability .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Danish workers ill-treated by globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could feel entitled to vote against the beggarly sum that the Eurocracy is reluctantly granting them .
However , the little which is being given may ease their hardship .
This does not make the logic of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less despicable .
It endorses the relocations that the Danfoss Group has gone ahead with in order to increase its profits .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of relocations that occur in the context of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in various countries , particularly China and India , often to the detriment of countries that respect workers ' rights .
The aim of the EGF is to help workers who are victims of the relocation of companies , and it is fundamental in facilitating access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , so we should now grant this aid to the 1 443 workers made redundant from three companies of the Danfoss Group operating in the NACE Revision 2 Divisions 27 and 28 in the NUTS II region of Syddanmark .
That is why I voted as I did .
The European Union has put in place legislative and budgetary instruments to provide additional support for those employees affected by the consequences of far-reaching structural changes in patterns of world trade and to help reintegrate them into the labour market .
It is also possible to help employees who have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I believe this to be particularly important .
Now Denmark has submitted an application referring to the mobilisation of a global amount of EUR 8 893 336 .
It concerns 1 443 redundancies ( of which 1 010 are targeted for support ) that occurred in three companies in the Danfoss Group operating in NACE Revision 2 Divisions 27 and 28 ( manufacture of electrical equipment , manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c. ) in the NUTS II region of Syddanmark , during the four-month reference period from 1 March 2009 to 30 June 2009 .
I have voted in favour of the planned measures to ensure that support is provided quickly for the workers affected and for reasons of European solidarity among the Member States .
I voted in favour of the report because money from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund goes to workers affected by collective redundancies .
However , I believe that there are a number of problems with this particular fund . For example , by far the most money paid out from the fund goes to the richest countries within the EU .
My vote should not be perceived as support for the EU 's ' subsidy gravy train ' , either .
I believe that it is a waste of money for Denmark to send money to the EU only for it to be sent back to Denmark after having done the rounds through the bureaucratic system .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the Danfoss Group from Denmark because I believe that mobilising the EGF is an absolute must during the current economic crisis .
On 8 September 2009 , Denmark submitted the request for financial assistance for mobilising the EGF in the case of the Danfoss Group , which made 1 443 employees redundant .
The economic and financial crisis has led to a slump in demand for mechanical and electronic equipment .
Trends in the machinery and equipment production sector changed dramatically in the EU in Q4 2008 in both Denmark and Germany , where falls in production in excess of 25 % were seen .
Sales of Danfoss mechanical and electronic equipment fell in 2008 by up to 52 % in Europe , 48 % in the US and 23 % in the Asia-Pacific region .
Due to the competition from Asian firms in this sector , whose wage costs are significantly lower than those in the EU , the Danfoss Group has gradually relocated its production from Denmark to third countries , which has had a serious impact on the labour market .
I call on the Commission to develop an ambitious , green industrial policy , capable of guaranteeing the EU 's global competitiveness and preserving jobs in the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) Considering Denmark 's requests for assistance regarding the 198 cases of dismissal at the Linak Company , part of the electromechanical sector in Syddanmark 's NUTS II region , I voted in favour of the resolution as I am in agreement with the European Commission 's motion and with the respective amendments introduced by the European Parliament .
In explaining its motives , I agree that the Commission 's motion includes clear and detailed information on the request , analyses the criteria for eligibility , and explains the reasons that have led to its approval , in compliance with Parliament 's defined requests .
Another Danish electromechanical company , Linak , has been hit by the effects of globalisation .
The people most severely affected by this are the least qualified workers , in a badly depressed region that is giving political decision makers particular cause for concern .
In this and other cases , older workers engender additional concern and must benefit from support measures targeted specially at them .
in writing . - ( PT ) Considering the impact of the current economic and financial crisis on the labour market , I voted in favour of releasing EUR 1 213 508 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for a plan supporting the reintegration into the labour market of the 198 people dismissed from the Linak A / S Company , a manufacturer of electronic equipment in Denmark 's Syddanmark region .
I reiterate my warning over the extremely rare utilisation of the EGF , in spite of the high unemployment rates in Europe .
I reiterate the need for the EGF to have its own funding , consisting of its own budget line for this purpose .
I voted for Mrs Matera 's report on mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the workers of Linak A / S in Denmark .
As I said in September during the debate on the EGF 's future after 2013 , I am disappointed that this fund , set up to support workers made redundant ' for reasons of recession or globalisation ' , is currently not financially guaranteed in the European budget .
Indeed , I do not believe that tapping into the financial resources of other European schemes to finance the EGF is a viable solution in the long run .
Therefore , when the Committee on Budgets voted for mobilising the EGF for the Danish employees mentioned in the Matera report , I pointed out , along with the Belgian Socialist MEP Mr Daerden , the need to work towards defining a separate budget heading for this funding .
What is at stake here is the European Union 's credibility in supporting citizens affected by economic instability .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Danish workers of the Linak Group who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could be inclined to vote against , given the pitiful amount of this handout .
However , the little that is being given may help to ease their pain .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the rationale that brings a leading international company such as Linak to relocate with the aim of increasing its profits , the amount of which it does not even have the decency to disclose .
in writing . - ( PT ) The EU is a space for solidarity and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is framed within it .
This support is fundamental to helping the unemployed and victims of relocation which occur in the context of globalisation .
The number of companies relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in various countries , namely China and India , is ever greater , with harmful effects for countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF 's purpose is to assist workers who fall victim to company relocation and is vital in facilitating access to a new job .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , and should be used now to assist the 198 cases of dismissal at the Linak Company , which is part of the electromechanical sector in Syddanmark 's NUTS II region .
This is the reason for my vote .
I am delighted to see the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund being utilised in the affected regions mentioned previously and I totally agree with this .
I believe , namely , that the entire process , from drawing up applications through to processing and obtaining the final decision of the budget authority , has so far been rather cumbersome and complex , according to the experience of many countries .
For example , in 2009 , the contributions requested from the fund were , on average , around EUR 5 552 700 , and 30 of the applications submitted by 13 Member States related to 17 branches .
However , the budget authority last year approved 10 financial contributions from the EGF amounting , in total , to EUR 52 349 000 , which represents just 10.5 % of the maximum annual sum that can be used from this fund .
One of the reasons is principally a lack of experience with the processes of the fund , and the long period of financial uncertainty when awaiting the decision of the budget authority .
I believe that the simplified procedures for assessments and decision making introduced at the end of 2009 will simplify and speed up the submission of applications for support from the fund and will accordingly bring effective assistance to employees who have lost jobs as a result of changes in the structure of world trade .
I voted in favour of the report because money from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund goes to workers affected by collective redundancies .
However , I believe that there are a number of problems with this particular fund . For example , by far the most money paid out from the fund goes to the richest countries within the EU .
My vote should not be perceived as support for the EU 's ' subsidy gravy train ' , either .
I believe that it is a waste of money for Denmark to send money to the EU only for it to be sent back to Denmark after having done the rounds through the bureaucratic system .
I voted for the resolution on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for supporting the persons made redundant from the family firm Linak A / S , located in Sønderborg , Denmark .
On 8 September 2009 , Denmark submitted the request for a financial contribution of EUR 1 213 508 ( 65 % of the total budget required ) for supporting 139 employees made redundant from Linak A / S. These redundancies coincided with another large wave of redundancies from the Danfoss Group in Sønderborg , southern Denmark .
I believe that Member States are responsible for supporting the reintegration of every redundant worker into employment .
The EGF offers Member States the opportunity to support workers affected by the global financial and economic crisis and the major changes in global trade patterns .
In Romania , 381 296 workers lost their jobs between March 2008 and March 2010 , including 13 667 in the county of Galaţi alone .
I think that other Member States , too , which have not requested the EGF 's mobilisation so far , including Romania , must examine and follow the example of the states which have used the EGF to support redundant workers due to the economic and financial crisis .
I welcome the vote in plenary on mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in favour of Spanish and Danish citizens .
Created in 2006 , this European fund is intended to provide assistance to employees made redundant following a process of restructuring .
The rules were changed in 2009 to allow for better use of any appropriations allocated to the fund which , hitherto , had not all been utilised .
The commitment to help more than 1 500 Spanish and Danish employees via this fund is therefore very good news .
It is worth emphasising the importance and relevance of this fund in these times of economic recession that we are experiencing .
Despite its temporary nature , the fund should be maintained , at least for as long as it can prove its usefulness .
in writing . - The EGF is a crucial fund in the EU , the scope of which has been widened in order to provide support for those who have been made redundant as a result of the crisis .
It is imperative that these funds are made available to those who really need them in an expedient and effective manner .
For this reason , I have agreed with the rapporteur and have voted in favour of these reports .
in writing . - With this important vote , the EP asks the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF .
It recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis .
It emphasises the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market .
It stresses that , in accordance with Article 6 of the EGF Regulation , it should be ensured that the EGF supports the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment .
It reiterates that assistance from the EGF must not replace actions which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor measures restructuring companies or sectors .
The three reports by Mrs Matera which we are voting on today concern support for 82 companies in the clothing industry in the Galicia region of Spain and two companies in the engineering and mechatronics industries in the Syddanmark region of Denmark .
The financial assistance that has been authorised will provide support for a total of 2 344 people and will help to reintegrate them into the labour market .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the refusal to grant discharge to the director of the European Police College in respect of the implementation of the College budget for the financial year 2008 on the basis of the excellent report by my friend and colleague , Véronique Mathieu , who is a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
All the arguments set forth in the report justify this decision .
However , I am surprised that the annual accounts have not been approved , even if they are not subject to significant observations on the part of the European Court of Auditors .
Whereas the report by my colleague , Véronique Mathieu , approved by the Committee on Budgetary Control , proposes three votes ( refusal to grant discharge , closing of the accounts and resolution ) , I find it odd that in actual fact , only two items were put to the plenary vote : the discharge and the resolution .
Very strange ... to my mind , nothing prevented the accounts from being closed .
We end up with a bizarre accounting situation where , in October 2010 , the 2008 accounts are not closed , the financial year 2009 is over and that of 2010 only has a few weeks left .
Understand that one if you can !
The recommendation of the specialist committee to refuse to grant this European institution discharge was supported right across the board , which means that the reputation of this ' Police Academy ' will be tarnished forever .
This tragicomic situation where the European Police College is not being granted a discharge in the light of certain fraudulent financial activities shows us that there are no bounds when it comes to corruption .
In other words , it is precisely the institution set up to protect us from criminals ( indirectly through providing professional training for police offers ) which is ending up in the dock .
I voted in favour of the report , so as to refuse discharge to the European Police College in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2008 , because the investigation into the misuse of funds has not yet been completed .
I also voted in favour , because I agree that it is unacceptable for an organisation financed by Europe not to have sound and transparent management of its finances after so many years .
The new Director of the College may have presented an action plan , but it is not sufficient , nor is it as detailed as it should be .
Finally , refusing the College discharge for 2008 will send a strong message about the need to improve its modus operandi in order to put a stop to poor money management .
In view of the irregularities detected and the inability of the European Police College to account for its budgetary and financial situation to Parliament , I agree with the rapporteur 's decision to refuse to grant the Director of the College discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2008 .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Police College has had difficulties complying with the standards of good governance expected of any regulatory agency .
Since 2006 , repeated audits have found problems in the College 's compliance with financial regulations , its staff regulations and accounting system , as well as inadequacies in its budget management , human resources , public contracting procedures and in the standards applied to expenses in organising courses .
According to the resolution , only in 2014 can we expect improvements in the College , when its multi-year plan will have been fully implemented .
I do not agree that the College needs a minimum of nine years ( 2006-2014 ) to attain the acceptable level of good governance expected of a regulatory agency .
Having considered the information on the European Police College 's actions and bad accounts management , I support Mrs Mathieu 's proposal to refuse the Academy 's director budgetary discharge for the 2008 financial year .
We are deluged with a vast number of sometimes pointless EU agencies , but the CEPOL is an important body for fighting crime and maintaining security and public order .
2007 statistics inform us that CEPOL was able to call on an annual financial budget of EUR 7.5 million .
It is in the interests of all citizens , particularly given the difficult economic and financial situation we face at present , to be able to count on efficient EU agencies that are able to use the budgets granted to them in a transparent and responsible fashion .
The controlling role performed by the European Parliament is important in establishing a veto where management processes are unclear , as in this case .
For this reason , I shall be voting in favour of the rapporteur 's proposal .
in writing . - The European Police College ( CEPOL ) , which became an agency in 2006 , has faced severe problems since its creation in abiding by minimum good administration norms to which all EU agencies are submitted .
Whilst I voted in favour of the report and the decision to refuse to grant a budget discharge for 2008 , this is the first time that a discharge has been used against an individual organisation .
Nevertheless , I question the meaning of the discharge and how useful it is as a tool , two years after the event and where , as in this case , management and personnel may well have changed .
Thus , it is vital that we investigate whether very small agencies can be effective and can meet the administrative requirements of the Financial Regulations with a very small staff .
Last week , the Committee on International Trade voted unanimously in favour of postponing the granting of discharge for the 2008 budget of the European Police College ( CEPOL ) and against the closure of the accounts for the same .
On account of serious deficits with regard to compliance with the financial and staff regulations , the European Parliament has also voted , with an overwhelming majority , against granting discharge to CEPOL and , hence , also against a positive closure of the 2008 budget .
It is nice to see that Parliament has fulfilled its task in this discharge procedure and has sent out a clear signal against negligent mismanagement .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Mathieu on this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) All European institutions which depend on the European Union budget must be rigorously inspected by the Court of Auditors and by all entities with an auditing function .
Inspection must verify whether Community funds are being appropriately used , whether these institutions are complying with their defined goals , and whether any resources are being wasted .
Generally speaking , based on evaluations of known inspections , with rare exceptions , we can state that the institutions in question are using available funding correctly and are complying with their set goals .
Nevertheless , according to the rapporteur 's judgment , this is not the case with the European Police College , given its various irregularities and the inadequacy in its audits .
This is the reason for my vote .
in writing . - With this vote , the EP refuses to grant the Director of the European Police College discharge in respect of the implementation of the College 's budget for the financial year 2008 .
Ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur is right to express concern about a lack of transparency in the European Police College 's procurement procedures .
Let us hope that the investigation being carried out by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) will be comprehensive and scrupulous and will help to bring more clarity to the matter .
However , this issue is related to a much greater problem - to the frequent lack of integrity and professionalism within police and security forces throughout Europe .
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have reported a particularly high number of cases throughout Europe where the police exceeded its powers and used illegal investigation methods .
In most cases , institutions failed to carry out investigations and punish lawbreakers according to international standards , and this increases the level of impunity .
Often , victims become easy targets because of their minority status , whether it is due to their ethnicity or their political views .
Strong police forces need a strong and honest Rule of Law and judicial independence .
The European Police College has noble objectives : to promote common European policing standards , cross-border cooperation in the fight against crime and uphold the rule of law and legislation .
Whether it is through this or another forum , the most important thing is that these objectives are achieved .
This Parliament resolution is particularly important for abolishing the visa regime for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
A visa-free regime brings about the realisation of one of the main fundamental rights in Europe - freedom of movement through all Member States .
It is very important to make every effort to deliver visa-free travel for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania as soon as possible .
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania have made significant progress in the last few months and important talks have been held with these countries .
Once these countries have been granted a visa-free regime , young people will be able to travel , learn and study abroad .
Furthermore , the risk of even greater ethnic and political instability would be lowered , political and economic cooperation in the region will be strengthened , and popular support for the EU and the prospect of European integration will increase .
Twenty-one years have passed since the fall of the Berlin Wall , but Europe remains divided , with citizens still requiring visas to travel freely in the EU .
I come from a country which lived for almost half a century under the harshest Communist regime without any right to free travel .
Subsequently , Romania has needed 15 years to persuade Europe that its citizens are not second-class and should enjoy a fundamental human right .
The EU does not and never has advocated artificially putting up partitions , but has brought all Europeans to the same table by dismantling borders .
The European Parliament has constantly promoted the notion of abolishing the regime imposing visa requirements because it is aware of the psychological impact which the current situation has on those who are still obliged to purchase visas to go and visit family members settled in EU countries , to go and study , or simply to travel .
It is high time , 21 years after the reunification of Europe , to put an end to visas for inhabitants of Europe who would like to travel within the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this legislative motion to recognise the importance of allowing citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina the right to free movement in the European Union through a system of visa exemption , which is to take effect this year .
This is a process which follows on from recent events with Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
My opinion is that this vote represents an important step for European integration and political and economic cooperation in this region .
However , it is still important to guide our efforts in order to proceed with liberalising the visa system in Kosovo , which constitutes the only area in the Western Balkans where the opening of negotiations is not yet planned .
I voted in favour of the report because I believe in the inalienable right of free movement of all citizens , the right of free movement , regardless of nationality .
This report finally makes the next step towards eliminating visa requirements for the citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Unfortunately , however , we must not overlook the fact that , in order to achieve the liberalisation of visa requirements , states must use biometric passports , which I oppose because , in my opinion , they infringe the principle of the protection of citizens ' personal data .
I voted for the adoption of the proposal for a regulation because it will help implement some of the EU 's prior commitments regarding the free movement of persons throughout the whole continent .
This will allow citizens from certain Western Balkan countries to feel that they , too , are part of the process of reuniting the continent of Europe .
I believe that we cannot progress with our desire to create a European identity and citizenship without removing the barriers preventing freedom of movement on the continent between EU Member States and their neighbours .
I welcome the receptiveness shown towards extending this facility to Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The inclusion of citizens from these countries with their fellow citizens from the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia in terms of enjoying the right of free movement in the EU will also help close some of the wounds of the recent past .
These are a few of the arguments explaining how I voted .
The Balkans , with their reputation as the ' powder keg of Europe ' , remain primarily , in spite of the progress made in recent years , a potential hotbed of interethnic tension , with political instability and the economic and social crisis added to this .
Bosnia and Herzegovina provides the most recent example of this where , unfortunately , in spite of all the efforts made , the mood of confrontation persists between the communities still divided by the wounds of war .
I believe that dismantling the walls which still divide the continent will boost the process of reform and reconciliation in this part of Europe .
Since lifting the visa requirements for Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia last December , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania have made significant progress , as indicated in the report , which therefore no longer justifies their isolation and separation .
However , one issue which remains unresolved in this region is the problem of Kosovo , which is not even recognised as an independent state by many countries , including the EU .
This aspect must be a focus of our concern in the near future as it may set a dangerous precedent for secessionist actions on ethnic grounds .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is with great pleasure that I am voting in favour of the European Union 's recognition and verification of suitable conditions for the liberalisation of the visa system for new states on our continent , in this case , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
I regret , however , that with regard to other countries , namely Ukraine and Croatia , the European Union is not extending the same welcome and that countries that have emerged and acquired their sovereignty and independence from the ex-USSR are not judged worthy of the same recognition , merely for this reason ( of being ex-USSR ) .
I voted in favour of Mrs Fajon 's report , because the results of the evaluation missions and reports have shown that progress has been made by Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina in fulfilling the requirements made of them , enabling these countries to be included on the list of third countries whose nationals are exempt from the requirement to be in possession of a visa in order to enter the Schengen area .
Those who remember the tensions and conflicts that devastated the Western Balkans cannot fail to see that considerable progress has now been made towards the pacification and stabilisation of the region .
It is only natural that the Union should have wished to help bring down the barriers that separate it from the majority of the Balkan States and to allow their nationals to access the EU without requiring a visa .
I am in favour of abolishing barriers to the movement of people as a matter of principle , and I therefore endorse the removal of the barriers in question .
At the same time , I believe that facilitating the movement of Balkan nationals within European territory should be accompanied by improved cross-border cooperation and more fruitful information exchange with their countries of origin in order to tackle the expansion of criminal activities by gangs originating there .
in writing . - ( PT ) I strongly support the goal of abolishing visas for all countries in the Western Balkans .
The elimination of visas for citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia in December 2009 was an important step in their integration with Europe .
The visa exemption system is of great importance in people 's lives , given that it strengthens relations between peoples and allows consolidation of the principle of freedom of movement as one of Europe 's basic rights .
The guarantee that the European Union will extend visa exemption to the two countries , especially to Bosnia and Herzegovina , in the very near future , at the beginning of autumn 2010 , will reduce the risk of greater political and ethnic instability , strengthen political and economic cooperation in the region , and increase popular support for the EU and the prospects for European integration , as well as broaden the horizons of its people and restrain extremist and anti-European sentiment .
I voted in favour of this resolution for visa exemption so that Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania could benefit from this as quickly as possible .
We are in favour of abolishing the visa requirement for nationals of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania as soon as possible .
These countries were denied the possibility in 2009 , when the visa regime began to be abolished for all Western Balkan countries .
This decision ' rewards ' the ability of these countries to ' deliver the necessary reforms ' .
Thus , they say , we are opening the ' door ' to countries that ' try their best to please us ' .
The question that arises is this : what price are the peoples of those countries paying for that ?
Those who today claim to be rewarding the Balkan countries are the same ones who , yesterday , were doing all they could to destroy Yugoslavia and dismantle its peoples ' achievements .
The hands of the major EU and NATO powers are stained with the crimes they committed there , in an operation that succeeded in creating hatred and warfare between peoples that had long before decided to unite their wills in order to build their country .
We therefore do not support the dismantling of what remains of Yugoslavia , promoted by those who want to get their hands on its wealth , exploit its peoples and make use of its geostrategic location , an old dream of big capital in the EU .
It is already being announced that the next area to be included in the regime will be Kosovo , the EU-NATO protectorate in the region .
I and the movement to which I belong totally disagree with Mrs Fajon 's proposal to make citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania exempt from a visa requirement when crossing the European Union 's external borders .
I believe such a measure to be irresponsible and hazardous to the safety of European citizens because it underestimates the political problems and difficulties in those countries , while it overestimates the weak and unsatisfactory progress achieved in recent years .
In Albania , no legal system has yet been established to counter organised crime and the very high levels of corruption .
The criminal justice system faces similar problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina , where the level of cooperation between the police and legal authorities is very poor .
The visa policy allows a certain amount of monitoring and selection of who is allowed to enter from third countries .
Without the control provided by this system , we risk situations arising that are hazardous for the safety of our citizens .
This vote is a strong signal that the European Parliament is sending to Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , namely , the prospect of future membership of the European Union .
Indeed , allowing the abolition of visas for nationals of these two countries will no doubt encourage the mobility of young students and will strengthen economic and political cooperation with the Balkan region , where some countries such as Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia are already benefiting from such a regime .
However , let us not deceive ourselves ; this vote by Parliament does not , under any circumstances , mean an endorsement of the policies of the current Albanian Government for which we are maintaining the requirements already stated in July .
This measure is primarily intended to create a link between nations .
It is obviously regrettable that Kosovo , because of disagreements between Member States regarding recognition of its independence , is not included in this process under way between the European Union and countries in the Balkans .
We must work towards this .
Today , the European Parliament has given a strong sign of its support for the policy of abolishing the visa regime for the countries of the Western Balkans , continuing on the course followed last year , when mandatory visas for nationals of Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia were dispensed with .
That decision represented important progress towards the European integration of these countries , which have demonstrated that they are capable of embarking on serious reform processes .
With today 's vote on the Fajon report , we have accepted the Commission 's proposal to abolish the mandatory element for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina also .
In fact , I believe that a differentiated approach would have risked exacerbating the ethnic and political divisions characteristic of the region .
The only region not included in the visa liberalisation process is Kosovo .
This exception is substantially due to the existing issues regarding the recognition of that country 's independence , which I hope can soon be resolved .
In conclusion , I must point out that the abolition of visas , which is the objective of this report , concerns a crucial aspect of people 's lives , in that it allows them to actually exercise their right to freedom of movement .
A report from Europol , Eurojust and Frontex has estimated that 900 000 illegal immigrants enter the European Union every year .
This document describes the illegal immigrants coming from the Balkans as containing a strong criminal element in terms of drugs , arms and human trafficking .
While some of these countries remain highly unstable for geopolitical , religious or even ethnic reasons , the report from the socialist , Mrs Fajon , recommends nothing less than abolishing the visa system for all countries in the Western Balkans .
Quite apart from the fact that this privilege goes against the Schengen agreements and the very principles of the functioning of the European Union and of the mechanism for joining it , to my mind , it is out of the question to authorise the free movement of persons from countries such as Bosnia and Herzegovina or Albania .
Invoking this ' fundamental right ' is , in reality , only a ' hotch-potch ' utopia .
The European Union is already dealing with massive and uncontrolled immigration that is severely damaging the identity as well as the economy and society of the nations that make it up .
On the contrary , we should lobby for the fundamental right of people to retain control of their borders and to take a sovereign decision on who can or cannot enter their countries .
The Fajon report on the proposal for a regulation listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of Member States and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement must be viewed positively , inasmuch as it represents an appropriate consequence of the agreements to relax visa requirements that the EU reached with Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia in 2007 .
Given the need to continue with systematic controls even after liberalisation , it should be emphasised that this measure will undoubtedly play an important part in creating stability .
Furthermore , I agree with the rapporteur that the direct consequences of this phenomenon on the quality of people 's lives will help to encourage the state and governmental institutions and the politicians in their efforts to implement the reforms necessary for them to accede to the European Union .
If we are to consider extending the visa waivers to include citizens from Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , we might discuss the theory whereby Albania has made progress in eradicating the influence of organised crime .
This is not the case .
However , the rapporteur 's explanatory statement and the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , both of which advocate visa liberalisation with Kosovo , are an unacceptable provocation .
As a result , I am voting against .
in writing . - ( PT ) The EU has always been concerned that the citizens within its geographical boundaries should be able to move freely throughout Member States .
This facility was gradually extended to non-member countries , and now various citizens of non-EU countries are able to travel within the EU without the need of a visa .
The goal of the current resolution is visa exemption for citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , following the example set in other countries in the Western Balkans , namely , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia .
The progress made by the two countries in recent months has led the EU to abolish the need for entry visas for their citizens , which will help reduce the risk of greater political and ethnic instability , strengthen political and economic cooperation in the region , increase popular support for the EU and prospects for European integration , broaden the horizons of their populations and restrain extremist and anti-European sentiment : for these reasons , I have voted in favour .
I support the Commission 's proposal to abolish the visa regime for the citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The visa regime should not , under any circumstances , isolate the citizens of the Western Balkans or turn them away from the European Union , their nearest neighbour .
This decision to liberalise the visa regime is the result of progress made by these two countries , particularly in terms of strengthening the fight against organised crime .
It is a decision that will have a major psychological impact on the population , for example , on students , who , up until now , have had to form queues in the consulates .
in writing . - ( LV ) I voted in favour of the final version of Mrs Fajon 's report .
In this connection , I should like to make it clear that I am opposed to a visa waiver regime for citizens of Kosovo , because I believe that it is necessary to agree this issue with the Serbian side .
I fully agree with the position taken by the UN Security Council , which has not recognised the independence of Kosovo .
I also believe that until such time as Serbia recognises the independence of Kosovo , we do not have the right to take any steps towards even the indirect recognition of that region .
As is known , many EU Member States have not recognised the independence of Kosovo .
I am convinced that we must adopt a more considered approach to this issue .
in writing . - ( DE ) The visa liberalisation in 2009 demonstrated to all intents and purposes that many people in the Balkans equate visa-free travel with being given carte blanche .
Countless people have used the more liberal visa conditions to travel into the European Union .
How many of those people actually went back to their home countries once the period of time granted for their stay had expired , nobody knows .
It does not seem to be clear to the people in question that visa liberalisation has nothing to do with jobs or the right of abode .
The maths of stemming illegal entry into the EU through a readmission agreement cannot stack up while visa liberalisation continues to be abused .
This idea needs to be put paid to .
Kosovo , in particular , represents a major problem for us in this regard .
The EU has never been able to decide what it thinks more important or what it thinks is correct and proper - territorial integrity or the right of self-determination for peoples - and because we have ignored the problem of multinational states for too long , what we have now is a divided Balkan state .
To use a visa agreement in order , indirectly , to almost force recognition of Kosovo in this way , when some Member States have not recognised it , contradicts the principle of subsidiarity and is a violation of national rights , which should be rejected in the strongest possible terms .
In light of the above considerations , I voted against the Fajon report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , because I know very well - as a Romanian citizen - how important freedom of movement is .
It is the most important freedom that the European Union is based on and the biggest right a European citizen has .
Broadening this principle to Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important step on the way to European integration .
I fully support the proposal drafted by the European Parliament and the Council concerning the waiving of the requirement for short-term visas for citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina when crossing external borders .
The countries mentioned have made great progress in complying with the requirements of the European Union .
In accordance with the Commission 's proposal , once the visa requirement has been scrapped , the Commission will undertake appropriate monitoring , in these two countries and in all Western Balkan countries which have already left the ' negative list ' and been transferred to the ' positive list ' , of the process whereby the measures planned by these countries within the framework of the liberalisation of visa regulations are implemented effectively and permanently .
The Commission also stresses that the basic requirement for completion of the visa liberalisation process in these countries is the introduction of biometric passports , which will guarantee security and prevent illegal immigration .
I voted against a favourable conclusion to the visa liberalisation process for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I support the critical position that the French took during the COREPER meeting on 29 September : having complained that the period between the Commission 's proposal and the assessment was too short , they referred the issue to Parliament and requested more time to evaluate the benchmarks .
There are still too many issues unresolved to agree to abolish the requirement for Albanian and Bosnian nationals to possess a visa for entry into the EU .
These issues concern , in particular , the fight against corruption and organised crime , the lack of biometric passports , and immigration and border controls .
On this last issue , I should remind you that last March , Belgium repatriated several hundred Serbs and Macedonians of Albanian origin who had sought asylum in Europe after visa restrictions had been lifted for Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro in December .
in writing . - Today 's vote clears the way for the belated but very welcome inclusion of Bosnia and Albania in the EU 's visa-free travel scheme .
It will clearly give a boost to their citizens , giving them the same rights and privileges as their neighbours .
The Council should now move swiftly to approve their inclusion .
However , we are concerned about the reluctance of some Member States , notably France , to do so .
Bosnia 's and Albania 's compliance with the EU criteria for lifting the visa requirement is actually better now than Serbia 's and Macedonia 's at the time they got visa-free travel one year ago .
If the Council fails to follow the position of the European Parliament and European Commission , it would be a completely wrong signal to send to the citizens of Bosnia and Albania .
We are opposed to this report because stipulating that nationals of Albania and of Bosnia and Herzegovina should be exempt from the requirement to possess visas when crossing the external borders of Member States is a risky business .
We consider this to be especially true in the case of Albania , where organised crime is deep-seated , and this could then spread throughout the rest of the EU .
In spite of this , Mr Frattini has come out in favour of visa relaxation ; a decision that is incompatible with that already taken by France , the Netherlands and Denmark .
The former Yugoslav countries of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia were recently added to the positive list of the regulation in question , meaning that their citizens are exempt from needing a visa to be able to enter European Union territory .
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina have also been making progress , so that as soon as they meet the exemption criteria , they can be granted exemption and come off the negative list .
It is essential to decide that a future citizen of the Union has a fundamental right to travel in the European Union .
In order to put this liberalisation into practice , it is still necessary to strengthen the fight against organised crime in both countries and to develop a strategy supporting the integration of repatriated nationals , in the case of Albania , and the harmonisation of criminal law according to the Federal Criminal Code , in the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The ability to travel without needing visas in the near future will contribute to strengthening political and economic cooperation and reducing the risk of tensions in the region .
Moreover , EU support will certainly help to broaden people 's horizons .
I am voting for the document for the reasons given above .
In view of the fact that there has been no improvement in the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo , which is , in fact , worsening , and in view of the fact that systematic violations of human rights are being committed on a daily basis , specifically in terms of unlawful executions , abductions , sexual assaults and acts of torture , I think it is essential for me to vote in favour of this resolution carried by the European Parliament .
The profits , the economy and mining and land resources are under the control of armed groups and conflicts have been going on for years , despite the presence of the United Nations Organisation Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
It is therefore essential to ask the DRC Government to regain stability and security in the country and thence to launch the peace process .
Today in plenary , we adopted by a very large majority a resolution condemning failures in protection of human rights in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) .
We have thus condemned the violence and , in particular , the mass rape perpetrated in the country over the summer .
We must , as a matter of urgency , strengthen the fight against impunity and , above all , end all violations of human rights , regardless of what they may be .
Independent investigations must be carried out to bring the guilty to justice .
We furthermore deplore the fact that the United Nations peacekeeping forces present on the ground have not been able to halt this violence .
Their presence is , nevertheless , essential , and we must allow them to complete their mandate in the DRC .
The Democratic Republic of Congo must immediately take action to meet its commitments in areas of human rights violations .
Today , most armed movements use rape and violence as a means to achieve military and economic objectives .
As a consequence of these violent acts , women often lose their place in society , their ability to care for their children , or even their lives .
Civilians continue to suffer unbearably and live in poverty .
The Democratic Republic of Congo must take all possible measures in order to prevent any further attacks against civilians and to ensure a strengthening of responsibility for violations of human rights and international humanitarian law .
At the same time , it is important to promote peace and stability in the region by applying existing regional instruments and making more efforts to develop the regional economy .
It is very important for the action plan adopted by the Council for gender equality in the field of development cooperation to ensure that the gender equality dimension is taken into account in all policy areas .
The Democratic ( ? )
Republic of Congo provides the setting for a humanitarian tragedy that is unfolding out of our sight , but this does not make it any less heartrending .
I hope that the initiative from the European Parliament to issue a declaration strongly condemning all the warring parties in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo and to distribute it more widely , including to the UN Secretary-General , will bring about an improvement in the situation of the civil population , who are the real victims of this senseless war .
Information about the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo is especially alarming as the acts of exceptional brutality being committed are taking place in the vicinity of the UN peacekeeping camp .
The 1 244 women raped in just three months of this year by representatives of all the forces involved in this conflict are by no means mere statistics .
Each of them is going through their own tragedy .
What is even more shocking is that this situation can happen again at any time without them feeling any kind of protection .
The situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo provides a further argument in favour of officially acknowledging any form of violence based on gender as a crime against humanity and a war crime .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite the efforts headed by the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) and the extremely difficult work carried out by humanitarian organisations , human rights violations still persist .
The situation is alarming , giving rise to massive rape of civilians by members of armed militia , unacceptable suffering , poverty , displacement of people and the degrading situation in the refugee camps , as well as the forced recruitment of civilians and child soldiers .
The Congolese army continues to lack the human , technical and financial resources to carry out its mission .
This resolution reinforces the priorities of training and appropriate salaries in order to reform the Congolese army and improve its regiment .
In addition , it underscores the need to redouble efforts to put an end to the armed groups ' activity , and to hold to account those responsible for human rights violations .
Equally , it reinforces the need to develop close cooperation between the DRC Government and the international community , taking into consideration the participation of women in resolving the conflict .
Dialogue needs to be resumed immediately for the sake of the peace process , for which reason I have voted in favour of this resolution .
It is vital to put a stop to the escalation of violence against local communities and acts of mass destruction , such as burning down houses , schools , churches or even whole villages , as has happened in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Rape and other forms of sexual violence against women and children ( some 14 cases of rape a day , according to data from the United Nations High Commission for Refugees ) have been used as weapons of war .
We cannot allow a generalised feeling of impunity to develop with regard to crimes that are , in fact , extremely serious violations of fundamental rights .
The perpetrators must be brought to justice and convicted of war crimes and crimes against humanity .
I reiterate the call made to the United Nations and the Congolese Government to launch investigations .
I also hope that the UN Security Council will urgently adopt measures to effectively prevent further attacks on the civilian population and to provide the victims with all the assistance they require .
I welcome the adoption of the ' Conflict Minerals ' law in the United States and hope that the EU can initiate similar legislation .
I have followed with concern and disquiet the situation unfolding in the Democratic Republic of Congo , the abuses perpetrated against civilians , especially against women , and the use of rape as a weapon in the clashes between the various military groups involved in a proper civil war .
I got involved in drafting this European Parliament resolution on failures in protection of human rights and justice in the Democratic Republic of Congo based on a desire to find a way of making those responsible for these actions respect civil rights and freedoms , as well as human dignity and the international commitments to which the country is party .
I welcome the initiative launched by the US , where the law on ' conflict minerals ' was recently adopted , and the natural request from the proposers of this resolution who are asking the Commission and Council to consider a similar legislative initiative as an additional instrument to be used to influence the decisions of those responsible for such reprehensible and barbaric acts .
I therefore voted in favour of adopting this resolution .
We must urgently find a political solution to the armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) so that safety and stability can at last be brought to the population of eastern Congo .
This is the purpose of the resolution that the European Parliament has adopted today following the publication of the report by the High Commissioner for Human Rights on 1 October , which lists 617 of the most serious violations of human rights and humanitarian international law committed during a 10-year period by State and non-State players in the DRC .
Tens of thousands of people were killed and many others were raped , mutilated or suffered other forms of violence during the decade in question .
The European Union is willing to support all the efforts made by the DRC Government and by countries in the Great Lakes region to promote together peace and stability in the area , by emphasising reconciliation , personal safety , a reformed and enhanced judiciary and the return and integration of refugees and displaced persons within the country .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I condemn the violence against women and children in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
There is an urgent need to step up the fight against impunity and to put an immediate end to the violence and human rights violations in that country .
The Democratic Republic of Congo has experienced profound instability arising from the artificial nature of its borders and internal animosities .
The proliferation of warring movements and the atrocities they have committed make up some of the saddest pages in the history of Africa .
The list of tragedies and violations of human rights and justice is being added to so fast that even the best-informed observers cannot keep up properly .
The international community was recently alerted to a wave of mass rapes , which we can only find repugnant and which deserve our condemnation and the strongest repudiation .
The use of this type of violence as a weapon of war - which , unfortunately , is nothing new - must , even so , elicit from us nothing less than unreserved condemnation and the effective prosecution of those who are physically and morally responsible for it .
Congo needs peace and stability , but that will not be achieved unless the perpetrators of the most obscene breaches of human rights , who have been enjoying scandalous impunity , are unequivocally identified and punished as an example to others .
in writing . - ( PT ) Atul Khare , the UN Under-Secretary General responsible for peacekeeping operations , informed the United Nations Security Council that from 30 July to 4 August , over 500 people were victims of gang rape perpetrated in the North Kivu province by the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda ( FDLR ) , a Hutu rebel group , and by the Mai Mai militia .
I strongly condemn this gang rape , as well as other human rights violations , and I welcome the request made to the United Nations and the DRC Government that it undertake an impartial and thorough investigation of all incidents , and guarantee that those responsible for violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law be held to account for their actions and prosecuted under the terms of international law .
We firmly condemn the rapes of women and children and all the human rights violations perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) .
It will only be possible to put an end to such acts when the foreign military presence and external interference in the country are terminated , as these are factors that feed the conflict .
The UN and EU missions have already demonstrated that they are not the solution but part of the problem .
Our political group proposed calling for ' an end to the EUPOL and EUSEC missions to the DRC , which have admittedly made a negative contribution to escalating violence and the situation in the country by training security forces that have been perpetrating crimes against their own civilian population ' .
A majority in this House preferred to reject this proposal and sided with those who want to maintain the conflict and benefit from it .
Peace will only be achieved through a political agreement between the various stakeholders , both inside and outside the country .
It must , of course , include the countries in the region , particularly Rwanda and Uganda , which are breaching the sovereignty and independence of the DRC and playing an active part in the conflict .
Above all , however , it must involve the United States and the European Union , the main beneficiaries of a war economy which sustains itself by selling important minerals used by US and European companies in the production of computer and mobile telephone components .
in writing . - The serious human rights violations , including systematic and mass rapes , which have taken place in the Democratic Republic of Congo , are truly shocking .
Whilst this House 's powers are limited in this area , it is important that we are united in condemning these atrocities and accordingly , I supported today 's resolution .
I condemn the mass rapes and serious violations of human rights in the Democratic Republic of Congo in the strongest possible terms .
I very much welcome the inclusion and adoption of this condemnation in the joint motion for a resolution .
I voted against the joint motion for a resolution , however , because , to a large extent , Congolese military and police units trained by the EU 's EUPOL and EUSEC missions since 2005 were , and are , also involved in these crimes .
The joint motion for a resolution expressly supports and welcomes these training missions .
I am in favour of the immediate cessation of these missions , as they have contributed in a negative way to the escalation of violence and to the situation in the country by training security forces that have been repeatedly involved in the serious violations of the human rights of the Congolese people .
In addition , the army and police trained by the EU support the repressive apparatus of the corrupt Kabila regime .
in writing . - ( PT ) The EU cannot remain untouched by the various armed conflicts which occur occasionally around the world .
The violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been dragging on for several years and has caused the death , displacement or homelessness of millions of people .
It is therefore extremely important to exhort all those involved in this conflict to cease hostilities so that the population of these regions can return to living in peace .
It is very important that we continue to support the United Nations missions on the ground so as to mitigate the suffering of the whole population , particularly focusing on the elderly , women and children .
in writing . - ( LV ) Quite recently , more than 500 people in the Democratic Republic of Congo fell victim to a mass gang rape .
The members of various armed bands in the eastern DRC are culpable of this mass rape .
I fully support this resolution of the European Parliament .
At the same time , I should like to add that , bearing in mind that the UN peacekeepers ' camp was situated quite close to the town in which these onslaughts of a sexual nature took place , and yet the UN did not prevent this shocking incident , we must form a view of the UN base 's actions in the eastern DRC .
We must identify the names of the responsible UN commanders .
One would also like to know whether the officers and troops of the UN base know the reason why they have been posted there .
It seems to me that they do not know , and that it is by dint of their silence that this mass crime and mockery of international law was committed .
It is a crime on the UN 's part to fail to carry out its direct mission .
There are no words to describe the violent atrocities that continue to take place in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
All we can do is describe them , one by one .
Gang rape , mutilation , gratuitous violence , looting , sordid murders , not to mention the mockery made every day of the most fundamental freedoms , in a State that is in full decline .
We can add impunity to the absence of any action or reaction , the result of a non-existent justice system , as well as Congolese authorities who resign rather than face up to the essential duty of protecting their citizens .
This resolution , the third of its kind , is aimed at the head of the Congolese authorities , but also at the European and international authorities who can no longer refuse to get involved .
They have a duty to act and protect the people , namely via the United Nations Organisation Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( MONUSCO ) which is present on the ground .
They must facilitate the re-establishment of peace and stability in the region and contribute to the establishment of a State that can exercise its core functions fully and finally be able to ensure respect for the rule of law .
in writing . - I hope the main actors in the field will take note of what we have just voted .
We strongly condemn the mass rape and other human rights violations which took place between 30 July and 4 August on at least 500 women and children in North Kivu province by the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda ( FDLR ) , a Hutu rebel group , and the Mai Mai militia , as well as those in other regions of North and South Kivu .
We call on all actors to step up the fight against impunity and for an immediate end to the violence and human rights abuses in the DRC , particularly in North Kivu .
We stress the need for further efforts to put an end to the activity of local and foreign armed groups in the east of the DRC .
We also call on the UN and the DRC Government to conduct an impartial and thorough investigation of the events , to ensure that those responsible for breaching human rights and international humanitarian law are held responsible and prosecuted in conformity with Congolese and international law .
Unfortunately , many countries in the world have no respect for fundamental human rights .
On the contrary , they are guilty of crimes against humanity , wars , sexual violence , and violence of every other type against men , women and children .
Between July and August , in the Democratic Republic of Congo , in the mining district of eastern Congo alone , more than 500 people , including children , girls , and women as old as 75 , were victims of gang rapes .
All this took place in the vicinity of a UN camp .
Not only did the UN not intervene , it even pretended not to be aware of what had happened for weeks .
According to internal estimates , about 6 million people have died so far .
I can only wholeheartedly support this resolution , which sees Parliament taking the side of the weakest and most defenceless .
I supported the resolution on failures in protection of human rights and justice in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
I believe that it should be adopted urgently and as a matter of priority .
At the beginning of December , there will be an ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Kinshasa .
This resolution could send an important message to the authorities and inhabitants of the Congo .
It will be a signal that the European Union intends to intensify its efforts to stabilise the situation in this region , to verify the aid mechanisms currently in place , to place more stress on judicial reforms and , above all , to stand firmly against violence against women and children and to put to an end to the impunity of those responsible .
I am very pleased with the adoption of the resolution on failures in protection of human rights and justice in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
This resolution sheds light on and condemns the numerous violations perpetrated as a weapon of war against Congolese women .
These atrocities have long been ravaging the country .
Once again , I stress the need to fight against the impunity that reigns in this region and I ask the Commission to prepare a legislative initiative at the earliest possible juncture which follows on from the American law on ' conflict minerals ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am very concerned about events in the Democratic Republic of Congo , where hundreds if not thousands of women and children have been raped in the last few months .
As a politician , I am stunned , even more so as a father and a man .
It is terrible .
Those guilty must be found , prosecuted and punished in accordance with international law .
We , the international community , have failed .
However , we also failed much closer to home , in our own territory .
We always rush to condemn human rights violations outside the European Union and demand that urgent action be taken .
However , when attention turns to human rights violations within the EU , the reaction is mostly restrained .
The EU will be hit by a huge crisis of confidence if it fails to narrow the gap between its honourable condemnations of crimes committed outside the EU and actions being taken at home in the area of human rights .
It should not be this way .
The Treaty of Lisbon brought new opportunities to strengthen human rights , especially the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is now mandatory , not just for EU institutions , but also for Member States .
Thus , it is within our capabilities to fix this human rights vacuum within the EU , but we must act now .
Ladies and gentlemen , between 30 July and 4 August 2010 , massive human rights violations and sexual violence against children , women and also men took place in the eastern part of the Congo .
The violation of human rights and of international law continues to this very day , and is spreading across the region at an alarming rate .
The European Union has taken on a long-term commitment towards the entire African region of the Great Lakes , part of which lies within the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Our efforts towards peace and stability in the region , however , have so far brought no tangible results .
Our resolution of today is another appeal by this Parliament to end attacks on civilian populations in the eastern provinces of Congo , and for the victims to be provided with basic health , social , humanitarian and legal assistance .
Every armed conflict has a political solution , but there has to be a will to find such a solution .
The security and stability of eastern Congo therefore rests primarily on the shoulders of the Congolese Government .
Economic and humanitarian assistance is important , but it is not enough in itself .
I am pleased that this Parliament , through the vote of its Members , has again confirmed in clear terms that our commitment to Congo includes a clear statement on the defence of human rights every time they are violated in the region .
I have therefore supported the submitted resolution , and I trust that the European Commission will find effective mechanisms for putting the recommendations from the resolution into practice .
In recent weeks , the European Parliament and the entire international community have mobilised themselves in defence of Sakineh , but also in defence of all the men and women who live under the same conditions in Iran and , indeed , in every other part of the world in which fundamental rights continue to be violated .
As of today , there are 154 countries in the world that have abolished the death penalty .
Ninety-six of these have abolished it for all offences ; eight have retained it solely for exceptional crimes , such as those committed in wartime ; six have declared a moratorium on executions ; and 44 have de facto abolished it , that is to say , these are countries in which no executions have been recorded for at least 10 years or which have made a binding commitment not to apply the death penalty .
In many countries , no distinction is made between people who have been convicted ; in fact , in a small number of countries , child criminals are still executed .
All this is in flagrant violation of international law , as enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
Accordingly , I reaffirm my opposition to the death penalty , in every case and in all circumstances , in the hope that it will be abolished as soon as possible .
in writing . - ( RO ) In recent years , promising progress has been made towards the abolition of capital punishment .
The number of countries which have stopped using this form of punishment for good has risen to 95 .
In fact , its regular use has been restricted to two regions in the world : Asia and North Africa .
The UN resolutions on the implementation of a global moratorium have made a considerable contribution to achieving these results .
The EU also continues to provide the largest source of funding to organisations campaigning against capital punishment .
However , I believe that the specific initiatives promoted by these organisations must gain the necessary political support .
As the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution provides significant support in this respect , I voted in favour of it .
However , in spite of the positive progress , 58 countries retain the death penalty , while the statistics for the number of people condemned to this punishment are alarming .
Last year , more than 700 people were executed , which is not counting the several thousand people assumed to have been condemned to death in China .
I therefore would like to highlight the need to increase efforts in influencing international public opinion .
Even in some EU Member States , a large proportion of citizens would agree to the introduction of capital punishment .
On the occasion of the World day against the death penalty , which will take place on 10 October for the eighth consecutive year , we , as MEPs , would like to adopt a resolution to underline our commitment to abolishing capital punishment and our wish to see this principle of opposition to the death penalty adopted worldwide .
Although 43 countries around the world continue to use capital punishment , this resolution invites the Member States that continue to use it to declare a moratorium on executions .
The aim is to achieve complete worldwide abolition , which is one of the priorities of the Union 's human rights policy .
There are many countries in the world that still apply the death penalty , including all those that have concluded commercial and economic agreements with Europe that contain so-called human rights clauses .
When thinking of countries where public executions are carried out by hanging , stoning or through the use of methods tantamount to torture , we must be moved by the hope that texts such as the one on which we have voted today will act as a spur to the whole of Europe , which too often forgets its economic and political power , and refrains from exercising it in the international arena in order to promote respect for human dignity in third countries .
The death penalty is one of the oldest penalties imposed for very serious crimes which has yet to be abolished in certain countries .
The death penalty is the ultimate cruel , inhumane and degrading punishment , which violates the right to life as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
At present , 43 countries worldwide still retain the death penalty .
Therefore , the European Parliament immediately calls on countries to take swift action to end this practice .
The imposition of the death penalty on minors and on persons with mental or intellectual disability causes particular concern .
The imposition of this penalty on the most vulnerable people should be abolished as soon as possible .
It is very important for countries ' government institutions to undertake to monitor issues surrounding the death penalty so that specific cases are raised with the national authorities and possible initiatives for the abolition of the death penalty are considered .
The European Union is committed to one of its priority human rights objectives - the complete abolition of the death penalty worldwide - a fact which will be confirmed by the declaration adopted by the European Union 's legislative plenary on World day against the death penalty .
The fact that many states still apply the death penalty , the cruellest , most inhumane and degrading form of punishment of all , especially to women and even minors , is beyond comprehension .
What makes it all the more difficult to understand is that there is no kind of evidence to show that the death penalty discourages crimes more than other forms of punishment .
It is important for the European Union to continue its measures supporting cooperation between states because this is the only way , through collaboration , education and raising awareness , of enabling us to fulfil the desire to abolish the death penalty worldwide .
The key to achieving the European Union 's most desired human rights objective also lies in the activities of the non-governmental sector which highlights unfair trials that scandalously impose harsh sentences , like the one handed down in Iran to a boy who was only 16 at the time he committed his alleged crime .
in writing . - UKIP accepts there are legitimate arguments about the death penalty , both for and against .
However , UKIP feels that the decision to have or not have the death penalty is a decision that lies only with the individual nation state , and not the undemocratic EU .
UKIP notes the attempts the EU has made to interfere with other countries ' policies in this area .
It is not for the EU to bully any country into maintaining abolition or enacting abolition of the death penalty .
UKIP also notes the way the EU has shut down any debate on this topic in the European context , despite public opinion on the subject .
The maintenance or otherwise of the death penalty is , and should remain , a decision solely made at the nation state level via democratic means .
Any state with the death penalty should ensure proper procedures of evidence collection , prisoner interrogation and fair trials .
in writing . - ( PT ) In a world where 43 countries still maintain the death penalty , and where children are forced to watch public executions , Europe must continue to call for an end to this practice , which constitutes a cruel and unacceptable violation of the right to life .
I voted for this resolution because I feel the EU should use diplomatic instruments to contribute to the abolition of the death penalty , applying pressure on government authorities to impose a moratorium on capital punishment , with a view to its complete abolition .
The resolution urges the Council and the Commission to provide guidelines for an overall European policy to apply to the dozens of European citizens condemned to suffer the death penalty in third countries , and make information and legal assistance available , which I consider equally important .
I also recognise the importance of approving World day against the death penalty and European day against the death penalty .
The value of life and the multiple cases of judicial error that history has left us are more than enough reason for us to fight the death penalty .
Abolition of the death penalty throughout the world is one of the European Union 's priorities .
The European day against the death penalty has been established on 10 October each year .
We are strongly committed to working towards the abolition of the death penalty everywhere and are striving to achieve universal acceptance of this principle .
According to Amnesty International , there are still 58 countries in the world that have not abolished it , 18 of which carried out executions in 2009 .
China alone executed more people than all the other countries put together .
The only country in Europe that continues to apply the death penalty is Belarus .
The European Parliament was the first European institution to launch this campaign , in the early 1980s , and the EU is currently the main institutional actor in the fight against the death penalty , as well as the main source of funding for such efforts .
We must fight for the adoption of moratoria on executions until the death penalty is finally eradicated .
One of the first measures adopted by the temporary authorities in Bucharest after the collapse of the Ceauşescu regime , in the wake of the popular uprisings in Timişoara and Bucharest , was to abolish the death penalty .
This was a gesture of healing , primarily to the political victims of the totalitarian regimes which dominated Romania from the 1930s .
I am recalling this event in recent European history because the European Parliament 's resolution on the World day against the death penalty is a response to an outmoded practice in the 21st century .
The death penalty is still part of the legislation in many countries , including some which actively promote civil rights and freedoms globally .
The death penalty does not only not act as a deterrent and reduce the level of crime , but it also raises the very real issue of possible miscarriages of justice , which would send innocent people to their death .
I regard the invitation from the European Union 's Member States to the countries which still use this punishment , calling on them to adopt a moratorium on carrying out the sentences , as one of the main plus points of this resolution .
This made me decide to vote in favour of its adoption .
This year , 12 countries applied capital punishment , in spite of the condemnation levelled against this inhumane punishment by most countries in the world and international institutions , including the United Nations .
I believe that the pressure being exerted to abolish the death penalty in the 43 countries which still include it in their national legislations must become a priority in the European Union 's policy for promoting human rights and , in particular , as part of the work of the new European External Action Service .
in writing . - ( PT ) As a citizen of Portugal , one of the first countries in the world to abolish the death penalty in 1867 , I consider the death penalty to be inhuman and the most extreme denial of human rights .
It is therefore with satisfaction that I am voting in favour of this resolution 's motion .
The promotion of human dignity and the consequential fight for the abolition of the death penalty are , and must remain , among the goals of the European Union human rights policy .
For the sake of a global and effective European policy over the death penalty , the EU , through its institutions and , in particular through the High Representative , should speak with one voice .
The establishment of a global moratorium on the use and imposition of the death penalty in every region of the world is not only a fundamental step on the road to abolishing the death penalty throughout the world .
It is , above all , a vital step towards greater respect for humanity .
The eighth World day against the death penalty , on 10 October 2010 , is a chance for the European Parliament to reiterate that abolition of the death penalty all over the world remains a priority for the European Union , at a time when it is still practised in 18 countries .
In 2009 , more than 700 people were executed , without counting the thousands of executions that took place in China .
Executions or death sentences have never resulted in improved crime figures , which is why the European Union should promote alternative sentences at the disposal of criminal justice systems when dealing with countries that still apply this punishment , which is contrary to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Parliament has also expressed deep concern about the application of the death penalty to minors and to people suffering from mental or intellectual impairment and has called for it to be brought to an end swiftly and permanently .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it advocates that the European Union should use all tools of diplomacy and cooperation assistance available to it to work towards the abolition of the death penalty .
Portugal is an example to be copied in this respect , because it was the first European country to include the abolition of the death sentence in its constitution , over 140 years ago .
Unfortunately , that is not the case in more than 40 countries around the world , where violations of the right to life enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights still persist .
The death penalty is an unacceptable violation of the intrinsic dignity of every human being , and of the inalienable and unrepeatable value of every life .
It therefore deserves our vehement condemnation and everyone 's unreserved commitment to its eradication I hope that more countries will join the group of states that have abandoned this practice forever .
Irrespective of the seriousness of the specific individual actions which , in theory , might motivate or even justify such a sentence , I believe that the abolition of the death penalty represents an enormous step forward for civilisation and a distinctive feature of penal systems , such as those of the Union 's Member States , that seek to separate justice from revenge .
It is essential to maintain this non-vindictive provision and to ensure that even the worst of criminals must be treated with dignity , even if they do not deserve it .
Indeed , simply taking an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth would be unworthy of our common heritage of respect for human life , which is so often overlooked by our political decision makers .
At this time , my thoughts are also with all those who are not guaranteed even a semblance of a fair trial and who are killed randomly or deliberately by the most barbaric methods in the most merciless circumstances .
The eighth World day against the death penalty will be held on 10 October .
I welcome this European Parliament resolution because I consider it to be the correct next step following the recent resolutions on the death penalty in China , Nigeria , North Korea and Iran .
The extent of capital punishment throughout the world is a cause for concern and it is difficult to establish the true levels of this phenomenon , particularly in the above countries , where democracy is absent or greatly limited .
It is important for the European Union to take up a strong position on this matter and use every possible legal instrument and political instrument in general to draw international attention to the matter and denounce infringements of international law .
For these reasons , I will vote in favour of the motion for a resolution .
in writing . - Whilst the EU is a global leader in the campaign against the death penalty , too many countries , including many with whom we have strong economic , social and cultural links , continue to execute people .
I do not consider that capital punishment has any place in the 21st century and support today 's call for a moratorium on executions .
in writing . - The abolition of the death penalty worldwide is a priority of this Parliament and a particular priority of the Socialists and Democrats Group .
It is a violation of human rights and unacceptable in all circumstances , and I am pleased Parliament has endorsed this motion with such great support .
As the most active and prominent supporter of abolition in the world , the EU had a responsibility to support civil society and organisations throughout the world campaigning for such a fundamental human right .
There is a great amount of work to be done in supporting de facto abolitionist countries codifying such practice in law , in reducing the number of death penalty sentences handed down and carried out in other countries , and in supporting campaigns to repeal death sentences , particularly where trial outcomes are not recognised as legally sound .
This is a fundamental value of our Union which we must defend publicly and often wherever possible .
The World day against the death penalty , declared for 10 October , is a further demonstration of Europe 's guiding role in the battle for civilisation .
The resolution deserves to be adopted , since it highlights the innumerable problems and aberrations that still exist today in 43 countries in the world .
It rightly emphasises that the battles we have fought thus far have led to tangible results : the several international conventions in this regard have been ratified by an ever increasing number of countries .
This means that increasing attention is being paid to human rights at international level .
Finally , I support the request for the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , to keep in mind that the main political content of the resolution must be the adoption of a worldwide moratorium as a crucial step towards the abolition of the death penalty .
in writing . - ( PT ) Over recent years , the EU has been the main institutional player in the fight against the death penalty .
This fight has been a priority of its foreign policy related to human rights .
The truth is that there are still over 40 countries in the world which exercise the death penalty .
As one of these countries , Belarus , is in Europe , we feel it necessary to make every effort to achieve the abolition of the death penalty throughout the world , given that it is the most cruel , inhuman and degrading punishment and violates the right to life set down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This is the reason for my vote .
I have upheld this resolution because my conscience as a human being leads me to fight for the abolition of the death penalty .
It is a fight fought by all humanists .
By abolishing the death penalty , we will strengthen human dignity and make progress on human rights issues .
Nothing justifies relativising the value of human life .
To this end , I would like to remind you that Europe , an area of democracy , was the pioneer in this fight for abolition of the death penalty .
It is therefore Europe 's duty to prioritise this legitimate fight .
I supported this resolution , as I consider the death penalty to be a light punishment for those who have carried out serious inhumane crimes .
I am not convinced that Latvia , as an EU Member State , will implement this resolution , as there has been a prior negative experience .
The Republic of Latvia has still not implemented Paragraph 74 of the European Parliament resolution of 11 March 2004 on the situation of non-citizens in Latvia .
More than 330 000 people in Latvia remain without status .
This means that one of the EU Member States pays scant regard to the opinion of the European Parliament and to the European Union as a whole .
For their part , the European Commission and the European Parliament behave as if everything were fine .
A strange attitude ...
This is evidence that double standards apply in the European Union .
The European Union expresses its concern at the violation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , yet violations of human rights on EU territory seem to it to be a normal state of affairs .
in writing . - On behalf of the Irish delegation to the EPP , We support the abolition of the death penalty and voted for the resolution on the World day against the death penalty .
However , we voted against the amendments to the text as we see this as a crude instrument , too widely drawn , which would have no effect on the death penalty and could contribute to a lot of people losing their lives because of the illegal drug trade .
The death penalty is the most inhuman and savage punishment .
It constitutes the violation of the most fundamental of human rights - the right to life .
This is why I believe that abolishing the death penalty must be one of the European Union 's priorities in order to foster democracy and human rights worldwide .
In Europe , the ban on the death penalty has a strong footing , since it is guaranteed under Protocols 6 and 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
The European Union is completely opposed to application of the death penalty , regardless of the circumstances .
The actions of the EU in this field form the chief priority of its external human rights policy .
The EU has consistently called for abolition of this penalty all over the world , and this is why , to the greatest extent possible , it provides financial support for civil society organisations acting to abolish the death penalty .
Since 1994 , within the framework of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , over EUR 15 million have been allocated in support of this type of project .
in writing . - ( PT ) The time that we dedicate to various social causes always constitutes a chance to reflect on the debate surrounding an important issue and , above all , to repeatedly draw attention to impending behavioural changes in the light of the adoption of new values or a new interpretation of old values , which are determining factors in constructing the society in which we wish to live .
The death penalty is one of the most heinous legalised acts , and I consider it to be unjustifiable by any form of prior action .
Even murder does not justify the death penalty for homicide , which is the equivalent of punishing one reprehensible act with an identical act which , decreed by a court order , is legal from the judicial viewpoint , but not legitimate from the ethical point of view .
In this context , I wholeheartedly welcome the resolution for the establishment of a World day against the death penalty in the hope that this may constitute a further step toward its effective abolition throughout the world .
in writing . - Once again , the EP reiterates its long-standing opposition to the death penalty in all cases and under all circumstances and emphasises , once again , that abolition of the death penalty contributes to the enhancement of human dignity and the progressive development of human rights .
It condemns all executions wherever they take place and strongly calls on the EU and its Member States to enforce the implementation of the UN resolution on a universal moratorium on executions with a view to total abolition in all states which still practise the death penalty .
It calls on the Council and the Commission to take action in order to progressively restrict its use while insisting that it be carried out according to international minimum standards .
It expresses its deep concern regarding the imposition of the death penalty on minors and on persons with mental or intellectual disability and calls for their immediate and definitive ending .
in writing . - The British Conservative delegation has traditionally given a free vote to all its Members on the issue of the death penalty .
We believe that the use of the death penalty should be a matter of conscience for each individual .
However , we would like to stress that even when individual Members are in support of the death penalty , we believe that it should be reserved for only the most heinous of capital crimes , and we categorically condemn its use on minors .
in writing . - Passing this resolution today , ahead of the eighth World day against the death penalty on Sunday , once again relays the European Parliament 's call for a complete moratorium on all executions to those countries still using this barbaric form of punishment .
It also reinforces the European Parliament 's view that all European citizens should be free from the threat of execution .
The oil slick caused by the Deepwater Horizon oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico last spring has led to this resolution drafted by the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which aims to draw attention to the urgent issue of preventing oil slicks .
I have therefore voted in favour of this resolution as it is essential that we lay down strict European rules for preventing accidents on oil platforms and for the Union to strengthen legislation on environmental responsibility .
However , I deplore the fact that the reference to a moratorium on all new oil drilling as well as to new standards have not been implemented throughout the Union and have been thrown out by a majority of Members in today 's vote .
The introduction of a moratorium would , in fact , have been in agreement with the policy of prevention and the strengthening of security measures for oil platforms , and would have been in line with Barack Obama 's policy of implementing a similar moratorium in the United States until December 2010 .
The recent disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , which has caused millions of barrels of oil to be discharged into the sea , has drawn the world 's attention to a subject that is fundamental for the European Union .
This event has shown that strict environmental protection measures must be adhered to when oil is extracted from the deep sea .
Europe must , however , remain competitive in this sector and continue prospecting for gas so that it can diversify its energy sources .
I therefore support the adoption of new safety principles , the application of strict and rigorous common standards and the establishment of solidarity funds to compensate victims for any damage caused .
The urgent need for such measures is also a result of the geomorphological nature of our seas , such as the Mediterranean , and of the drilling currently under way on the Libyan and Egyptian coasts .
If there were an oil spill , it would cause an environmental disaster that we would struggle to overcome , with extremely serious consequences for the economy and the environment of many European countries .
In conclusion , I do not support the proposal for a moratorium , because I believe that agreements with third countries and their oil companies would be more effective .
This course of action would make it easier to export safety standards and invest in prevention and technological research .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is important for the EU to ensure the protection of its coasts through its ability to prevent and respond to such problems .
The legislation in effect also needs to reinforce the level of safety in oil exploration and drilling .
The European Maritime Safety Agency , located in Lisbon , provides support and technical assistance to the European Commission and Member States for the development and application of Community legislation pertaining to maritime safety and protection , as well as regarding pollution caused by ships .
In June this year , I presented in writing to Commissioners Oettinger , Kallas and Georgieva a suggestion for broadening the European Maritime Agency 's area of responsibility and the establishment of safety control mechanisms for European oil platforms located in the North Sea , the Black Sea and the Mediterranean , and also a suggestion that it take responsibility for the prevention of environmental disasters related to oil drilling .
This suggestion allows an economy of scale in terms of financial , human and technical resources .
I welcome the Commissioners ' response , which demonstrated a willingness to review the regulation of the European Maritime Agency , and I call for the European Commission to develop the efforts needed to achieve this goal .
The recent accident in the Gulf of Mexico , resulting from an explosion on an offshore oil production rig , would be sufficient argument alone for all those due to consider and vote on the European Parliament resolution on EU action on oil exploration and extraction in Europe .
As is emphasised in the text of the resolution , Europe is not protected either against such incidents with a devastating environmental impact because the majority of oil drilling and extraction activities take place in the North Sea .
We also now have such activities expanding in the Black Sea region , a sea which similarly has its fair share of problems due to human activity .
As stipulated in the resolution , it is the Commission 's task to devise stringent policies which can be enforced at EU level to prevent oil rig accidents , which may mark an important step towards preventing possible incidents and accidents .
These are a few of the considerations justifying my vote in favour of approving this resolution .
The EU must learn the lessons of the Deepwater Horizon rig disaster and ensure that high security standards are adhered to in all oil exploration sites on the seabed .
In view of the risks of offshore drilling and the doubts concerning the handling and the potential consequences of such an incident in Europe , the resolution that we have supported asks for ' a moratorium on all new deep sea oil drilling in EU waters ' .
We are also asking the Commission to carry out a specific assessment and to work on an action plan , in collaboration with the Member States , for improving security standards on existing rigs .
Finally , we want to have an assurance that the polluters will be held legally responsible , and that the victims , such as fishermen , will be able to receive the correct compensation .
I voted in favour of the resolution on EU action on oil exploration and extraction in Europe , since I consider it necessary to enhance safety and working conditions on offshore oil platforms in the European Union with a view to preventing environmental disasters such as the one that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico .
Given the importance of oil extraction for those countries that perform it and the dangers it involves ( as can be seen from the terrible consequences of accidental oil spills ) , it is essential for the Union to create the conditions to make oil exploration as safe as possible .
There has to be appropriate legislation for this purpose , laying down basic safety standards for offshore oil and gas production so as to guarantee the safety of extraction and supply in the European Union .
In this respect , as I am Portuguese , I am bound to remember the Prestige disaster , which had a profound effect on the Galician coastline with consequences stretching along the coasts of Portugal and France .
I therefore call for the measures now being proposed not to be confined just to oil prospection and extraction but to include oil transport and supply as well .
Tanker accidents are , unfortunately , more common than we would like , so it is important to review safety standards in this area too , so as to reduce the likelihood of such disasters .
The Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has been a wake-up call for the European Union and its Member States to examine all aspects of oil exploration and extraction in the EU as a matter of urgency , and to take all necessary measures to ensure that this kind of environmental disaster never occurs within our waters .
It is therefore necessary and imperative to adopt a common , cross-border European system of prevention and response to oil spills .
I would like to highlight the request for the Commission to submit a report assessing the level of environmental pollution and the biological state of the Gulf of Mexico , along with revising the EU 's capacity to respond immediately to accidents involving offshore installations , and to develop a European action plan in cooperation with the Member States .
I welcome the request for draft legislation aimed at ensuring the implementation of greater safety standards on all EU oil platforms and drilling operations .
However , I disagree with the imposition of a moratorium on any new deep sea oil drilling in EU waters , even if these standards are ensured throughout the EU , due to the disproportionate nature of this measure compared with the impact that it could have on the industry .
The general thrust of the resolution is positive , in that it draws attention to the need for prevention and provision of the necessary support in the event of environmental disasters due to oil spills .
Guaranteeing the independence and quality of environmental impact assessments and determining liability are important factors in ensuring a high level of protection for human and environmental health , preventing potentially hazardous activities on the seabed from damaging the marine and coastal environments , protecting biodiversity , and safeguarding the prosperity of local farming and fishing activities for coastal communities .
We have to criticise the fact , however , that a resolution on this subject should completely ignore the issues of the physical limits of oil reserves , humanity 's extreme and worrying dependence on this primary energy source , the need for fair and careful management of existing reserves , and the need to seek other , alternative sources of energy supply .
The highest levels of precaution , environmental protection and of safety and security of oil operations in Europe are principles of paramount importance on which we can accept no compromise .
In particular , we have to draw the necessary conclusions from the catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico in order to prevent similar events from occurring in European Union maritime and coastal waters .
Nonetheless , Parliament showed good sense today in rejecting the maximalist position calling for a moratorium on all new deep sea oil drilling in European waters .
What is at stake is the survival and future of our European oil industry at a time of crisis , but also our need for energy independence .
in writing . - This draft resolution calls for the strengthening of safety and security standards on EU oil platforms and an EU capacity disaster response in the event of an oil spill in EU waters .
This is of pressing concern considering the recent disaster in the Gulf of Mexico with the Deepwater Horizon explosion and oil spill .
This resolution would call for a moratorium on new deep sea drilling until the standards have been improved and met .
I firmly believe that drilling companies throughout Europe need to improve working conditions and a way that this can be done is securing a uniformly high security standard on offshore platforms operating across the EU .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I believe it is essential to examine carefully all aspects connected with oil extraction and exploration in the European Union .
In fact , I believe it necessary to enact regulatory measures that will prevent a repeat in our seas of the environmental disasters that have recently struck the United States .
In actual fact , if ever similar incidents were to occur in the Mediterranean Sea , which is well known for its extremely slow replacement of water , an environmental disaster with serious consequences would ensue .
In the light of the review of existing European legislation in this area , which turns out to be lacking in many respects , it is vital to take action to ensure maximum safety standards .
It is for this reason that I join in the call to the Commission to monitor closely the investigations carried out by the US authorities in order to better define and implement high-level precautionary measures which would also ensure the protection of biodiversity in the coastal and marine environment .
I voted for this resolution as I believe that Europe urgently needs a common European , cross-border oil spill prevention and response system .
Given that EU waters also border countries that are not part of the European Union , whereby EU legislation does not require them to comply with the relevant provisions governing liability and the remedying of damage , the European Commission must develop accident prevention policies for oil rigs and extend the scope of the SEVESO II Directive to oil rigs .
The current environmental liability legislation contains several important gaps and , therefore , I believe that some new legislative provisions need to be introduced to take into account all inherent risks associated with off-shore exploitation , and liability in the event of oil accidents needs to be properly regulated .
Due to the absence of a compensation fund for oil disasters , the Commission must include compulsory financial security provisions under the Environmental Liability Directive .
in writing . - I strongly support high safety standards in oil drilling throughout the EU , and particularly support calls for oil companies to maintain uniformly high standards in all countries they operate in - the current disparities between Member States are unacceptable and unfair .
The findings of the investigation into the Deepwater Horizon tragedy must be examined carefully once they are published , and particular care must be taken in reviewing safety standards when awarding licences for new drilling .
Given the high standards in North Sea oil drilling in Scotland , I do not think a uniform moratorium on new drilling is the best way to tackle this issue , but instead that detailed safety checks should be paramount in any decision to award new licences .
The close connection between oil exploration and extraction activities and past and future environmental change is proven and is the object of continuous scientific research .
An early demonstration of what will happen in 2080 as a result of these activities can only serve as a warning to stop the clock of disasters that is set for the whole world - no one is exempted , not even ourselves .
There is no doubt that there are liabilities for deep sea drilling which , until recently , would never have been taken into account , but the threat of disasters similar to that in the Gulf of Mexico cannot leave us indifferent .
It is essential today for the European Union to strengthen and harmonise throughout the 27 Member States safety levels pertaining to oil exploration and extraction activities , not only for existing platforms , but also for those that will be taken out of service .
Secondly , we must identify and regulate operator liability , beginning with excluding the possibility of leasing installations to third parties .
For this reason , I agree with what the rapporteur has stated and I want direct intervention by the Commission and the Council to bring about clarity , transparency , uniformity and , hence , safety within our territory and on this specific subject , on which , ladies and gentlemen , we must never drop our guard .
I abstain , given that this document does not make a single reference to a post-petrol future .
The various accidents that have taken place in the field of oil exploration and extraction over the years have acted as a warning to the dangers of this activity .
However , the recent and extremely serious accident in the Gulf of Mexico has really highlighted the need to use new and different methods to avoid similar situations in future , as these can jeopardise the environmental balance and biodiversity of whole regions , and the resulting damage has an effect on everyone .
The EU therefore needs to take the necessary measures to ensure that oil exploration and extraction in Europe is carried out in accordance with the best safety regulations , thus avoiding future environmental and human disasters .
in writing . - ( LV ) I fully supported this proposal for a resolution .
I believe that it is necessary to increase the liability of oil extraction companies so that , in the event of an accident , the insurance and reserve fund for accident prevention could comfortably cover all the costs of the clean-up and all the possible damage done to the environment .
A 100 % bank guarantee and stricter plant licensing in the oil exploration and extraction sector are also essential .
The oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico clearly demonstrates that financial considerations all too easily result in safety regulations being flouted and common sense going out of the window .
In the North-East Atlantic , the conditions at depth are similar to those in the Gulf of Mexico and hence , the risks are similar , too .
The safety debate in Europe is all the more important in light of the fact that the majority of oil drilling and exploration takes place in the waters of the North Sea and that , in view of the tightening up of the safety requirements in the United States and contrary to the obligations of the OSPAR Convention , the neighbouring states were not able to reach an agreement .
It is even more important because , in times of high oil prices , it becomes particularly profitable to develop poorly accessible oilfields and to extract under the most adverse conditions , such as from deeper and deeper depths .
I therefore welcome the fact that appropriate safety standards are now to be sought at EU level and I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution .
I voted for this report as it deals with an extremely important subject .
However , I wish to point out that the issue needed to be raised with a more general framework in mind .
The European Commission is currently revising EU legislation on environmental liability and should propose , in this context , solutions for avoiding ecological disasters , like the recent one in Hungary , resulting from the spillage of a large quantity of pink sludge .
In view of the consequences in the Gulf of Mexico , I think that the resolution adopted by Parliament today on the EU 's actions in the exploration and extraction of oil in Europe is extremely important .
As a Member of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , I must point out that the production of deep sea oil and gas is important to security of supply in the EU .
Deep sea oil and gas production does not take place under such extreme conditions as in the Gulf of Mexico .
However , every precaution must be taken .
This is why we must work on prevention so that we have up-to-date legislation that is effectively applied and prevents natural disasters from occurring .
However , we cannot get around the fact that this type of extraction and production always carries risks .
Therefore , we must also think about building up a genuine capacity to respond to possible accidents such as the one that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico .
This resolution is a step in the right direction as it encourages progress in the EU in terms of both prevention and response .
Is the European Parliament willing to vote for a moratorium on all new offshore oil drilling ?
That is the way to learn from the human and ecological tragedy of the oil catastrophe that took place on 20 April in the Gulf of Mexico : 11 dead , 800 millions litres of oil spilled and the devastation of biodiversity .
That is the only real political issue of today 's vote .
By rejecting the moratorium , Parliament 's plenary has sent a clear message which does not address people 's concerns at all .
Nonetheless , it is perfectly obvious that offshore drilling is a risky operation and every precautionary measure has to be taken : strengthening the principle of environmental liability , establishing a special European fund to be maintained by mandatory contributions from operators of offshore installations , especially when drilling is carried out in the Arctic under conditions of extreme cold and at great depths .
One thing is clear : by refusing to vote for a suspension of new offshore drilling operations , the European Parliament falls short of the European Commission 's position of a de facto moratorium , as announced in Commissioner Oettinger 's speech on 7 July .
Almost five million barrels of oil leaked into the waters of the Gulf of Mexico between April and September 2010 following the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil platform , seriously damaging both the economy and the ecosystem of the region .
In total , more than 400 species - whales , dolphins , manatees , herons , egrets , etc . - were endangered .
Since the European Union has many oil platforms - there are more than 500 in the North Sea - everything must be done , at European level , to avoid such a catastrophe in our territory .
By voting in favour of this resolution , I am calling for strict European rules to be developed for the prevention of accidents on oil platforms and for legislation to ensure that uniformly high safety standards apply across all European Union oil platforms and drilling operations , from the Atlantic Margin to the Black Sea .
Furthermore , I welcome the Commission 's decision regarding a ' stress test ' on oil drillings in EU waters .
The risk of serious accidents in European Union waters is high and Europe is , quite simply , not equipped to deal with the devastating consequences of such an accident .
The Commission itself acknowledged this during the consultations .
Offshore oil drilling exploration has increased exponentially and the risks have therefore increased also , but safety , on the other hand , remains largely inadequate .
In this context , only a temporary moratorium on all new offshore drilling in EU waters could have reduced the risks , and also sent a clear signal regarding our dependence on fossil fuels .
Once again , therefore , we shall have to rely on the little credibility and trustworthiness we can ascribe to the oil industry .
After what happened to the notorious platform in the Gulf of Mexico , which caused an environmental disaster following a rupture in an oil well pipe , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety calls on the European Commission to pay attention to drilling in the sea , with particular reference to platforms in EU waters .
I should have preferred the Committee on the Environment to have gone further and requested similar guarantees from other European non-Member States such as Norway , 90 % of whose GDP is linked to oil extraction from the sea .
The EU is a world economic power and must be capable of demanding that countries that are not Member States but count the EU as their principal partner also observe the safeguards in place for activities in dangerous deep waters .
The natural catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico caused by the sinking of the Deepwater oil platform provides an ideal opportunity to consider Europe 's plan of action to prevent similar events .
The unimaginable damage sustained by the ecosystem of the Gulf of Mexico and the southern coast of the United States as a result of the oil spill should be a strong incentive for us to act .
Firstly , the Union must increase its ability to react quickly if such a disaster takes place .
We should ensure that an appropriate coordination system for national services is in place in order to increase their effectiveness when combating a spill or removing damage caused by one .
Secondly , increased safety monitoring of existing installations or those being built is essential .
We should , for example , improve monitoring of the process whereby licences are granted for oil drilling or leasing installations to third parties .
Thirdly , an appropriate legal framework must be created to regulate matters of responsibility and the making good of any damage , as there is a whole raft of significant legal loopholes in the provisions in force .
We should also consider the introduction of a compensation fund which would fund anti-crisis measures in such situations .
I supported this balanced resolution , which does not ban future oil exploitation in deep water , but adjusts it to ensure respect for European security standards , which are amongst the strictest in the world .
These standards must , in my opinion , guarantee both a sustainable energy supply to Europe and the security and durability of offshore activities .
We all remember the terrible pictures of the black sea in the Gulf of Mexico , the dreadful loss of human life , the distress of the citizens affected by the disaster and the considerable damage resulting from the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig .
It is for this reason that I renew my appeal to create a genuine European civil protection force capable of being deployed rapidly and effectively following disasters of such seriousness .
Offshore exploitation and extraction in deep water are essential for the rarefaction of petroleum .
However , their impact on the environment must be controlled , and we must guarantee that they do not constitute a future threat to marine and coastal areas and to biodiversity .
This is a major challenge for the international and environmental image of the European Union , which is producing very positive results in this area .
I voted in favour of this resolution , following the debate with the Council and the Commission in which we discussed the European Union 's plans and main strategic objectives for halting the loss of biodiversity , on the eve of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity .
I therefore hope that the EU will take a strong , consistent position to this conference , with ideas about the concrete measures that will be taken to guarantee the contribution that biodiversity protection will make to sustainable development .
I would remind you that preserving biodiversity is fundamental to ecosystem quality , has direct effects on essential functions such as food production and water supply , and prevents landslides and floods .
I also hope that the political responses aimed at ensuring the integration of biodiversity with economic activities such as agriculture , forestry , fisheries and tourism will be bold and ambitious enough to protect this invaluable , yet extremely fragile , heritage - as in my region , the Azores - from other blinkered external interests that may threaten it .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the EU 's objectives relating to biodiversity .
Faced with the progressive loss of species and , therefore , of biological richness on earth , it is important for us to set ambitious objectives on the protection of fauna and flora while ensuring that humankind can continue to exploit their riches .
As such , Parliament has advocated objectives which will allow resources to be conserved by depending on a strict regulatory system and by promoting new technologies .
I voted in favour of this motion in advance of the COP 10 meeting on Biodiversity in Nagoya in Japan this month .
It is estimated that the global extinction rate is between 100 and 1 000 times higher than the usual natural rate , and human agency is chiefly responsible .
It is very disappointing that the 2010 targets for ending the loss of biodiversity have not been achieved .
Agricultural land accounts for 45 % of the EU total and is a valuable habitat containing a wealth of biodiversity .
The agricultural sector has contributed to EU biodiversity , and many animal and plant species now depend on the agricultural sector and farming practices .
For example , it is sheep and cattle grazing that maintain the diversity of flora of open grassland .
Biodiversity issues must be taken into account when farming practices are being implemented .
Assistance and support must be provided for agri-environmental measures to promote the sustainable use of biodiversity .
The importance of the agriculture sector to the environment must be addressed in Nagoya , and this issue should be central when the future and budget of the CAP are being discussed from now on .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agree with this resolution .
Given the current situation , where biological diversity has declined by 30 % over the last 40 years , and future projections that the rate of biodiversity loss will accelerate ten-fold , it is necessary to take decisive action now to preserve biodiversity and promote the sustainable use of biodiversity .
Biodiversity loss poses a threat to food security , and exacerbates energy depletion and climate change .
In order to avoid the negative impact of these processes , the Commission and the Member States must cooperate by preparing a sustainable EU strategy on biodiversity preservation , which would be reconciled with the objectives of combating poverty , managing waste sustainably and reducing climate change .
Adequate financing will unavoidably be required to implement the planned actions and strategies .
It is likely that public sector support will be insufficient .
Therefore , it is necessary to attract investment from the private sector and to find new sources of financing .
Furthermore , while approving the new multiannual financial framework , it is necessary to consider the plans drafted and to ensure they have the required financing .
The resolution on the EU 's strategic objectives for COP 10 on biological diversity , to take place in Nagoya , is of particular importance in 2010 , which the United Nations has declared the International Year of Biodiversity , and given that neither the global target to significantly reduce the rate of biodiversity loss by 2010 nor the EU target on halting biodiversity loss have been met .
The preservation of biodiversity , along with the sustainable use and fair distribution of the benefits resulting from genetic resources , should continue to be defended , and I believe that this is reflected in this resolution .
The Commission and the Member States must speak with one voice at COP 10 , and their internal decision-making processes need to be fast-tracked .
It is particularly important to strengthen diplomatic efforts with third countries .
Finally , I believe that it is crucial for the Commission and the Member States to integrate the environmental element into their relations with third countries , with the emphasis on the importance of pursuing an integrated approach and ' green diplomacy ' .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the EU strategic objectives for the 10th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity in Nagoya , primarily because I firmly believe that biodiversity conservation is conducive to the sustainable growth of developing countries .
Indeed , the fact that neither the global biodiversity objective set for 2010 , namely , the sharp reduction in the rate of biodiversity loss , nor the EU objective to halt biodiversity loss , has been achieved makes the additional actions aimed at achieving these objectives even more urgent .
Another concern is the illegal use of genetic resources , which has , in most cases , an adverse impact on the target countries for such practices .
I agree that biodiversity conservation issues are raised only intermittently in public debate .
This is why I support the proposal expressed in the text of the resolution about making a more sustained and targeted effort to promote biodiversity conservation measures among ordinary citizens .
We need to understand and support these issues .
I feel that it is just as important to make an effort to include biodiversity conservation as part of civic education in our countries .
Given that halting biodiversity loss is not an urgent item on the European and international political agenda , I welcome the implementation and adoption of a set of specific indicators based on scientific data for measuring the progress made on biodiversity in terms of achieving the European Union 's strategic objectives and targets .
In a matter that is as sensitive as it is essential , such as the preservation of biological diversity as both European and global natural heritage , it is important that the Member States and the Commission come to a consensus on the position that the European Union should take at COP 10 .
I therefore welcome this motion for a resolution .
The complexity involved in the preservation of biodiversity calls for many mechanisms , solutions and efforts .
I therefore believe that the promotion of synergies between the various world organisations , Member States and NGOs will allow the development of instruments for safeguarding biodiversity under policies of environmental preservation which promote this objective .
Lastly , I would like to highlight the need to signal the economic benefits arising from market intervention in biodiversity conservation and the inclusion of environmental issues in the agenda of the Member States and the Commission regarding relations with third countries , also known as ' green diplomacy ' .
It is regrettable that , despite the commitments made by the EU during the EU summit in Gothenburg in 2001 , biodiversity loss has still not been halted .
This resolution reminds us that biodiversity plays a key role in the fight against worldwide hunger and in food security , and that it is a prerequisite for any attempt to diminish climate change and to adapt to it .
It is time for all the Member States to implement the Natura 2000 legislation in full , as well as the Habitats and Birds Directives , and to take initiatives to preserve marine biodiversity .
This policy in favour of biodiversity must be conducted at both European and international levels in order to integrate these concerns into policy on development cooperation and the external activities of the Union in particular , as well as into all future agreements concluded within the WTO .
As I have already had occasion to mention , in relation to the report by Mrs de Lange that was put to the vote in the last part-session , ' I ( ... ) agree with the need for the EU in its entirety , and particularly those areas covered by Community policies , to find a sustainable strategy for protecting biodiversity and preserving ecosystems .
I believe that this becomes particularly relevant in the area of agriculture and fisheries , for which reason I am monitoring particularly closely the reforms of the common fisheries policy and the common agricultural policy that are being prepared .
This is because the adequate and sustainable preservation of biodiversity , while essential and desirable , cannot be a brake on the sustainability and development of agriculture and fishing . '
The United Nations has declared 2010 the International Year of Biodiversity .
Unfortunately , the European Union will not achieve its biodiversity target for 2010 ; the loss of biodiversity is continuing at an alarming rate .
The rate of loss is projected to accelerate tenfold by 2050 .
This loss of biodiversity is unacceptable , not only from an ethical , but also from an ecological and economic perspective , as it prevents future generations from enjoying the benefits of a healthy biodiversity .
It is crucial that the Commission and the Member States speak with a single voice and increase the speed and effectiveness of their internal decision-making processes so that they can achieve a rapid consensus on the internal EU position at COP 10 , as well as devoting a greater volume of resources and more time to their diplomatic efforts in relation to third countries .
This resolution contains some points that are positive and important , others that are ambiguous and unclear , and yet others that are negative and even worrying .
We share the concern expressed about the failure to meet EU and world targets on significantly reducing the rate of biodiversity loss .
We welcome aspects such as sharing the benefits of genetic resources , rejecting patents on life forms and living processes , protecting traditional knowledge and the practices of indigenous peoples , making the connection between genetic diversity and global food security , assessing the impact of biofuels , and drawing attention to the problem of exotic species .
However , we vehemently reject and criticise the intention to move towards new forms of private appropriation of nature and natural resources , such as the introduction of ' payment for ecosystem services ' , which is advocated more than once in the resolution .
The ambiguous and unclear aspects should also be mentioned , such as advocating that ' the values of biodiversity and the opportunities derived from its conservation and sustainable use are integrated into national accounts ' .
The vote in favour of the motion for a resolution on the EU strategic objectives for the 10th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity ( CBD ) , to be held in Nagoya ( Japan ) from 18 to 29 October 2010 , is principally due to the need to arrive at this important meeting with a common European position that can be supported by as many other participating countries as possible .
Only if we have clear ideas on objectives and proposals can we really play a decisive role in the global agreements that will be reached .
In particular , the resolution rightly stresses the need for urgent intervention to meet the target of reducing the loss of biodiversity on a wider scale through the application of already available resources .
The rampant rate of man-made biodiversity loss is worrying .
Biodiversity should be viewed as the most reliable barometer of the state of the environment .
Therefore , as the EU is faced with alarming biodiversity loss figures in which 42 % of mammals , 43 % of birds , 45 % of butterflies , 30 % of amphibians , 45 % of reptiles and 52 % of freshwater fish are threatened with extinction , I believe that the legislation that has just been implemented is essential and crucial to the conservation of biodiversity , and even its reinforcement .
We must therefore be ambitious with regard to biodiversity in order to achieve the strategic objectives for 2020 .
That is why I voted as I did .
Biodiversity is the basis for the existence of the whole of humankind , which implies that biodiversity and natural habitats must be preserved .
Poor sections of the population are especially affected by the reduction in biodiversity and the loss of ecosystems , as they often rely on natural products in order to survive .
It ought to be in the interests of Western governments to preserve this diversity and to take action to raise awareness of this matter because , in the long term , the preservation of biodiversity can only be beneficial from an economic point of view , too .
I am abstaining from the vote because the goals have been set too high and the EU 's leading role in this regard will only achieve its purpose if large nations like China are also prepared to change their way of thinking .
The European Union is concerned by the rapid rate of biodiversity loss and by the fact that the global 2010 biodiversity target to significantly reduce the rate of biodiversity loss has not been met .
In order to achieve ambitious goals , it is necessary , as quickly as possible , to adopt concrete indicators based on scientific data in order to measure progress towards the strategic targets .
Studies conducted to date estimate that the welfare loss arising from the loss of biodiversity is currently around EUR 50 billion per year ( just under 1 % of GDP ) , rising to EUR 14 trillion in 2050 .
Therefore , the European Union considers this problem to be extremely urgent .
I endorse the conviction that many links exist between protecting the climate , achieving the Millennium Development Goals and halting biodiversity loss .
Steps taken to protect biodiversity have a positive effect on climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies .
I agree with the appeal contained in the resolution for support for efforts to enhance synergies and links between biodiversity and climate policies .
However , in order to help prevent these global problems , there is a need to increase drastically the global funding for biodiversity protection , notably through existing funding sources , as well as new and innovative sources , including new and innovative market-based instruments .
Biological diversity is a rich heritage which we have inherited from past generations , and which we should leave for future generations . Quite apart from any anthropological point of view , it is also important to recognise the intrinsic value of this biological diversity .
At present , one in five species is at risk of extinction .
This is a frightening figure which calls upon us to take appropriate action to defend and protect biodiversity .
In view of this , I welcome this resolution , which is ultimately aimed at promoting the effective and decisive implementation of the previously established objective for 2010 to significantly reduce the rate of biodiversity loss , and which systematises the different paths for urgent action for the protection of biodiversity , establishing new objectives for 2020 .
The European Union must have the same aggressive approach in the international arena with regard to the protection of biodiversity as in the fight against climate change .
The task of conserving biodiversity promises to be just as difficult at Nagoya as at Cancún to reverse the ruinous trend in global warming .
The figures are there to remind us of the scale of the challenge : 30 % of animal and plant species have disappeared since 1970 .
In Europe , the loss of biodiversity continues even though , as a result of growing awareness , ecological zones called ' Natura 2000 ' were set up covering almost 18 % of European territory .
What should we expect at Nagoya between 18 and 29 October 2010 ?
At best , that the European Union speaks with one voice .
It must also have the courage to speak about topics that can provoke anger , even with Japan , the host country , which cannot continue to use unsustainable and particularly barbarous methods of fishing for whales and dolphins with impunity .
It must also give a positive message : the best way of protecting the diversity of species is to incorporate this concern horizontally into economic activities , such as trade , tourism and transport .
in writing . - Although our first intention was to support the text , Amendment 1 to paragraph 16 , tabled by the EPP Group and the ECR Group , finally led our group to abstain .
Biodiversity affects the life of every one of us .
However , as a result of human activity , the process of biodiversity loss around the world is advancing with increasing speed .
Symptoms of this include mass deforestation , shrinking fish stocks and the disappearance of yet more species .
Scientists estimate that 15-40 % of species may disappear by the end of the 21st century .
We should be aware that biodiversity loss has an adverse effect on the action of ecosystems and the services they deliver , such as the provision of food , purification of water , fertilisation of soil , protection against floods and production of energy .
Biodiversity is endangered by many factors , for example , climate change , uncontrolled suburban development and invasive alien species .
However , I would like to concentrate on one specific issue .
I am thinking of agriculture , which is often cited as a factor which poses a threat to biodiversity .
Certainly , one can agree that industrial agriculture is not environmentally friendly .
I think , however , that a significantly greater threat to the environment is the discontinuation of agricultural activity .
We have been seeing an intensification of this process recently .
The ever lower profitability of agricultural production , which is caused , among other factors , by price fluctuations , means that people are turning away from agriculture , and this is causing the disappearance of life over large areas .
From 18 to 29 October , the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity ( CBD ) will take place in Japan .
Both at a global and at a European level , the 2010 target to halt biodiversity loss has not been met .
As Parliament 's resolution underlines , unless something is done quickly to reverse it , the loss of biodiversity will be significant and uncontrollable in the medium and long term .
Parliament demands that living things should not be subject to patents and that the plundering of genetic resources by business and industry , particularly in developing countries , should cease .
The protection of biodiversity is essential to achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
I therefore supported the resolution including the amendments proposed by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
In a few weeks ' time , the climate change conference takes place in Cancún and it is therefore high time that the international community and , above all , the European Union , given its commitment to environmental protection , took heed of the report entitled ' The economics of ecosystems and biodiversity ' ( TEEB ) , and its recommendations at the Nagoya conference .
It is extremely urgent to repeat the fact that the fight for biodiversity , the fight against climate change , and the fight against poverty , are intimately linked , as are the answers for dealing with them .
Although studies have estimated the current economic costs of the loss of biodiversity to be around EUR 50 billion per year , this matter is not on the international political agenda .
Excellent instruments already exist at European level and we need to enhance these in a targeted way and coordinate them with climate policy action in order to obtain the maximum benefit from the investments .
Investment in the preservation of biodiversity will pay dividends .
The Basel II agreements regulate banking activity and , in particular , the own funds that banks have to conserve to ensure their solvency .
In this resolution , the European Parliament advocates the long-term management of risks and profits , as well as some rules which are adapted to the size of banks - so that the most important ones do not feel that they are let off - and argues that they should not pass on the costs of adapting to the new legislation to private individuals .
In addition , Parliament is concerned that Basel II may not be respected in a uniform manner across the world .
It is pressing the European Commission to take steps towards greater harmonisation .
I think that these recommendations go in the right direction : reducing the risk of a future crisis and defending private individuals .
I therefore voted strongly in favour of this resolution .
I welcome the excellent work done by the rapporteur , Mr Karas , in preparing an invaluable own-initiative report on the reform of Basel II to strengthen the banking system in the light of the financial crisis .
Europe must , in fact , play more of a part in this phase of the negotiations so that we can avoid a possible penalisation of the European economic system and distortions of competition .
Compared to the US system , the European system is mainly financed by bank lending , but the financial crisis of the last few years in Europe and the resulting lack of liquidity have led to a drastic reduction in loans to small and medium-sized enterprises , which form the backbone of our economy .
I voted in favour of this document because I am convinced that in the negotiations on the reform of Basel II , the EU must strive to obtain equal terms with the United States on accounting standards , parity of requirements between commercial banks and investment banks , an unambiguous definition of liquidity and greater transparency with regard to the role of rating agencies .
In order to cope with future periods of stress , we must henceforth provide ourselves with a greater quantity and quality of capital and greater liquidity .
At the same time , it would be expedient to take countercyclical measures and create economic surpluses .
I voted in favour of the resolution as I agree that the issue of ' too-big-to-fail ' financial institutions should be addressed , whereby capital requirements and countercyclical buffers should be proportionate to the size , level of risk and business model of a financial institution .
I would like to call for an in-depth study of capital instruments before and after the crisis in order to evaluate the importance of specific capital instruments and their relevance in a crisis situation .
The forthcoming European Banking Authority should play a leading role in drawing up and implementing measures relating to capital requirements and the rules on countercyclical buffer standards at EU level .
I abstained on this report because , although it recognises the problem in theory and supports the need to revise the Basel II rules and reinforce supervision of the financial system and banks , it balks at adopting strict rules .
The report underestimates the degree to which the banks were to blame for the crisis , due to their over-indulgent and speculative tendencies , especially over recent years .
We need a new perception of the character and role of the financial system if we are to have European economic policies which foster sustainable growth and , ultimately , address social needs .
I am voting in favour of the bulk of the measures proposed in this report .
Countercyclical regulation requires standardised criteria which ensure comprehensive and careful monitoring of the financial markets and the market environment by supervisory authorities .
In particular , these include the full exchange of information , synchronisation of regulatory measures and the real-time monitoring of exposure and risk , including a requirement for audit trails on all financial market transactions .
Developing high quality liquidity standards is therefore a key part of the crisis response .
However , these should be sufficiently differentiated in order to take account of the particularities of banks ' business models and their respective risk profiles .
In view of this , the forthcoming European Banking Authority should play a leading role in drawing up and implementing measures relating to capital requirements and the rules on countercyclical buffer standards at EU level .
I voted in favour of the resolution as I believe that the supervision and regulation of financial market participants are essential for safeguarding the interests of the public and the financial and economic stability necessary for development and progress .
Moreover , the crisis that we are experiencing at present has shown that bank capital was clearly insufficient in terms of solvability and solvency .
Capital requirements and countercyclical buffers should be proportionate to the size , level of risk and business model of a financial institution .
On the other hand , I would like to highlight the appeal and warning to the Basel Committee on the importance of the necessary adjustments to the regulatory framework so that the European economy and banking sector , which are characterised by a strong interdependence , are not prejudiced and placed in a situation of competitive disadvantage on the global market .
Attempts to improve the international financial system , at Basel Committee , G20 and European Union level , seem to me to be of no use at all .
The September agreement on the volume and quality of capital that banks are required to hold was welcomed as a great advance and a great victory over a sector that was set against these measures and threatening to cut off the supply of credit .
It was a Pyrrhic victory apparently , since , following the agreement , stock exchange prices for the sector scarcely increased , which was not a good sign .
The banks have until 2019 to comply with the new provisions and , in the meantime , anything can happen .
Risk analysis , which we already know to be utterly ineffective , remains central to this system .
The problem of liquidity and leverage ratios has not been resolved , any more than that of off-balance sheet assets and securitisation .
Financial institutions which do not receive funding from the public sector , such as hedge funds , are not affected despite how dangerous they are and their perverse way of operating .
In short , nothing has been resolved , nor will it be without fundamentally changing the system instead of trying to patch it up .
The Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs have voted in favour of the Karas report .
The report deals with a number of essential points as well as calls for Basel III to be implemented in the most appropriate way and with respect for the differences in the financial systems .
However , the Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs regret the fact that more account was not taken of the Danish recommendations for the protection of the Danish mortgage credit model .
Some of the Basel proposals may cause significant damage to effective mortgage credit models in Europe , including the Danish one .
in writing . - The Basel Committee seeks to reform the Basel II framework in order to strengthen the resilience of the banking system .
The Committee 's proposal aims to improve the quality of the capital base , and extend and strengthen the coverage of the capital framework .
The Committee also intends to introduce a leverage ratio to help contain excessive build-up of leverage in the system and other supplementary countercyclical measures such as capital buffers to be built in good times .
Moreover , global standards on liquidity management are proposed .
However , whilst there is a strong international commitment to revise the Basel framework , it is crucially important that such revision strikes the right balance between various business models , investment and traditional retail banking , different legal forms and predominant financing of the corporate sector through bank lending in Europe .
Furthermore , the European Parliament must play an active role and strongly influence the revision of the rules already in the process of negotiations in the Basel Committee .
The European Parliament , as the democratically elected European body which will later on colegislate on the Commission proposal for the Capital Requirements Directive ( CRD 4 Directive ) , should be involved in the negotiations process at an early stage .
The vote in favour of the Karas report is due to the precision with which my colleague has recorded the progress that has been made with the Capital Requirements Directive , but also the critical issues that are forcing us to urgently carry out this reform .
Firstly , I agree on the need to guarantee an active and , above all , ' early ' role for the European Parliament in the negotiations so as to ensure a kind of ' democratic control ' , enabling measures to be taken which correspond as far as possible to the requirements of all businesses .
We must do everything we can to protect the end users of financial services , and so the new agreement must provide for a system that does not force banks to pass on their operating costs to them .
in writing . - At the heart of the financial crisis were banks taking excessive risks and failing to hold enough capital to cover those risks .
The failures of those banks have brought on a crisis which continues to severely hurt citizens around the world .
Citizens have paid twice , with costs of a taxpayer bailout followed by the pain of recession and spending cuts .
To prevent a repeat of such a crisis requires a fundamental revision of the financial regulatory framework and this must include a stronger capital framework for banks .
Proposals to improve the Capital Requirements Directive are therefore central to creating stable and responsible banks .
This report endorses the aims and proposals set out by the G20 and the Basel Committee , to ensure banks hold sufficient amounts of capital of a suitable quality , and that they have the liquidity and stable funding necessary to withstand tough market conditions .
Labour MEPs are voting for this report as it backs the reform process , but we do not support any calls to weaken the proposals adopted by Basel .
We encourage further study of the impact of the measures where appropriate , but with a view to ensuring full , tough and timely international implementation .
This text does not measure up to the challenge that the current crisis and its economic and social consequences represent .
The urgency is to radically change banking system rules , not to take half measures to preserve them .
The Basel Agreement sets a ridiculously low level of capital requirements and prohibits none of the tools of speculation .
I voted against this cover for speculation .
The global financial crisis which is continuing to cause problems to the economy in all countries has confirmed that a strong banking sector is of paramount importance in order to avoid similar situations in future .
Basel II and the revision of the Capital Requirements Directive are to contribute to a strong banking industry , in conditions that , in future , will allow us to withstand any similar crises to those seen in the recent past .
The aim of this report is to improve the quality of the capital base and extend and strengthen capital requirements for risk coverage ( such as counterparty credit risk arising from derivatives , repurchase agreements , etc . ) .
It is also intended to introduce a leverage ratio to curb excessive use of leverage within the banking system , and other supplementary countercyclical measures such as the creation of capital buffers in favourable economic periods .
Last but not least , it proposes global liquidity management standards .
That is why I voted as I did .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that :
' too-big-to-fail ' financial institutions should be able to draw upon countercyclical capital that is proportionate to the size and level of business risk ;
the Basel Committee and the Commission should clarify the treatment of reciprocal financial cross-holding agreements ;
there should be an in-depth study of capital instruments as they are before and after the crisis , in order to evaluate the importance of specific capital instruments and their relevance in a future crisis situation ;
high quality liquidity standards are a key part of the crisis response ;
it is necessary to define the criteria for high quality liquid assets ;
the Commission should include all euro area sovereign debt as high quality liquid assets , regardless of its specific rating ;
the forthcoming European Banking Authority should play a leading role in drawing up and implementing measures relating to capital requirements and the rules on countercyclical buffer standards ;
countercyclical regulation requires harmonised criteria in order to ensure comprehensive and careful monitoring of the financial markets and the market environment by supervisory authorities .
in writing . - The report sets out the EP position regarding the forthcoming revision of international standards and guidelines on capital and liquidity requirements for the banking system which are being adopted by the Basel Committee ( the international forum established by central banks and supervisors of the banking sector ) , as well as the G20 commitments on this matter .
These standards are supposed to be transposed and adapted to the EU legal framework through a revision of the Capital Requirements Directive ( CRD ) .
A Commission legislative proposal is scheduled during the first quarter of 2011 .
in writing . - I wish to confirm my support for this report .
As the Commission knows , Parliament has always felt that arrangements for the agreement of Basel II inadequately reflect the Parliamentary process .
With so much at stake between the major financial nations , a reconsideration of issues such as capital ratios and leverage demand stronger oversight by Parliament .
This report has helped correct the imbalance of institutional involvement from the EP and the Commission needs to acknowledge that .
I fully support the report 's recognition of the fact that there are mortgage obligations and other types of securities issued that are , in fact , equally as liquid and secure as government bonds .
I therefore also fully support the report 's indirect support for the Danish mortgage credit model , even though I believe that Denmark should have been mentioned more explicitly in the text .
The reason that I am abstaining from the vote is because , in the interests of competitiveness in the EU , the report does not call for the introduction of more stringent financial regulation than is found in the rest of the Western world , including the United States .
Adoption of the EU financial supervision package in September involved , in particular , the creation of bodies and mechanisms for micro-prudential supervision in the banking area , in coordination with the network of national supervisors .
The own-initiative report on which we voted today focuses on a subject that I believe somehow falls within this new architecture and which I consider decisive for any economy .
Defining the quantity and quality of own funds is certainly a matter of great sensitivity which needs to be analysed in terms of its impact - particularly on Europe 's economic recovery - and its general context .
Since our businesses are financed primarily by the banking sector , which is one of the pillars of the economy , it is crucial in my view that the banks should manage their risks and profits within a long-term prudential perspective .
Moreover , I believe these concerns should be discussed proactively and in terms of transatlantic cooperation .
I voted in favour of this report since I agree with its overall content , which I see as one more step towards establishing new Union mechanisms for planning , coordination and supervision in the economic , budgetary and social spheres of the EU .
in writing . - The current financial crisis has demonstrated the risks taken , and lack of capital held to cover those risks , by many banks .
This irresponsibility continues to cost European citizens , both in terms of bank bailouts and spending cuts as a result of the ensuing recession .
Any revision of the financial regulatory framework must include proposals to improve the Capital Requirements Directive and therefore central to creating stable and responsible banks .
This report endorses the aims and proposals set out by the G20 and the Basel Committee , to ensure banks hold sufficient amounts of capital of a suitable quality , and that they have the liquidity and stable funding necessary to withstand tough market conditions .
I voted for this report as it backs the reform process , but I will not support any calls to weaken the proposals adopted by Basel .
I would also suggest further study of the impact of the measures where appropriate , but with a view to ensuring full , tough and timely international implementation .
Up until now , the international community has not maintained an attitude of indifference , but has carried out many actions of solidarity to support the populations living in Africa .
However , the level of development of this sector is still far below that in the West .
If we consider that an African 's life expectancy may be even 30 or 40 years less than that of a European , we can say that this remains a major problem , even now .
Fellow Members , I support the solutions proposed in Mrs De Keyser 's report and I wish to point out that the real solution to Africa 's problem lies equally in constructing a foundation for the health care system and in providing prompt aid .
To paraphrase a famous saying , I believe that ' if you offer the patient a drug , you have helped him for a day .
If you offer him the foundations for a health care system , you have helped not only him for life , but also his children ' .
This is precisely the reason why I support a balanced policy for granting funds .
in writing . - The Maltese Labour delegation voted in favour of the report on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health , which promotes fundamental issues and priorities to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and halve extreme poverty by 2015 .
We also condemn the fact that in some areas , women are still subject to genital mutilation , violence and rape .
We also fully agree with issues addressed in this report , especially the most pressing health problems in sub-Saharan Africa , and the general question of how to improve health care service provisions and social insurance schemes there .
However , my delegation is not in agreement with the reference to the promotion of abortion in paragraph 6 of the report .
in writing . - This report deals with a number of issues .
Nevertheless , of great concern is paragraph 6 which deals with abortion .
I am against abortion and cannot support a dossier that promotes these practices .
This is why I have decided to vote against the report as amended .
The Swedish Conservatives have today , 7 October 2010 , voted against the report on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health .
However , we would like to point out that we believe that the report deals with a vitally important subject - access to health care is a basic prerequisite for development .
Hundreds of thousands of children in sub-Saharan Africa die each year of diseases that are not fatal for anyone who has access to basic care .
In our opinion , however , this report does not have the answer to the question of how this should be provided .
It is a fact that civil society has played , and in many countries continues to play , a very major role as care provider .
To categorically reject the work done by private care providers and non-governmental organisations is not the right way to go about things for someone who has the welfare of the poor in mind .
At the same time , we would like to stress that we do , of course , support the wording in the report concerning women 's reproductive health and the condemnation of genital mutilation and the terrible acts of violence that women are still being subjected to .
As far as I see it , the main merit of the resolution on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health is that it tackles the issue on the basis of the specific features of the region in question .
There is a real problem in implanting a model for organising social protection systems which is specific to Western civilisation in a totally different context .
Many projects intended for developing countries have failed due to the adoption of an absolutist , Western-centrist approach , whether from Europe or the United States .
This has led to resources being wasted and additional problems being created for the countries concerned .
The specific situation of this area makes the observation even more obvious that we cannot treat health like a commodity .
Consequently , forms of health care need to be identified which can be provided on a non-profit basis , inspired by the values of solidarity and democracy .
The progress achieved over time , including through the contributions made by EU Member States , can be undone by adopting a hasty approach based on commercial considerations .
I feel that the resolution tackles the issue in a fair , coherent manner , which is why I voted for it .
in writing . - I support this report which seeks , in light of the EU 's commitments to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and halve extreme poverty by 2015 , to address the most pressing health problems in sub-Saharan Africa and the question of what systems can be put in place to do so .
The report examines how universal , accessible and affordable health care systems can be set up and how we can share best practice from the European experience .
In particular , the report looks at mutual health organisations which have already been established and proven to work effectively in several African states .
Mutual health organisations are not intended to take the place of the state ; rather , they offer an alternative , enabling the obstacles to health care access to be overcome and providing improved access to quality health care for all citizens regardless of their income .
Indeed , they have been able to tailor insurance provision to the socio-economic characteristics of populations in an informal economy which remain excluded from formal schemes and commercial insurance , and , as a result , they are an appropriate solution for achieving the goal of universal coverage in low- and middle-income countries .
Africa is exhausted by the consequences of the crisis , natural disasters , extreme poverty , wars and epidemics , and it is therefore urgent that we help to introduce a sustainable health policy .
This is why I supported this report , which provides for health care systems financed in a mixed way by state resources , through international solidarity and through the participation of citizens .
In order to achieve that , the European countries must keep their promise to allocate at least 0.7 % of GNP to cooperation in 2010 .
The EU must support the numerous existing mutualist initiatives whose objective is to promote access to health care .
The Member States are called on to provide their expertise and greater technical and financial support to the governments of developing countries in order to introduce and extend social security systems .
Finally , the European Investment Bank also has a role to play in guaranteeing credit , cofinancing investments in clinics and taking on part of the remuneration of health professionals .
It is only through these joint efforts that Africa will be able to benefit from a sustainable health care system which is accessible to all .
The reinforcement of health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa is a crucial aspect of development policies .
Compensating for the shortcomings in care systems will also have an impact on public health worldwide , through improved training for medical professionals , appropriate prevention campaigns and reduced treatment costs .
This will contribute to a fall in serious epidemics , such as HIV , tuberculosis and dysentery .
It is not acceptable for private companies to hinder access to health care for the sake of profits , and it is even less acceptable for conservative religious movements to reject sexual and reproductive health policies and question the right to abortion , thereby putting the health of millions of women at risk .
In order to improve the health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and throughout the world , it is essential for the European Union to be more in step with the rest of the international community .
In particular , it has a role to play in encouraging the emergence of non-profit-making , solidarity-based mutual health structures , enabling the promotion of access to quality health care .
This is why I support the adoption of Mrs De Keyser 's report .
It is important for the people in countries on the African continent to have access to health care services .
It is good , therefore , that we are having a debate on health insurance systems and on how health care can be organised in low-income countries .
Unfortunately , the tone and approach of the report could have been a great deal better .
For example , it is regrettable that ideas still prevail in Europe that make it possible for phrases such as ' whereas people living in certain social and humanitarian circumstances do not always appreciate the concept of providence ' to still be written .
We also believe that , in certain respects , the report has an outdated attitude to private health insurance and independent providers of health care .
In certain parts of Africa today , it is vital for these independent providers to be able to continue to operate in order for there to be any health care available at all .
In spite of these shortcomings , we believe that the aim of the report is a good one and that it presents a good number of sound initiatives .
We would also like to support the progressive forces working within the aid organisations for women 's right to reproductive health .
We therefore chose to vote in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of the report on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health since it confirms the need for the international community to fulfil its commitments to the Millennium Development Goals and for the European Union to discharge its undertaking to step up its support for health services in sub-Saharan Africa .
I must emphasise the importance of supporting the development of sustainable mutual models , which should be based on solidarity - between North and South and among their members - but which , in the long term , should aim to gain their autonomy and become self-financing .
Sub-Saharan Africa continues to be the region with the lowest average life expectancy ( ALE ) at birth ( of the 20 countries with the lowest ALE , 19 are in Africa ) and the highest mortality rate and mother and child mortality rate .
It is also the region with the highest prevalence of deaths resulting from HIV infection , the prevalence rate in the adult population exceeding 15 % in several countries .
These data can only be seen as striking , alerting us to the urgent need for humanitarian aid to these countries to be properly directed to the area of health and the provision of basic medical care to highly deprived communities .
In this , the European Union and the individual Member States have a role to play , not because this situation of extreme need may be due to the colonial past of the African continent , as the report states , but because we Europeans are linked to Africa by special bonds of friendship and solidarity which must not be forgotten .
The serious problems and extreme health needs of African people are indisputable , as is the importance of effective intervention by the developed world in order to ensure better living conditions in a continent marked by numerous scourges , from natural disasters to wars , conflicts and oppressive dictatorships .
It is , however , unacceptable to use this cause in order to force the introduction of fundamental and non-negotiable human values , as is the case with the right to life .
The imposition of new , divisive concepts will not contribute to solving the problems of underdeveloped Africa .
I therefore voted against .
The report contains aspects that we consider important , such as the belief that health is not a commodity and the concern it shows at ' the growing commoditisation of health care ' .
We welcome its defence of the right of women to exercise full control over matters relating to their reproductive health , including procreation , contraception , abortion or sexually transmitted diseases .
Equally important is the fact that it highlights the problem of the shortage of qualified health professionals in many African countries .
Instead of trying to help keep these resources in their countries of origin , several European countries have contributed to exacerbating the brain drain by enticing many such professionals away .
Where the report could and should have gone further is in what it calls ' external factors ' , which ' can radically reduce the margin for manoeuvre of states ( ... ) and can have a profound effect on the health of their populations ' .
We certainly cannot ignore the structural adjustment programmes , the foreign debt , or the cuts and privatisations aimed at achieving viability , including in the health sector , where there are huge shortages already .
Nor can we ignore the way in which the EU tries at all costs to impose Economic Partnership Agreements , which will weaken these countries ' economies even more .
in writing . - The exchange of information is important no matter what policy area it is .
However , in the health care sector , it is of vital importance to swap information between countries and regions , and in this way , it will be easier to examine what aspects are universal , accessible and affordable in regions other than the one it was first intended for .
With this in mind , I welcome this report as it shows best practice from the European experience and we can see what that is applicable to in Sub-Saharan Africa .
I supported the report on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health because I consider it essential to defend the right to health as a fundamental human right .
Sadly , it is well known that the life expectancy of an African is at least 30 years less than that of a European , and this difference alone puts the model of North-South solidarity seriously to the test .
It is also well known that the majority of sub-Saharan Africans , especially those living in rural areas , cannot afford the cost of medicines .
The report that we have voted on today in Parliament expresses a preference for sustainable health services financed either from public funds or from international solidarity .
In fact , in this context , the European Union can play an important role by taking appropriate action to lay the foundations of a transparent funding system based on health indicators derived from the real needs of the population .
In addition , I consider it necessary to proceed with the implementation of programmes to educate the population in prevention and early diagnosis of diseases , and lastly , I would emphasise the primary role that the authorities on the ground must play to this end .
It is imperative that we continue to pool our efforts so that the investment made by the European Union towards health systems in sub-Saharan Africa are effectively implemented in order to permanently reduce the large imbalance that currently exists between that continent and others , especially with regard to childbirth , life expectancy and the incidence of HIV .
It is , however , important to sound a warning to the rulers of these countries so that they use the available funds for their intended purposes , and to ensure that they are not diverted to other types of activities , because poor governance in certain countries often leads to the worsening of problems in health systems .
I should also point out that the birth rate should continue to be preserved and promoted in these countries , and the voluntary interruption of pregnancy should not be easy .
Whilst we should certainly respect the rights of women , the recurrent practice of interrupting pregnancies should not be the main factor in the birth rate .
That is why I voted as I did .
I support the report on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health .
Health is not a commodity .
Following the 2010 report on the Millennium Development Goals , and with five years to go until the deadline , it is the responsibility of each one of us to support our partner countries in the implementation of their national health policies .
Health expenditure is not a cost but an essential investment for the sustainable socio-economic development of these countries .
How can we accept the fact that the life expectancy of an African and a European can differ by 30 or 40 years ?
There are many factors , such as bad governance , natural disasters and extreme poverty , that contribute to creating a worrying situation ; a situation in which health indicators in Africa are some of the most alarming in the world .
As stated in the report , according to the World Bank , it is unlikely that developing countries will be able in the near future to finance their own national health systems from their tax revenue .
In this context , non-profit-making systems with mixed financing from state resources , international support and public participation could help meet the immense challenge posed by health care in sub-Saharan Africa .
Admittedly , some African countries have already embarked on some promising initiatives with the help of the international community .
However , the European Union has a particular role to play in the implementation of solidarity-based health structures by providing guidance and funding basic health care systems , together with access to drugs .
It must also support programmes to educate the population in prevention and early diagnosis of diseases .
in writing . - The report deals with the absence of health insurance in sub-Saharan Africa , which penalises the majority of the population in obtaining access to health care .
Those who have health care are the people who can afford it .
The big majority of the population of sub-Saharan Africa , particularly in rural areas , is unable to afford heath care or drugs , even of the generic kind , despite NGOs and other government programmes providing services .
So the main message of the report is to put in place health insurance , based on a solidarity system , to allow the population to have access to heath care .
In this respect , the report calls on the Commission to support and encourage a health insurance system by bringing together public authorities , all stakeholders and donors .
Almost 10 million children under the age of five die each year , and of these , 4 million are newborn infants less than one month old .
Infant mortality is almost entirely concentrated in poor countries , mainly in sub-Saharan Africa .
Even to this day , a woman dies every minute in the world from complications linked to pregnancy or childbirth .
The main causes are haemorrhaging , infections and hypertensive crises .
Statistics from the World Health Organisation show that the risk of dying as a result of pregnancy is 36 times higher for a woman in a developing country than it is for a woman living in a developed country .
In the last few years , the number of fatalities has fallen by 34 % but this statistic is less than one half of what would be required to meet Millennium Development Goal 5 .
Greater attention must be paid to helping those more at risk , namely , women living in rural areas and the poorest families , ethnic minorities and indigenous groups , and people living in conflict zones , and there must be more investment in health care systems so as to ensure that a better quality of care is finally made available to all .
in writing . - ( SV ) In today 's vote in the European Parliament , I voted against the own-initiative report on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health .
The report deals with a vitally important subject - it is obvious that access to health care is a basic prerequisite for development .
Hundreds of thousands of children in sub-Saharan Africa die each year of diseases that are not fatal for anyone who has access to basic care .
It is a disgrace to us in the developed world .
Aid targeted at making health care accessible is needed .
In my opinion , however , this report does not have acceptable answers to the question of how this should be done .
It is a fact that civil society , particularly the faith-based organisations , has historically played , and in many countries south of the Sahara , continues to play , a very important role as a care provider .
To do as this report does and categorically reject the work done by private care providers and non-governmental organisations is definitely not the right way to go about things for someone who genuinely has the welfare of the poor in mind .
I therefore voted against the report .
Through the resolution on health care systems in sub-Saharan Africa and global health , the European Parliament has ' pointed out that women have the right to exercise full control over matters relating to their reproductive health , as regards procreation , contraception , abortion or sexually transmitted diseases ' .
However , I regret the fact that this measure was adopted by a slim majority - 313 to 229 .
This is about a fundamental right for which thousands of women have fought and still fight in Europe and throughout the world , often putting their lives at risk .
Although I strongly deplore the position taken by a minority of my colleagues , I am very pleased by today 's vote .
My colleagues and I believe that we must capitalise on the successes of the European Union 's regional policy .
That means that it will have to undergo an evolution , not a revolution .
It must remain a strong , well-financed policy , and one that is a genuine lever of economic development for all our regions .
We want simplified rules , not only in words , but also in deeds .
We firmly believe that outermost towns and regions should receive special attention .
Having worked on this resolution , both at the working group stage and in Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development , I have secured significant progress on two fronts : that more consideration be taken of the needs of potential beneficiaries and that the concept of GDP not be held needlessly sacred .
I believe that GDP should remain the main criterion for allocating funds but that we should also consider other criteria .
I am pleased with the compromise that has been found , so I voted in favour of this text .
By adopting this resolution with a very large majority , we have joined forces and sent a very clear message to the European Commission and European ministers .
I voted in favour of the resolution on EU cohesion and regional policy after 2013 .
This text includes essential assertions such as the need , after 2013 , to maintain a cohesion policy , which is a necessary condition for the union of the Member States .
I believe that we must be very careful with regard to the notion of requesting that , in the framework of the second pillar of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , rural development be coordinated with cohesion development objectives and managed at regional level to ensure that it is adapted to needs .
It is perfectly possible to achieve regional adequacy by contractualisation without a mandatory instrument .
I absolutely agree that cohesion policy should not be renationalised .
Cohesion policy should be neither national nor regional .
It should be European .
We should move beyond a cohesion policy based on the reunification of Europe to a cohesion policy based on European planning and development .
Making the Union the most competitive region in the world in economic and social terms , and the most environmentally sustainable : that is the ambition linked to the Europe of results that citizens expect .
EU cohesion policy aims to reduce differences in levels of development between European regions and to achieve economic and social cohesion , which is very important for rural community life and development .
I voted in favour of this resolution and it is vital that the EU continue to support sustainable growth in rural and remote areas .
Ireland has received some EUR 10 billion since 1973 through the Regional Development Fund and the Cohesion Committee .
I support what the resolution says about giving careful thought to the importance of regional development , and taking it into account in the EU budget , and about promoting a strong European regional policy with appropriate funding to achieve social , economic and territorial cohesion .
Cohesion policy from 2013 onwards must meet the needs of the European regions , to help the EU community grow and flourish .
It must be a simplified and transparent policy .
There must be synergy with regional development policy and a coordinated approach , being managed at regional level , so that specific policy targets are reached and money distributed fairly .
in writing . - ( LT ) I supported this resolution .
Cohesion policy is a particularly important part of EU policy , which aims to reduce disparities between the levels of development of European regions and to ensure economic , social and territorial cohesion .
An effectively implemented regional policy has great added value for the whole of the EU and its economic growth .
The European Parliament has frequently expressed its position that cohesion policy is currently being developed against the backdrop of global challenges , which have a varying impact on the EU 's regions .
It is therefore necessary to fundamentally improve the overall coordination of cohesion policy at EU level .
In reality , the complexity and severity of the requirements and rules applied to cohesion policy are one of the main obstacles preventing the exploitation of these instruments ' potential .
In order to ensure that cohesion policy objectives are achieved when the policy is implemented , there must be adequate flexibility so that it is adapted to the specific characteristics of individual regions so that they can overcome specific economic and social difficulties .
The cohesion policy is the most effective instrument available for applying European policies at regional level .
The motion for a resolution adopted today contains important aspects establishing a close link with the EU 2020 strategy objectives .
The 2014-2021 budgetary framework must support an ambitious cohesion policy in terms of allocated resources .
In addition , in view of the impact of the economic crisis on the less developed regions , the convergence objective must continue to be given predominant weighting in the future as well .
In the case of Romania , implementation of this policy allows proper convergence to be established with the other EU states , especially as all eight development regions in my country can benefit from the Structural Funds .
Attracting and making the best use of these funds would have resulted in a 15 % rise in GDP over the next five years .
However , as a result of the low administrative capacity of the administration departments within the ministries , the rate of absorption remains one of the lowest in Europe .
Consequently , I believe that it would be useful to reorganise these existing administrative structures at ministry level and apply stringent skills criteria for selecting staff .
Furthermore , I think that macro-regional strategies , like the Danube strategy , need to be maintained as priority aspects of this policy .
I voted for this resolution because the European Union must now begin to plan how to finance and coordinate EU cohesion and regional policy after 2013 .
I agree with the view of the European Parliament that we now have to plan and distribute EU money earmarked for the structural funds so that in the new long-term financial period , enough money is allocated to ensure the harmonious development of all EU regions .
Europe is united , and so it is very important to achieve the objective of cohesion policy - to reduce disparities in the level of development of the European regions and to ensure economic , social and territorial cohesion .
I agree with Parliament 's opinion that cohesion policy should be more results-oriented and that we should aim for even more effectiveness and usefulness because only then will this policy become more convenient and beneficial for consumers .
To achieve this , we must fundamentally improve administrative procedures , increase financial control , coordinate national and regional procedures and make them more flexible and simple .
In order to achieve the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , we must implement cohesion and regional policy and ensure that this policy is independent and covers all European regions .
It is important to increase the EU budget , but it is also important to improve the flexibility and simplification of the rules of use in order for there to be better implementation of the budget .
The EU should have political priorities which contribute to economic growth and the creation of more and better employment , along with policies which contribute to competitiveness , such as scientific research and innovation .
I would like to call for the architecture of post-2013 cohesion policy to offer a simple , fair and transparent transition regime , taking into account past experiences and the latest trends in the social and economic situation of the regions concerned , as well as enabling them to continue on their path towards growth and development .
The EU budget should be drawn up in conjunction with the European political agenda .
For example , energy is on the agenda of all the European leaders , yet we are investing four times less in scientific research than we were in the 1980s .
I believe that the European Union 's 2020 strategy is a good starting point and a good working basis .
I believe that the European Social Fund should remain part of the regulation on general provisions concerning the cohesion policy funds .
However , I think that it needs to operate according to its own rules .
Since its foundation , the European Union has promoted peace and welfare , an area of freedom and security , and a single market as essential values , and it has promoted social , economic and territorial cohesion through sustainable development .
Today , these values , upon which we pride ourselves , should continue to guide the European integration process in the future , obviously along with its policy of regional development .
2013 is just around the corner .
Everyone 's efforts are therefore important in achieving this objective , as the current situation in Europe is quite complex , and is undergoing profound changes following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The adverse global climate has also refocused the priorities of the EU , with a view to settling specific or economic problems that need to be solved , but which cannot distract from the principles underlying EU regional policy .
The architecture of post-2013 cohesion policy should clearly reflect the fact that cohesion policy is not a policy of redistributing financial resources between Member States and regions .
Rather , it is , or it should be , a policy aimed at the EU 's social , economic and territorial development .
In adopting the resolution on EU cohesion and regional policy after 2013 , the European Parliament has just given its support to the requests being made by the regions gathered together right now in Brussels for the Open Days .
Parliament wants to give a strong political signal before the fifth cohesion report , due out in November , which will set the main objectives of EU regional policy after 2013 .
The social crisis that we are currently experiencing lends a special dimension to regional development policy .
If the regions are to continue to cope with this period of economic restructuring , they need a proper budget .
In order to ensure the success of the EU 2020 strategy , the regions also need to be more involved , and the European Commission must continue to simplify the procedures for accessing funds .
Finally , cohesion policy must also be the subject of better communication so that European citizens can understand the important role played by the Structural Funds in major regional and social cohesion projects .
This is one of the local level initiatives that Europe must promote .
I voted in favour of the resolution on EU cohesion and regional policy after 2013 .
Implementation of cohesion policy , which contributes to stable , sustainable economic growth and job creation in the European Union , is essential for the success of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Although it is important for achieving the goals of this strategy , cohesion and regional policy should be independent and provide a framework for establishing strong synergies between all European policies .
As I have had occasion to say at other times , EU cohesion policy is vital for reducing the imbalances in the various regions of the EU 27 , for helping to alleviate imbalances , and for promoting European competitiveness .
It is essential to help the least favoured areas to develop ; to enhance the efficient allocation of funds for innovation , technology and education ; and to implement measures to stimulate employment and competitiveness , in particular .
The Europe 2020 targets should be the driving force in this area as well , and I therefore welcome the recommendation to encourage greater use of the available technical assistance resources to enhance the capacities of small and medium-sized enterprises and non-governmental organisations .
in writing . - ( PT ) The aim of cohesion policy is to reduce disparities between levels of development in European regions and mobilising the potential for growth in order to achieve economic , social and territorial cohesion .
This policy has proved essential to the process of European integration , the pursuit of modernisation and sustainable growth .
In accordance with the spirit of the treaties , these features demand the application of a regional policy at EU level throughout the entire EU area , covering all European regions .
The outermost regions , border regions , regions with specific geographical features , and other regions facing specific development challenges , should continue to benefit from specific provisions .
The current accumulation of long- and short-term challenges that the European Union is facing entails the adoption of the EU 2020 strategy so as to create a favourable framework for stable and sustainable economic growth and job creation in Europe .
The implementation of cohesion policy is now essential to the success of this strategy .
I would like to highlight the fact that territorial cohesion implies an approach aimed at territorial development , so there should also be sufficient flexibility to allow for adaptation to specific regional characteristics and support for less developed regions in their efforts to overcome their socio-economic difficulties .
There are several positive aspects to this resolution , particularly where it insists on the objectives of cohesion policy , which aims to reduce disparities between the levels of development of European regions and mobilising growth potential to achieve economic , social and territorial cohesion .
This is an area that facilitates the pursuit of modernisation and sustainable growth as well as demonstrating some solidarity .
It should therefore have been given greater emphasis .
It is essential for the regional dimension to be fully considered in the proposed review of the EU budget and the future financial framework , since otherwise it will be difficult to achieve social , economic and territorial cohesion .
Cohesion policy needs to be adapted to the outermost regions mentioned in Article 349 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union through the adoption of specific measures .
The Commission must propose permanent measures backed by adequate funding that can adapt to the needs of each outermost region in order to help them overcome their permanent handicaps .
Border regions , regions with specific geographical features and other regions facing specific development challenges must also continue to benefit from specific provisions .
However , we do not want cohesion policy to be subordinated to the priorities of the EU 2020 strategy , which stresses ' competitiveness ' , ' deregulation ' , ' adaptability ' and ' entrepreneurship ' , always at the expense of cohesion and convergence .
Future cohesion policy is currently being decided , while unemployment is growing and public finance shrinking across Europe .
GDP in the Border , Midland and Western ( BMW ) region , for example , is likely to fall to 75-100 % of European GDP again .
Measures must be implemented for 2013 onwards that take the changed economic situation in Ireland , and particularly in the BMW region , into account .
Objective 2 programmes must focus in future on strengthening the regions ' capacity to contribute effectively to sustainable economic development in Ireland and Europe that is greener and smarter .
Regional flights to the BMW region are an economic and social necessity .
Thus , funding of the Public Service Obligation must be maintained , because these internal flights could not be operated without this money .
EU support for cross-border cooperation must continue .
Cross-border cooperation has the potential to combat fragmentation of the labour market , trading networks and infrastructure in border regions .
in writing . - Cohesion policy is a basic principle of European integration as it ensures equal development and the reduction of disparities within the EU whilst also protecting social and territorial cohesion .
The Lisbon Treaty strengthened cohesion policy and thus , it is in all our interests that the future cohesion policy stimulates the development potential of the entire EU , encourages greater competitiveness of the European economy , and improves the quality of our lives .
As a consequence of the inception of the Europe 2020 strategy within the Council and following the adoption within Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development of a document on future cohesion policy , we have an appropriate and well-timed report aimed at restoring the central role of cohesion policy .
The report rightly emphasises the relevance of the regional dimension following the introduction , under the new treaty , of an additional territorial status for economic and social cohesion , and makes due reference to the key principles of cohesion - multi-level governance , partnership and an integrated approach .
For all these reasons , I shall vote in favour of the report .
Without an assertive cohesion policy like the one that it has always had in place , the EU would not have succeeded in reducing existing imbalances between more geographically disadvantaged regions and all the other regions .
The strengthening of these policies at this stage , when the crisis is causing some delay in the arduous task of reducing imbalances , is vital for achieving the objectives outlined in the EU 2020 strategy and for the EU to achieve one of its main pillars of solidarity , which has already enabled the development and progress of most European regions .
I should like to express my sincere respect for Mrs Hübner and thank her for this resolution , which she has drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development .
The resolution raises in a very timely manner the issue of the application of EU funds earmarked for regional development and of how to secure an environment in which these funds may be applied more flexibly , taking into account countries ' geographical location and the basic indicators of their economic efficiency .
Unfortunately , in my country , Latvia , funds earmarked for the implementation of cohesion policy are applied in a very inefficient manner .
The corruption endemic among officials in the Latvian Ministry of Economics and the Ministry of Regional Development and Local Government practically ' puts a brake on ' both initiatives by individuals and on any steps towards efficient application of EU financial resources .
Due to the lack of an information campaign in Latvia regarding cohesion funds , its population is practically ignorant of the opportunities offered by the EU .
I voted for this resolution , so that I could use it in explaining to certain Latvian ministers and civil servants that it is time to get to work in the EU and , naturally , for the benefit of Latvia .
The opportunities to renew Latvia that have been passed up are a crime against future generations .
The cohesion policy system within the EU provides support to enable poorer regions to be brought to the same level as richer regions .
It is intended to be used to balance out the consequences of uneven economic development .
However , we must ensure that financial resources are allocated to the individual regions in a fair and transparent way .
The criteria used in connection with the paying out of subsidies should also be clearly defined .
We need to pay more attention to peripheral rural regions .
I am voting against the resolution because it does not make it sufficiently clear to what extent the subsidies will be monitored and what formula is to be used to determine how these are to be distributed .
The motion for a resolution on European Union cohesion and regional policy after 2013 is a clear signal from the European Parliament to the European Commission over the minimum requirements for the design of this policy in the next programming period .
The objective of cohesion policy is to reduce differences in the level of development of European regions and to increase growth potential to achieve economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Cohesion policy , which is an expression of European solidarity , plays an extremely important role in the Europe 2020 programme .
Its effective implementation is essential for further modernisation and to ensure lasting , stable economic growth and job creation in Europe .
It is also intended to increase competitiveness and improve the quality of life of the EU 's citizens .
I am definitely in favour of rejecting all attempts at renationalising cohesion policy or dividing it into sectors and embarking on a sectoral dispersion of the resources of this policy .
Attention should be given to the necessity of multi-level governance and the significance of cooperation with regions so that cohesion policy will be as user-friendly as possible , as well as to the necessity of better coordination of rural development with cohesion development objectives .
The aim of regional cohesion policies is to ensure the best possible welfare conditions for populations .
In order to usefully assess these policies and improve the decision making with regard to the allocation of European funds , the EU must have social and environmental indicators in addition to GDP .
It is no longer enough to have economic growth as the sole criterion for decision making .
Cohesion policy is an expression of solidarity between European regions .
Its decentralised management is the most effective way of responding to the regions ' specific circumstances and requirements , and as such , it adds crucial value to national employment policies .
This is why we firmly oppose any plans to renationalise the management of the European Social Fund .
Renationalisation should not be the only option for giving this fund more weight and visibility .
The objective of economic , social and territorial cohesion between the levels of development of the regions of the Union is important .
In adopting a 2020 strategy , we need to create a framework favourable to stable economic growth and job creation .
The resolution also calls for rural development to be coordinated with cohesion development objectives and managed at regional level to ensure that it is adapted to needs .
Unfortunately , in the wake of the crisis , there are many rural areas in Europe that have become even more marginalised and , consequently , depopulated .
Such a state of affairs causes degradation of the terrain , which intensifies hydrogeological instability .
The EU must give the regions the opportunity to intervene with targeted subsidies aimed at repopulating areas experiencing demographic decline .
Only in this way shall we be able to guarantee new jobs and greater regional development .
Cohesion policy is the great pillar of European solidarity .
It is through this policy that we achieve the objective of reducing regional disparities and stimulate harmonious development throughout the European Union .
A framework for the forthcoming 2014-2020 period must be established that can enhance the effectiveness of regional policy .
Multi-level governance must be encouraged , with greater involvement of regional and local bodies in the law-making process , as required by the new Treaty of Lisbon , and compliance with the principle of subsidiarity , as decisions must be made at the closest possible level to the people .
The special circumstances of the outermost regions , such as Madeira , which is where I am from , must not be forgotten .
This group of European regions faces very particular development challenges and must continue to benefit in future from special provisions regarding the implementation of European policies .
It would also be desirable to apply other indicators in addition to gross domestic product , which must continue to be the main criterion for determining eligibility for regional policy assistance .
Such indicators must take into account the specific attributes of the regions , so as to provide a more complete picture of the reality of each region .
I welcome the adoption of this resolution laying down the guidelines of the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) for the programming period 2014-2020 .
I believe that by calling attention to the regional character of the ERDF , we are reaffirming the need to take into account the specific features of the regions in the implementation of regional policy .
Nevertheless , it is essential for the managing authorities to take account of the actual situation in the regions and to establish policy areas for the ERDF that truly meet the needs of communities and local economic operators .
It must be acknowledged that the management of the ERDF in our regions is characterised by serious disparities , and that is why I call for the standards in this area to be harmonised at European level .
It is equally important to offer more scope to alter , in the medium term , the policy areas according to economic and social conditions and developments in the regions so that the ERDF can provide real added value throughout the programming period .
The ERDF is , in my view , a wonderful catalyst for growth , employment and territorial cohesion , and it must become an important tool for effectively supporting structural development projects for the benefit of the public and our regions .
This report calls for a simple , fair and transparent transition regime after 2013 .
One of the key challenges for cohesion and regional policy has been climate change , which also - to varying degrees - will have a considerable impact on the regions of Austria because the sectors that will be affected most will include tourism , as well as agriculture and forestry .
As indicated in the motion for a resolution , the limited resources must be focused on the key priorities , and common solutions need to be found to common problems .
Article 9 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union stipulates that : ' In defining and implementing its policies and activities , the Union shall take into account requirements linked to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection , the fight against social exclusion , and a high level of education , training and protection of human health . '
Thus , I think it essential to increase the effectiveness and visibility of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , that is to say , of the social dimension of EU regional policy .
The EUR 10 billion invested each year in social Europe ( lifelong learning , social inclusion , adaptation of workers , and so on ) must be used in a way that is consistent with the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy and must make real progress .
However , the ESF must remain an integral part of EU regional policy so as to ensure that any increased differentiation between funds does not make matters more complex .
I voted in favour of this text because it presents these issues in a clear way and launches a strong appeal to the European Commission : the ESF must become a key instrument of EU policies .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agree with this resolution .
A sustainable economic growth and job creation policy in Europe is essential .
The implementation of this policy should be supported by reforms in education , vocational education and training and retraining programmes , in order to adapt them to labour market needs , and it should receive the backing of small and medium sized enterprises .
It is very important for the planned instruments to work together in a coordinated and mutually supportive manner so that the best results can be achieved .
At EU level , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) plays a key role in improving employment and working conditions and in workers ' integration into the labour market .
However , support from the structural funds alone is insufficient .
In order to establish an effective and efficient system for financing social programmes , aid from the structural funds must be combined with other existing programmes , such as the European Progress Microfinance Facility , through which micro-credits are provided to small enterprises and support is given to people setting up a business , and other instruments .
The European Social Fund is a key instrument in helping boost economic and social cohesion in EU states .
Maximum financial support from the fund would help strengthen the feeling of solidarity among European citizens , especially those in the new Member States .
During the 2007-2013 period , the European Union has allocated approximately EUR 3.5 million to Romania from the European Social Fund .
The operational programmes are focusing on two areas .
The first is aimed at developing human resources , while the second is intended to improve the public services and policies infrastructure through the ' Development of administrative capabilities ' programme .
In this context , the Structural Funds ' potential needs to be strengthened through simplifying and improving the relevant procedures .
The main aim is to help Member States attain the best employment opportunities and the most active participation on the part of citizens in society .
In future , the European Social Fund will need to play an important role in supporting the Europe 2020 strategy .
This will definitely require action to be taken at both European and national level .
The future of the European Social Fund will clearly depend not only on the approach taken by European decision makers towards the future of the continent , but also on the way they have been able to draw positively on the experience of the past , a past that is telling us today more clearly than ever before , that the model applied up to now by the European institutions in the field of employment , training and work is a model that is no longer suited to the needs of the present-day economy .
The EU 2020 strategy itself , together with its principal instrument , the Social Fund , will have to take account of the fact that the only employment and training policies that can make the outlay of European funds sustainable are those which are necessarily targeted at meeting local needs and strengthening and sustaining small and medium-sized enterprises as the cornerstone of the European economy .
In future , we will have to pay much more attention than we have paid so far in the Social Fund and in the entire EU 2020 strategy to the local dimension and small businesses , which make up 99 % of Europe 's economic fabric .
In the expectation that the Union 's outlook on these vitally important issues will change , I am voting in favour of the resolution .
I voted for this resolution submitted by the European Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs because it is necessary to strengthen the European Social Fund ( ESF ) and increase its effectiveness , in particular , during the economic and social crisis , since this fund is one of the European Union 's principal financial instruments for combating poverty and social exclusion .
Moreover , it is very important to improve the ESF 's financial procedures because it would enable Member States to use the ESF more easily and effectively to invest in skills , employment , training and retraining activities with a view to creating more and better jobs .
I would also like to draw attention to the fact that it is very important for the Commission to distribute EU money allocated to the ESF in a targeted manner , because only then will this instrument directly help people to gain employment , find better jobs , overcome poverty , avoid social exclusion and lead life to the full .
Furthermore , only a more effective and stronger ESF can lead to the implementation of the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy in the fields of employment and social affairs and contribute to the reduction of unemployment and poverty in Europe .
I supported the resolution on the future of the European Social Fund for a number of reasons .
First , I appreciate the fact that the resolution of the European Parliament recognises that structural funds remain , to a large extent , the chief instrument for financing aims in the area of social policy .
At the same time , I support the request addressed to the Commission , emphasising the need for interdependence with other programmes , and support for cohesion with multi-year framework programmes such as Daphne , Progress , the Public Health Programme , and the ' Europe for Citizens ' programme .
No less important is the Commission 's call to boost the potential of structural funds by simplifying and improving approaches and flexibility , with an emphasis on the dimension of social integration , in order to help Member States optimise the results of social policy and employment policy and achieve sustainable growth .
Finally , I supported this resolution of the European Parliament because it emphasises that the regional policy and social policy of the EU form a mutually interconnected whole , and for the success of the Europe 2020 strategy , it is necessary to provide a clear framework for achieving the cohesion of all European policies and structural funds , an end which the resolution challenges the Commission to achieve .
The European Social Fund plays a vital role in social cohesion by helping to integrate workers in Europe 's regions .
Its action in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises , education and vocational training is essential to the success of the EU 2020 strategy .
The European Social Fund 's role could , however , be strengthened further .
The future architecture of the Structural Funds for 2014-2020 will have to take into account the specific characteristics of that fund .
Some adjustments could be envisaged .
However , it is important to keep the European Social Fund within the framework of the general regulations on the Structural Funds , as is the case today .
To grant it its own legal framework will inevitably have the effect of fragmenting European policies and creating pointless complications for the beneficiaries .
European policy coherence must go hand in hand with an integrated vision of objectives and resources , which requires greater synergy between instruments .
The European Social Fund should therefore continue to come under the regulation on general provisions concerning the funds , with its own rules , certainly , but under no circumstances with its own budget .
The European Social Fund plays a vital role in improving career and professional opportunities , promoting the adaptation skills of workers to the demands of the labour market and integrating them into it , along with strengthening social inclusion .
It is important for the Member States to use the European Social Fund to invest in qualifications , employment , training and retraining , with a view to creating more and better jobs .
The goals and objectives of the EU 2020 strategy can be achieved by using this instrument in support of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and adapting the education and vocational training systems to the needs of SMEs .
There needs to be a big emphasis on modernising the education and vocational training systems , on decent work , including combating unstable and undeclared work , on gender equality , on creating conditions for reconciling work and private life , and on ensuring the inclusion of people who are excluded from the labour market .
I abstained on this report because , although it calls for the European Social Fund to be reformed and strengthened , it puts the fund at the service of the EU 2020 strategy .
We all know that the European Social Fund ' was set up to reduce differences in prosperity and living standards across EU Member States and regions , and therefore promoting economic and social cohesion ' .
However , today , as the economic crisis pushes the EU even further into recession and unemployment , into company and factory closures , poverty and social exclusion , despite 2010 being declared by the EU as the year for combating poverty , a question mark hangs over this objective .
The priorities of all the European Funds , including the ESF , need to be revised for the benefit of the citizens and societies of Europe , not to serve the EU 2020 strategy , which follows on from the demonstrably failed Lisbon Strategy .
Certain points of the report , such as adjusting education systems and vocational education and training ( VET ) to the needs of business , clearly serve the needs of the market , not of the citizens of Europe .
Bearing in mind that the Structural Funds continue , to a large extent , to provide the main funding instrument for meeting social objectives , I believe that economic , social and territorial cohesion must be consolidated by improving employability and employment opportunities through encouraging a high level of employment and providing a higher number of better quality jobs .
I voted in favour of this resolution since I believe the European Social Fund should be the main financial instrument for achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
It is essential for the Member States to use this fund to invest in training and retraining activities with a view to improving people 's qualifications and creating more and better jobs .
In view of the current employment situation in Europe , with unemployment rates reaching record levels in various Member States , I believe the Europe 2020 objectives can be achieved by using the European Social Fund ( ESF ) to support small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and to adapt the education and vocational training system to the needs of businesses so as to improve people 's employability .
The success of the Europe 2020 strategy depends on the competitiveness of European businesses and industries and also our economic dynamics in the post-crisis world .
To achieve that , we have to focus our efforts on the vitality and dynamism of businesses ( especially SMEs and technological and scientific industries ) and on training our people appropriately .
My view is that the ESF should be at the service of these objectives , and I therefore fully support the emphasis that this resolution places on the importance of training and education as a means of fighting poverty , unemployment and social exclusion , through creating wealth and enhancing competitiveness .
Due to the effects of the current economic and social crisis , the fight against unemployment and social exclusion have attracted the particular attention of the European public and the European institutions .
In this context , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) is doubly important to the possibility of achieving the EU 2020 strategy objectives .
Today , there is particular emphasis on training and professional skills in order to achieve smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , along with innovation and dynamism among small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
The aim is to promote more and better jobs , with a view to eradicating situations of poverty and social exclusion .
I would therefore like to reiterate the importance and urgent need for the ESF to become more flexible , simple and adaptable , like the other structural funds , so as to promote a more effective response to the new European reality and new social problems .
We believe that the European Social Fund ( ESF ) should support the measures adopted by the Member States to encourage employment , promote the quality of work in all its aspects ( training , working conditions , contractual relations , working hours and organisation of work ) , and help reduce social inequalities and disparities in the distribution of income .
An increase in ESF funds may help to achieve the objectives of social inclusion , the fight against poverty and social exclusion , and education and training , while also making a major contribution to economic and social cohesion .
The resolution adopted today by Parliament highlights some of these measures .
It emphasises the essential issues on which the ESF should concentrate and draws attention to the need to maintain ' efforts to achieve social cohesion ' .
We need much more than ESF funds , however .
We need to change policies .
We need to get rid of the Stability and Growth Pact and replace it with a real Progress and Social Development Programme .
Ireland has received financial support of over EUR 7 billion from the European Social Fund since the time it joined the European Union in 1973 .
This money was used mostly to tackle long-term and youth unemployment .
Under the EU 's Operational Programme for Human Resources for Ireland 2007-2013 , the European Union is giving EUR 375 million to Ireland through the European Social Fund .
This programme has a total budget of EUR 1.36 billion .
This money is being used to provide training courses for unemployed people , disabled people , early school leavers and those on the margins of society .
This is the era of globalisation .
To address the challenges and opportunities which globalisation creates for the Irish workforce , the European Social Fund in Ireland is also supporting training programmes for lifelong learning , which can be adapted to deal with the realities of a globalised labour market .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the future of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
The ESF is a key factor in European social cohesion , supporting as it does employment , the integration of workers into the labour market and vocational training .
In this text , we have clearly expressed our opposition to the European Commission 's proposal to separate the ESF from the other funds .
The opposite action should , in fact , be taken : this fund should be closely linked to the others , particularly regional policy instruments , so as to increase its effectiveness .
We have expressed ourselves in favour of the ESF becoming a more effective , simplified and transparent tool , which must continue to act as a powerful catalyst for the construction of social Europe .
The ESF must be able to be deployed in the fight against poverty and social exclusion as a whole and must be able to fulfil the EU 's objectives in this area .
in writing . - The European Social Fund ( ESF ) is the EU 's main budgetary instrument to help social and labour market integration .
However , it is clear that this resolution focuses too much on the role of the ESF boosting employment and not sufficiently on its key role in supporting the inclusion of vulnerable groups , which my group , the Socialists & Democrats , has always strongly supported .
Instead , it is crucially important to focus ESF support on the vulnerable groups who suffer the most as a result of the economic downturn .
This report claims to defend decent work and to fight against precarious work .
It is one thing to claim it , but we still need to provide ourselves with the resources to do it .
The Europe 2020 strategy is going in the opposite direction of such a claim .
What impact does all this talk really have ?
None .
Why list the problems posed by the poor and say nothing of those caused by the rich ?
This text preaches hypocrisy .
The European Social Fund ( ESF ) is the instrument par excellence that allows the creation of new employment and job opportunities , the promotion of the adaptation of workers ' skills to the demands of the labour market , and workers ' integration into the labour market , along with reinforcing social inclusion .
It is therefore vital for the European Union to achieve the objectives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy in the field of social and employment affairs .
Thus , the strengthening of this important instrument is essential for us to bring the outlined strategy properly to fruition , reinforced by support for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which are the driving force behind the whole economy and primarily responsible for economic and technological development , as well as the creation of jobs .
In Latvia , European Social Fund funding has become the object of political and economic speculation .
Certain dishonest civil servants are enriching themselves from funds earmarked for training and reskilling .
Newly established training centres and other unlicensed institutions are simply ' laundering ' money earmarked for the training of the unemployed and other low-income groups , while the qualifications of trainers are often below the necessary standard .
The fees charged by certain ' training centres ' are higher than those of the University of Latvia .
The European Social Fund has to pay for this negligent state of affairs .
I supported this resolution .
I was particularly struck by Paragraph 15 , in which the European Parliament ' calls on the Commission to strengthen the structural funds ' potential through simplification , flexibility and improvement of procedures ... with the aims of helping Member States to optimise the output of social and employment policies and creating sustainable growth ' .
I voted ' for ' in the hope that a monitoring mechanism that would crack down hard on dishonest political operators may be set up .
Attempts are being made to reduce economic and social differences between the Member States using the European Social Fund .
In this regard , beginning with qualification measures is much more forward-looking in the interests of job security and job placement for European workers .
We need to make full use of the potential that we already have so that trade and industry cannot import huge numbers of cheap foreign specialists on the pretext of there being a lack of skilled workers .
In this connection , the various ' cards ' that are being considered should also be rejected .
However , if the bringing to account and execution of projects leads to problems in many regions , and if the French PPP training programme , for example , has been waiting for payments for three years on account of a change in competences within the Brussels bureaucracy , the fund is failing in its mission .
In any case , we need to make it clear that more attention needs to be focused on small and medium-sized enterprises as the ' true ' employers .
As this resolution essentially agrees with these considerations but contains a few shortcomings , I abstained from the vote .
We have voted today , in plenary , on a motion for a resolution on the future of the European Social Fund .
As is well known , the European Social Fund plays a key role in supporting the Europe 2020 strategy , the principal objective of which is to achieve inclusive growth , a reduction in poverty , an increase in employment and a rise in training levels with the ultimate aim of creating new and better jobs .
Seen in this light , the primary importance of the fund as a policy tool and its double value , in supporting employment policy and cohesion policy , on the one hand , and in real and harmonious regional development , on the other , can be understood .
This last aspect - and I conclude - is of particular importance in that Europe cannot be said to be truly complete , cohesive and united if all the communities of which it is comprised are not truly developed and have not reached a level of growth that is both steady and uniform as far as possible .
In particular , we must not forget the regions of southern Europe - the mobilisation of funds for the regions of eastern Europe , right and proper as it may be , must not be carried out at the expense of those regions that are the heart and soul of Europe .
in writing . - We have supported the text which , among other things , notes the key role played by the European Social Fund ( ESF ) in improving employment and job opportunities , promoting the adaptation of workers ' skills to the demands of the labour market , and workers ' integration into the labour market , and reinforcing social inclusion .
It draws attention to the four employment guidelines adopted by the European Parliament and welcomes the fact that the objectives include promoting employment and combating poverty in the context of integration / reintegration into working life through training .
It also emphasises that substantive progress towards achieving the Europe 2020 targets and objectives , in particular , in the field of employment and social affairs , is essential if the strategy is to be credible .
The resolution is extremely important in that it draws attention to the key role that the European Social Fund plays in improving employment and the quality of work .
It attaches great importance to education systems and vocational education and training ( VET ) , to decent jobs , to gender equality and to ensuring that people currently excluded from the labour market can gain access to it .
Unfortunately , the crisis has made it more difficult for young people to enter the labour market and caused elderly workers to lose their jobs .
It is important to increase the potential of the Structural Funds to support those who may be excluded , thereby optimising the output of social policies and creating sustainable growth for the benefit of all .
The aim of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) is to promote employment opportunities and geographical and occupational mobility for workers in the European Union , and to facilitate industrial change and changes in production systems .
To that end , vocational training and retraining are of the greatest importance , especially during a period of economic crisis and growing unemployment such as the one we are witnessing today .
The aim of the ESF is to improve workers ' employment opportunities and help to improve their living standards .
It is therefore an essential instrument .
Job creation and the promotion of employability are a means to achieving the objective of economic , social and territorial cohesion within the Union .
Synergies between the various EU policies should be encouraged in order to achieve the Europe 2020 growth and employment targets .
However , I am not in favour of making the ESF a financial instrument separate from the other structural funds , with its own rules and budget .
I am of the opinion that it will be easier to achieve synergies if we do not embark on that kind of sectoring of European funds , but instead focus on improving coordination among the various instruments and making more efficient use of them .
in writing . - As part of the current debate on the future of cohesion policy after 2013 , this resolution sets out the Parliament 's commitment to ensuring that the European Social Fund remains part of the overall strategy for cohesion funding .
There is , however , a need for increased flexibility and a simplification of the rules surrounding the fund .
The ESF can act as the main tool in achieving the Europe 2020 strategy by focusing on skills and jobs across the EU .
In order to achieve this , we need to ensure the ESF remains part of cohesion policy .
The European Parliament has voted for a resolution on the future of the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
At a time when the ESF is being questioned , in particular , by the President of the Commission , who wishes to integrate it into a much larger fund with diluted objectives , the European Parliament 's support of the ESF is significant .
The resolution supports the role of the ESF in EU regional and social policy and calls for the procedures for allocating funds to be simplified .
Indeed , these highly restrictive procedures do not facilitate the distribution of funds in a way that is really suited to the needs of populations , and they also result in non-consumption of appropriations , particularly in France , which is a scandal in itself .
I regret , however , that the resolution revives , among other things , the dogma of ' updating education systems ' and calls for these to be adapted solely to the needs of companies in order to improve access to the labour market .
The European Social Fund plays a key role in improving the employment situation and creating jobs .
I support the priorities called for in the motion for a resolution of updating education systems ( including expanding them to include training that is adjusted to the needs of SMEs ) , the promotion of decent work and , of course , gender equality by creating conditions for reconciling work and family life .
Every possible effort must be made to ensure that EU policies and instruments work together in a coordinated and mutually supportive manner ( paragraph 13 of the report ) .
The minutes from this daily session will be presented to the European Parliament for approval at the start of the next part-session .
If there are no objections , the resolutions adopted at today 's session will be handed over to the recipients and bodies named in them immediately .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Forwarding of texts adopted during the 