Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 6 September 2007 .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , we have learned with deep sorrow of the death of our former colleague , Nicholas Bethell , who was a Member of the European Parliament from 1975 to 1994 and again from 1999 to 2003 .
Lord Bethell died on 8 September at the age of 69 , following a long and courageous battle against Parkinson 's disease .
During his many years as an MEP , Lord Bethell proved an outstanding Vice-President of what was then the Political Affairs Committee .
He devoted himself energetically to many issues , on which he also drafted reports : the liberalisation of air transport , the EU membership of Cyprus and the introduction of the Sakharov Prize , which over the years gave moral support to many people worldwide in their fight against oppression .
Let me say a few words on this subject .
Armed with his masterly knowledge of the Russian language and at considerable personal risk , Lord Bethell visited the Soviet Union on several occasions , where he made friends with many leading dissidents , such as Alexander Solzhenitsyn , Andrei Sakharov , Anatoly Shcharansky and Alexander Ginsburg .
He held discussions with them , interviewed them , campaigned for the release of those of them who were imprisoned and in general fought for the freedom of nations and for justice .
Lord Bethell translated two books by Alexander Solzhenitsyn into English .
He brought Anatoly Shcharansky and Elena Bonner , Sakharov 's widow , to the European Parliament , not just once but on several occasions .
Lord Bethell was a colleague and a friend , who acted with conviction and set yardsticks .
We will remember him with gratitude .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have just heard that two Spanish soldiers have been killed by a mine in Afghanistan and others - also Spanish - have been seriously injured .
I would ask you to observe a minute 's silence in memory of Lord Bethell and all victims of terrorism .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Thank you .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have taken note of the pro-democracy and freedom demonstrations in Burma / Myanmar .
I am sure I may express solidarity and sympathy on behalf of all of us .
That goes in particular to Aung San Suu Kyi , a holder of the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize , who has been under house arrest for many years .
The European Parliament hopes that the time will come when we can welcome Aung San Suu Kyi here in the European Parliament and we call on the Myanmar authorities to release all the detainees immediately and grant them the right to demonstrate freely .
( Applause )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
( NL ) Mr President , just a marginal note to this week 's part-session .
As you know , the first round of voting for the 2007 Sakharov Prize will be taking place shortly .
There were five nominees .
The ITS Group had nominated a candidate too , the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople .
We now find that the Patriarch has been put under pressure not to stand .
To my knowledge nothing like this has ever happened in the whole of the time that European Parliament has awarded the Sakharov Prize .
He was happy for his name to be put forward by our Group - Mr Binev asked him and he was perfectly agreeable .
This is something quite intolerable .
As far as I know it has never happened before that someone has been pressured to withdraw his candidacy purely and simply because he was nominated by a group that rows against the mainstream .
Well , in protest at this kind of outrage , this kind of underhand political machination , I can tell you now that the ITS Group will not be voting in the upcoming election .
Mr Claeys , I have heard of the events you are talking about , but cannot give a view on the substance of what you say has occurred .
This is not really the right moment to inform Parliament ; it should be done in a different form so that we can discuss this question .
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Corrigendum ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written declarations ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business
I hereby inform you that pursuant to Rule 68 of the Rules of Procedure , on Tuesday , 25 September the President of the Council and I will be signing four legislative acts adopted by the codecision procedure .
The titles of those legislative acts can be found in the Minutes of today 's sitting .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at their meeting of Thursday , 20 September 2007 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday :
No amendments .
Tuesday :
The PSE Group has requested that the report by Mr Zatloukal on efficiency and equity in European education and training systems be put back from Tuesday evening to Wednesday evening and taken after the report by Mrs Descamps .
( DE ) Mr President , I will be very brief .
With several reports being taken together and the Saryusz-Wolski report postponed from Monday to Tuesday , there will be very little time to debate the Zakloukal report on Tuesday evening .
In agreement with the rapporteur , we would , therefore , prefer that report to be held over until Wednesday .
That is the only reason .
- Thank you , I am sure that was the reason for the proposed amendment .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
The report by Mr Zatloukal was postponed to the Wednesday night sitting .
Wednesday :
The Verts / ALE , GUE / NGL and ALDE Groups request that the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Myanmar / Burma be put on the agenda for Wednesday afternoon , followed by the tabling of motions for resolution .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this House , as you have very rightly said , has already given its opinion on the situation in Burma on a number of occasions , but what is happening today was not happening in 1988 .
Thousands and thousands of people , monks , are demonstrating and there is little doubt that events are on the move .
Up to now , the Community institutions , the Commission and the Council , have said nothing .
There have been a few reactions from this or that Member State .
In our view , therefore , Wednesday will be an excellent moment for a statement by the Council and the Commission and for a round of speakers from the political groups , if only to show our support for these new developments in Burma .
We cannot stay silent at this time and we have a duty to focus attention publicly on this country , because we have the opportunity to do so .
Therefore , I really hope that the plenary will accommodate the three groups tabling this proposal .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if ever there was a time for a communication from the Commission and Council focusing attention on the situation in a particular country , that time is now .
A brief discussion on Burma will give us the chance to express our solidarity with the events of the past few days there , and it is most important that we should do so .
There are enough of us who are very concerned at the situation of Myanmar , of the Burmese generally , and of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , to make time for this during the current part-session of Parliament - it need not take all that long .
( DE ) Mr President , naturally we discussed this idea at length in our Group too .
We felt that this particular moment , with demonstrations happening on the ground , is perhaps not the right time for us - to put it rather colloquially - to put in our three ha 'p'orth and express our view . Our view in this connection is quite clear .
If , however , that is the wish of the House and it is also made clear that we are of course on the side of the demonstrators , as we have always said , then we could agree a compromise to the effect that we are in favour of a debate , as proposed , but will not table a resolution at this point , which does not preclude the possibility that next time , when we know how things stand , we also adopt a resolution .
My request , at least , is that we hold separate votes on whether to hold a debate and whether to table a resolution .
Thank you , Mr Swoboda .
That is precisely what I would like to propose .
First we vote on whether to hold a debate .
If we vote in favour of a debate , we then come to the question of whether to table a resolution .
That is a logical and conclusive procedure .
Can we follow that procedure ?
( Parliament approved the proposal )
( DE ) Mr President , we did not know that the Liberal Group might want a resolution and , if so , that it would not be tabled until the next part-session .
That is a new situation .
We can all live with it .
That is why the proposal from the Liberal Group that you should now put to the vote is , if I understand it correctly , as follows : if the Groups agree to draft a resolution , it should be tabled during the next part-session .
That does not exactly mean that we have already reached agreement ; it does mean , however , that if we do agree among ourselves , the resolution would be tabled during the next part-session .
We can all accept that .
First we have to decide whether we want a resolution and then , if we do want it , when we should adopt it .
( DE ) Mr President , on a point of order : since this is a new matter we cannot simply say yes or no .
We should discuss it and not simply assume that just because they are Social Democrats our colleagues have spoken on behalf of all of us and can decide what is the reasonable way to proceed .
We would like to say something against it that may be even more reasonable .
I propose that first we vote on whether we want a resolution .
If we vote in favour , we will then decide whether the resolution will be taken this week or during the October part-session .
( DE ) Mr President , of course we need a European Parliament resolution on this issue .
We have drafted resolutions , some of them lengthy , on many other occasions and in some cases we could not have claimed quite the same urgency .
Here we have a very concrete reason , here we have a very significant change in the situation of this country , which we have been observing for a long time .
It has already been pointed out that the leader of the opposition , who has been under house arrest for many years , has been awarded our Sakharov Prize but has not yet received it .
That is why we must react to these new developments with a resolution .
Yet there is no urgent need to do so this Wednesday .
We will be holding the debate on Wednesday and I would propose that we vote on a resolution at the following sitting .
We shall now vote on whether we want a resolution and will then hold a second vote on when we should adopt it .
( Parliament agreed to a resolution )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say something about why we should decide now on a resolution .
Basically I do not understand this debate .
Everyone clapped when the President took a clear stand .
What the President said can surely be incorporated into a resolution that Parliament could adopt as early as this Thursday .
What is so difficult about condemning what is currently happening in Burma ?
Where is the problem ?
Who needs 10 or 20 days to say : we are on the side of those who are fighting for freedom in Burma , full stop !
It would take 10 lines !
If the Social Democrats or the EPP-ED cannot manage it , we will draft it for them .
We have already decided in favour of a resolution .
Shall we draft the resolution this week ?
( Parliament approved the request )

I propose beginning Question Time not at 5.30 p.m. but at 6 p.m. to give us more time for the debate , while allocating the usual hour and a half to Question Time , i.e. from 6 p.m. to 7.30 p.m.


( Parliament agreed to the proposal )
Thursday :
No changes
Sitting on 10 and 11 October
Wednesday :
The Social Democratic Group has requested postponing the joint debate on the reports by Mrs Bowles and Mrs van den Burg on Community statistics to the October part-session in Strasbourg .
( DE ) Mr President , we are requesting the postponement for the following reasons .
It should be possible for us to reach agreement with the Council at the first reading .
If , however , we held the debate as early as 10 October , it might not prove possible .
That is why we should postpone it .
I believe the rapporteur also agrees with this proposal .
I put to the vote the proposal for postponement to the October part-session .
( Parliament approved the proposal . )
Thursday :
No changes
( The order of business was adopted ¹ )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance pursuant to Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , we do appreciate your kind words about Nicholas Bethel .
His death a fortnight ago has led to many tributes from across the political spectrum .
As we debate the issue of human rights , something that presses upon us now as it always has , we should remember his enormous efforts .
We remember , and we are proud of , his award of the Schuman Medal in 2003 , when , despite the ravages of his ill health , he delivered a moving and eloquent speech to members of our group .
For many people , his championing of the cause of both Nelson Mandela and Andrei Sakharov is something we should not forget .
A letter was written by Elena Bonner , the widow of Andrei Sakharov , to Nicholas Bethel 's family a few days ago , in which she recognised that , without his help , the cause of Sakharov and many other dissidents in the then Soviet Union - and the nature of the repressive regime - would not have been properly recognised outside .
On behalf of the British Conservative delegation , I am proud to deliver a tribute to a courageous man .
Those of us who attended his funeral in London on Thursday saw and heard for themselves the immense pride and affection in which he was held by so many friends and colleagues outside as well as inside the political world .
Our thoughts and prayers are with his family at this time .
It was a privilege for me and for many of my colleagues in this Parliament to have served with him , a man of such distinction and humanity .
( Applause )
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , Russia has started to show in a number of ways where , in its view , the borders of the European Union should lie .
Since August endless columns of cars have been standing at Narva border crossing in my homeland , Estonia .
On the worst days it takes over 100 hours to cross the border , with over 400 lorries queuing .
The situation on the border between Russia and Latvia is even worse .
The Kremlin has agreed to initial discussion of the issue in Moscow on 16 November , but that is still two months away .
I want to encourage the European Commission and the European Council to address the issue considerably sooner , at the next summit in a month 's time on 26 October in Portugal .
It strikes me that the parties have an excellent opportunity here to improve relations by turning their attention to practical issues such as the trouble-free crossing of borders .
The free movement of goods is one of Europe 's fundamental freedoms .
Russia , which aspires to membership of the WTO , cannot afford to behave like this .
After all , it also wants the support of our Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 30 October 1985 , Altiero Spinelli , fearing that the Europe of nations , rather than the European nation , would very quickly undermine the 1984 reform of the European Parliament , entrusted us in this House with the task of continuing the European revolution .
I should simply like to quote what he said on 31 December : ' The European Parliament may censure the Commission , may bring about its resignation , may reject the budget , may vote for a budget other than that proposed by the Council , but the European Parliament must in particular forward its opinions to the Council .
Without these opinions , the Council cannot make decisions ! ' ; Spinelli , who organised tens of meetings on this issue in the various European countries , concluded ' the European Parliament should have the courage to strike in support of its opinions . '
Mr President , we went for a military rather than a parliamentary operation to achieve a new structure , a new organisation of Europe .
It seems to me that the polls tell us clearly what the people of Europe think of this and of the bureaucratic Europe of nations and not the European nation .
We are aware of your revolutionary enthusiasm , Mr Pannella .
Yet we must keep to our Rules , and they provide for one-minute speeches .
You have been speaking for nearly two minutes .
( PL ) Mr President , one of the Catholic institutions of higher education in Poland is currently applying for a grant from the European Union .
In our country 's history , the Catholic religion has played an important role in the fight for freedom during the Communist era and , in general , has acted for the development of democracy .
One could even compare it to the role played by socialism in Franco 's Spain .
Polish Catholicism has never done anything to harm the Jewish people .
However , I have heard that the Jewish people are trying to block this grant and have approached the President of the European Commission .
This is interference in Polish affairs and in Polish sensitivities as regards Europe , the Polish nation and religion .
The European Union should put its trust in the Poles concerned and not bow to pressure from lobby groups .
( DE ) Mr President , Angela Merkel received the Dalai Lama at the Chancellery yesterday .
In the context of its strategy of isolating the Dalai Lama on the international stage , China requested Mrs Merkel not to meet him .
On several other occasions in the past , Beijing has called on the Federal Government to refuse him entry .
That shameless interference is all the more remarkable when we remember that next year China wants to play the gracious host of the Olympic Games .
We have seen this kind of brazen attempt to exert pressure in relation not only to the Tibetan people but to human rights in general .
That is why I support the Chinese candidate for this year 's Sakharov Prize .
I seriously wonder what else we can expect in the year to come and what more needs to happen before Europe stops all too casually selling its system of values in return for economic interests .
That makes Mrs Merkel 's action yesterday all the more encouraging !
( Applause )
( PT ) - I should like to take this opportunity to express our solidarity with the soldiers and leaders of associations representing members of the armed forces who are the subject of disciplinary procedures in relation to their activity in such associations , for exercising and upholding the legitimate rights of members of the armed forces in Portugal , especially as regards the whole range of social and professional matters which these associations seek to promote as part of a necessary enhancement of the dignity of military life .
I would like to close by reminding you of the recommendation of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe of 11 April 2006 on the human rights of members of the armed forces , which states that members of the armed forces are citizens in uniform who must enjoy the same fundamental freedoms , including those set out in the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Social Charter , and the same protection of their rights and dignity as any other citizen .
In August , the President of this Parliament participated at the congress of the German Landsmannschaft .
His decision to support this organisation serves as an example of how the President is not capable of acting neutral when the interests of his country to rewrite history are involved .
Owing to such organisations and their misguided supporters , the German people may possibly believe the lie that Poland committed evil by accepting the historically Polish western territories on the Odra and Nysa from the hands of the Great Powers .
A Polish politician once wrote that the Anglo-Saxon parties to the Potsdam Treaty put forward a formula that we had been awarded the western territories by way of compensation for the loss of the eastern territories .
The Polish nation has rejected this formula and does not consider these territories as compensation by Russia for the eastern half of our fatherland .
The nation believes that the western territories are the compensation for guilt at crimes committed by Germans , compensation that has nothing to do with Lwów and Wilno .
The President of this Parliament , an institution representing 27 nations , is expected to show objectivity and represent the common interests .
If Herr President has a problem with that , let him remain silent .
Europe does not need any more mawkish , moralising Christers who speak of peace and cooperation .
Mr Wojciechowski , since you have addressed me personally , let me say to you that the principles of the European Union are based on discussing things together , conducting a dialogue .
In my speech I spoke of reconciliation , and nobody in Poland could criticise a single sentence of my speech because it was a speech about reconciliation and your views are also represented .
I must tell you that I do not understand how you can criticise the fact of talking with people and endeavouring to convince .
I ask you to be fair and to do your part in bringing about reconciliation in Europe !
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , specifically on a point of order , I am sorry that you responded in person just now .
I can understand that but I find it absolutely intolerable for the President of this Chamber to have to defend himself in person against such an unreasonable and inappropriate attack .
That is why I say this - and I hope I am speaking on behalf of all sensible Members of this House : both in this speech and in other , earlier speeches you have upheld the dignity of this House in an outstanding manner and defended the basic values of the European Union with dignity in every respect .
I thank you for that , and also for your speech in Poland !
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Schulz .
It is certainly moving to hear such words from the Chairman of a large Group .
My warm thanks !
( RO ) Mr. President , as known , on 25 November 2007 , elections to the European Parliament will take place in Romania , the first ones of this type in our country 's history .
An event of such a political , social and , as I said , historical importance , should mobilize the entire society so that the event could take place under the best conditions .
Unfortunately , this is not happening since the political scene in Romania is agitated by endless disputes , a situation that , in my opinion , does not favour the climate of stability required for the normal development of elections .
Moreover , if the no-confidence motion submitted today , two months before the elections , is adopted , and it has every chances of being adopted , taking into account that it is initiated by the most numerous opposition party , the political situation may become even worse , the main effect being the decrease in the population 's interest in the elections to the European Parliament .
In this situation , I consider it opportune , and maybe even necessary , for the political forces in the European Parliament to join the Romanian ones in order to normalize the conditions for carrying out the elections .
( FR ) Mr President , I would simply like to add that I have just returned from a four-day visit to Poland .
I had a good look around and I talked to Polish people , and I am pleased to report that I did not meet any who took the same tone as our colleague here .
I found the Poles to be thoroughly European .
I also laid a wreath at Auschwitz-Birkenau : I believe that people from every country in Europe have been there and I believe that all of us - including yourself , most particularly , Mr President - are determined such things will never happen again !
So I am pleased to say that what we have just heard was not the voice of Poland , nor of the ordinary Polish citizen ; it was the voice of dangerous people , whose dangerous thinking would be capable of taking us back to the days of concentration camps .
I will not mince my words here .
Never again !
And , above all , let us never again hear this sort of hatred expressed in the European Parliament !
( Applause )
( SK ) There may be debate later about what I want to say .
In 2002 former Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán appeared before the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
He stated that the decrees of President Beneš were incompatible with EU law .
The European Commission subsequently carried out an analysis of this matter .
The conclusion was that the European Commission considers the issue of the decrees of President Beneš to be resolved and closed .
As a result of constant efforts to open up these decrees , last week the National Council of the Slovak Republic adopted a resolution on the inviolability of post-war documents .
The resolution , which condemns the principle of collective guilt , was supported by members of the coalition and opposition parties .
History cannot be reversed or changed .
A situation that occurred in exceptional circumstances must be viewed in the context of the time in which it occurred .
Challenging and revising the post-war order of Europe is not what the majority of progressive and positive thinking Europeans expect of us .
Our common aim is peace , cooperation and resolution of the problems facing people who live in the here and now .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very keen to draw your attention to the resolution that was adopted last Thursday in the Slovak Parliament .
That resolution does not reflect a European spirit , it does not reflect a spirit of reconciliation and understanding , but instead says that the decrees that came into force after the Second World War , the Beneš decrees , are still fully applicable today .
The explanatory statement equates the Hungarian and German minority with traitors and enemies .
I want to point out that we as a European Parliament - and I have already written to the President too - should send out a clear signal that this is not the spirit that should inspire us in Europe but that we should be working together on the construction of Europe and building up a common future .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I am loathe to speak on this matter , but I have a request to all Members taking part , whether it be Mr Ferber , or Mr Maňka , who belongs to my Group .

What has been happening in some EU Member States and their parliaments over the past weeks gives cause for concern .
Every one of us in this House knows that even if the Slovak Parliament adopts a resolution of this kind , the Beneš decrees can no longer have any legal effect .
On their accession to the European Union , all Member States who join it have committed themselves to basic values , which makes any further discussion of the issue Mr Ferber has brought up unnecessary .
That brings us up against the question : what are we as a European Parliament doing to calm the situation down ?
In my view we should not start interpreting the text - and incidentally I did not find the phrases you used in the text - but take a different approach .
The European Parliament , instead of fuelling the tensions with controversial debates , could decide to take a different approach and apply the procedures for resolving disputes that we use in our own everyday work in this case too .
That would mean saying that the mission of this Parliament 60 years after the end of the war is not to conjure up the ghosts of 1945 , but instead to convey the spirit of cooperation of 2007 .
One way to do this would be through a dialogue , which does not have to take place here in plenary .
I therefore call on all colleagues in my Group , as in your Group and all the other Groups , to try to calm the situation down instead of aggravating it by statements designed for media effect , which is what I think they are .
We are not holding a debate now .
Mr Ferber , there is no provision for Members to answer one another .
( Heckling )
( DE ) Mr President , I would ask Members to take note of what this item on the agenda is actually about .
If Mr Schulz feels he has to comment on every second or third speech , that is his problem .
But if he is interested in having a real debate here , then I would be pleased if he would support our Group 's request to hold a debate on this subject in this House at the earliest opportunity .
( Exchange of views with microphones switched off )
I hope this matter will be resolved amicably .
( HU ) Mr President , last week the National Council of the Slovak Republic passed a resolution affirming the inviolability of the Beneš Decrees .
Based on the principle of collective guilt , these decrees deprived ethnic Hungarians and Germans of their assets , of the possibility of exercising their civil rights , and often even deprived them of their personal freedom .
This was a shameful thing even at the time , but it is especially shameful that in the 21st century , 60 years after the events took place , a Member State of the European Union should have tabled this motion and reaffirmed it .
Of course it comes as no surprise that this is happening in a Slovakia which is currently in the process of ratifying a law naming Hlinka , leader of the semi-fascist Slovak state , as father of the Slovak nation .
It is happening in a Slovakia where , moreover , Ján Slota says the trouble is that they have not been able to rid the country of Hungarians , and that this is the source of all their problems .
I think that every democrat has an obligation - and I say this with all due respect to Mr Schulz too - to condemn all such attempts to resurrect the terrible and shameful events of 60 years ago .
Thank you .
( SK ) In August this year an extreme right-wing group known as the ' Hungarian Guard ' was formed in the Republic of Hungary .
The Guard 's aim is to protect Hungary from attacks from neighbouring countries but its officials are stating that they will never abandon their demand that all Hungarians should live in one state .
The Hungarian authorities have not challenged the activities of this nationalist group and have enabled it to register , thereby legalising its activities .
The group 's first public event was even attended by a FIDESZ party member of the Hungarian Parliament .
The formation of this group is causing anxiety and fear in neighbouring countries , primarily Slovakia , Romania and Serbia .
In the light of the increasingly radical views of certain Hungarian political circles , the Slovak Parliament has adopted a declaration on the inviolability of post-war documents governing the post-war order in Central Europe .
( HU ) Mr President , this debate again demonstrates that we newcomer nations should follow the example of the old Member States of the European Union in terms of how German and French people achieved reconciliation , how the Italians and Austrians achieved agreement on South Tyrol , how Dutch and Germans , Germans and Danes , Germans and Belgians resolved centuries-old conflicts .
My message to everyone in this House is that the way to respond to nationalism is not with more nationalism , but by condemning nationalism , and first and foremost by condemning and combating our own nationalism .
The European Union 's fifty-year history has been a history of reconciliation among its peoples and ethnic groups , of atonement and self-examination by its peoples following the Second World War .
Willy Brandt 's historic gesture of kneeling in Warsaw may have contributed to enabling the German nation to hold their heads high and become a great people and a respected nation in Europe once more .
Asking other peoples or ethnic minorities for forgiveness , acknowledging our past errors and crimes cannot , will not ever diminish the stature of a people or nation ; on the contrary , only by doing so can a people or nation become great .
We know full well that the notion of collective guilt has led to universal conflagration and to the extermination and prostration of peoples .
My message is that there is no alternative to a historic Hungarian-Slovak reconciliation either for the Slovak majority , the Hungarian minority in Slovakia , or for relations between Hungary and Slovakia . Thank you for your attention .
( RO ) Mr. President , on 14 September , I submitted a resolution proposal to the Private Office of the President of the European Parliament regarding compliance with the linguistic rights of Romanian communities in Europe and the conservation of the Romanian language in the context of promoting multilingualism and cultural diversity .
At the end of August , an unprecedented testimony was the exchange of opinions with the members of the Ilaşcu group , which took place in the Sub-Commission for Human Rights .
They spoke about the closing down of Romanian language schools and about the fact that books written in the Romanian language are burnt in the Transnistrian region of Moldova .
Also , I have received numerous complaints at my parliamentary office from the Romanian community of Valea Timocului in Serbia , in relation to the prohibition of the right to learn and pray in the Romanian language .
The same things can be said about the Romanian communities in Bulgaria and Ukraine .
In the context of the beginning of 2008 , a year of intercultural dialogue and attention given by the European Union to promoting cultural diversity , as well as by creating the position of Commissioner responsible for multilingualism in 2007 , I believe we cannot ignore the situation of continuous infringement of the linguistic rights of Romanian communities .
We must promote their protection , both within the foreign policy and the internal policy of the European Union , to find solutions for improving the current situation .
( RO ) Mr. President , the European press has presented a series of abuses committed by employers from the European Union Member States against seasonal or permanent workers coming from the newly acceded countries , abuses associated with serious infringements of the labour legislation .
Such regrettable cases are possible due to the fact that the newcomers are not aware of their rights on the labour market , the relevant legislation and , especially , the institutions competent to protect them .
This is the reason why I firmly request the European Union to urgently establish offices , in all Member States , for free legal consulting on labour law for workers coming from other Member States .
I also consider that , for regulating such situations , the Commission also has to take into account measures for encouraging and facilitating the migration of labour forces between Member States .
( PL ) Mr President , for us Poles the Gdansk shipyard is not just the birthplace of ' Solidarity ' , it is also a symbol of the changes that have taken place both on a national and international level .
It is also a symbol of freedom and partnership .
At present there is a conflict between the Board of the shipyard and the European Commission , which is demanding a drastic reduction in the shipyard 's capacity and the closure of two slipways , or else the refund of state aid .
I would like to make public here that the Gdansk shipyard was the beneficiary that received the lowest subsidies and despite that was the only one of them to make a profit in the first six months of this year .
If the shipyard were to give in and accept these conditions , then , practically speaking , this would be the end of this symbolic shipyard that has done so much to deserve assistance .
The supervisory board of the shipyard has decided to increase the initial capital by PLN 300 million , which would be allocated for additional investment .
It is still possible to save this shipyard .
I believe that saving this workplace would be an honourable action not just for Poles , but also for the European Union .
Today the workforce and I ask that the Members sign declaration no . 81 concerning the future of the Gdansk shipyard .
In addition , on a formal issue , Mr President , could I say a couple of words since I have the floor ?
I would like to ask who gave Mr Schulz the job of censor ?
He does this job without politeness , without manners , he interferes in debates and speaks out of turn .
I would also add that he certainly does not have the majority behind him .
( EL ) Mr President , we returned last week from Palestine where we in the Committee on Development were fortunate enough to see the current situation both in the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip .
The Gaza Strip has reached crisis point .
What was once an open jail is now the scene of a catastrophe because the Israeli authorities have decided to ban imports .
Hospitals , for instance , have medicines but no spare parts for their equipment .
Roads are piled with rubbish and there is a danger of tanks overflowing with effluent .
In short , the humanitarian situation is desperate .
People in Gaza are living on the breadline ; the difference between the two Palestinian territories is beginning to become obvious .
We as a Parliament must therefore take action to free Gaza from its isolation and to bring about a sustainable solution based on the needs of a whole nation rather than those of the inhabitants of one side .
( DE ) Mr President , like my colleague and friend Milan Horáček I wanted to address an event that occurred yesterday .
Chancellor Angela Merkel was the first German Head of Government to receive the Dalai Lama , in Berlin .
She has stood firm against all the verbal attacks and disparaging personal remarks made by the Chinese .
She has repeated that she is prepared to support the Tibetan people in their aspiration towards cultural and religious identity and desire to achieve genuine autonomy .
Our European Parliament , which is the voice of human rights throughout the world , also endorses the non-violent approach the Dalai Lama has consistently followed .
Let yesterday 's event set an example throughout the European Union .
It should encourage our Member State governments never to give in to China , not even under economic and political pressure .
( Applause )
Mr President , my point is simple : as energy becomes the focal point in international politics and as efforts to create a single EU energy market are increasingly resisted by the existing national monopolies , the efforts of the same Union to further integrate the foreign policies of its Member States into a common foreign and security policy would be consequently undermined , because , on the import side , Member States seek to continue to secure preferential deals with the major suppliers and , on the export side , they would attempt to extract maximum gain from unilateral policies .
The effects are already visible : in spite of the hard talk at Union level , the truth is that , instead of reducing its current energy dependency , the EU is becoming more and more dependent on Russian and / or Russian-controlled energy supplies .
Not that a substantive relationship with Russia is a bad thing in itself , but , the more substantive it gets , the more unbalanced it tends to get too .
As a citizen of a country with enough experience in the matter , I know how difficult it is to keep politics away from trying to exploit such an economic dependency .
( SL ) Mr President , I have drawn attention on a number of occasions to the Slovenian minorities in Italy and Austria but on this occasion I welcome the Italian Government 's actions last year aimed at implementing a law to protect the Slovenian minority , namely the establishment of a list of 32 municipalities in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region and support for the building of a Slovenian school in San Pietro al Natisone and Slavia Veneta .
These measures will ease the lives of the Slovenian minority in Italy and satisfy at least some of their rights and needs .
However , I also call upon the Austrian Government and our fellow Austrian MEPs to do their utmost to ensure that Austria also makes the earliest possible start on implementing in full Article 7 of the Austrian State Treaty .
I refer in particular to paragraph 3 which in principle guarantees the Slovenian minority the right to bilingual signs .
This will promote coexistence and even better relations between the countries concerned and also relations within the European Union .
Mr President , I rise to make a protest and a proposal .
I want to protest against the actions of the Polish Government in blocking a decision in Council to have a Europe-wide declaration regarding the abolition of the death penalty on 10 October 2007 .
I believe that delivers a very bad signal to the many countries around the world which persist in retaining the death penalty , some of which execute children and people with mental disabilities .
Something like 5 000 people are executed by states every year and 28 000 people languish on death row , so it is inexcusable that a full Member State of the European Union should in any way deliver an opinion which seeks to undermine the argument for ending the death penalty .
I wish to propose that you undertake an initiative for this Parliament to mark 10 October in a special way , and that you encourage the Member States of the European Union , and all the parliaments of the Member States , to do likewise .
Mr President , I rise on an issue of an animal disease , blue tongue , which has spread through Europe - through France , Germany , Luxembourg and Belgium ; and now we have one case in the UK .
It is a difficult disease to find and it is a difficult one to diagnose , and the long-term solution is a vaccine .
I recommend to this Parliament , the Commission and the Council that we do everything in our power to get a vaccination in place , because this disease has killed over 1.8 million cattle and sheep in the last 10 years in Europe .
So we need to do something about it seriously .
I would urge you to put all pressure on the Commission , the Council and this Parliament to get a vaccine available .
This item is closed .
Road Map for renewable energy in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the report by Britta Thomsen , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on a Road Map for renewable energy in Europe .

rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the committee members for their excellent and constructive cooperation in connection with the report .
I am pleased that we are now placing renewable energy high on the agenda , as renewable energy will constitute a vital cornerstone for Europe in demonstrating to the rest of the world that we can actually fight climate change and secure energy supplies for our citizens .
I consider my report an opportunity for Parliament to both influence the shaping of impending legislation on renewable energy and at the same time ensure that the Heads of State or Government and the Commission are aware that the ambitious targets that have been adopted require significant and genuine effort if they are not to simply end up as empty promises .
First and foremost , I would like to emphasise that a central message in my report is that we have created the right framework for the development of renewable energy .
It means that we are integrating all our policies within the energy sector .
Renewable energy cannot be seen as separate from the other targets within the energy sector , specifically the implementation of an internal market for electricity , achievement of an energy efficiency potential of 20 % and revision of the CO2 emissions trading scheme .
All these targets are interconnected and the primary concern therefore is to ensure that we achieve the proper legislative framework .
We shall compel the Member States to implement already adopted legislation and decisions , and guarantee a long-term perspective that encourages investors to become involved in this huge venture .
These are the preconditions that need to be met so that we can achieve our political objectives of greater security of supply , reduction of CO2 emissions and creation of new jobs in Europe .
Yet , at the same time , we must develop an energy policy that is based on solidarity with the developing countries where more than a million people have no access to energy .
The energy sector must no longer simply be regarded as a technical element in our everyday lives , but more as a joint player in resolving the problems involving the environment , climate and security of supply .
I have highlighted that one obvious example of the need to create integrated policies is the EU 's Structural and Cohesion Funds .
These funds provide the opportunity for investments in renewable energy , energy savings and other climate-promoting measures .
However , the expenditure plans for the Member States indicate that the new Member States would prefer to use the money to build motorways rather than invest in renewable energy .
Just one percent of the funds has been allocated to renewable energy and energy savings .
Therefore , I would urge the Commission to revise the guidelines to provide systematic support for green energy projects in the EU , so that there is a link between what we adopt , on the one hand , and the way in which we allocate funds , on the other .
In the report , I have also underlined the importance of incorporating energy efficiency within the National Action Plans .
Several people have pointed out to me that their separate action plans for energy efficiency do not belong in this report .
However , I feel that it is precisely the establishment of this link that is fundamental , because otherwise it will be a purely Sisyphean task if we continually increase our energy consumption whilst simultaneously attempting to achieve a relative target of 20 % renewable energy .
These two things must and shall be amalgamated .
We must constantly maintain the perspective that investments in renewable energy are an asset to Europe .
The promotion of a market for renewable energy will contribute to the fulfilment of the Lisbon targets by increasing employment within the Member States and by increasing the initiatives of the Member States and the EU with regard to research and innovation .
The final subject that I would like to emphasise today is of course the issue of biofuels and renewable energy in the transport sector .
I would like to encourage us to really move forwards within Parliament and adopt a comprehensive approach towards the transport sector , which also secures political objectives concerning the expansion of public transport and the switch from road to rail and waterborne transport .
Although in general I support the idea that the transport sector must also carry its share of renewable energy , I believe that there are a couple of pitfalls that we need to be aware of .
Firstly , the introduction of biofuels should not result in us slackening the requirements for energy-efficient cars .
We must not allow a message to be sent to the car industry to focus on bio-fuels instead of more efficient cars
Secondly , we must establish requirements concerning sustainability criteria that ensure a marked reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , and concerning the view that an increase in demand for biomass can be compatible with the preservation of biodiversity .
Furthermore , a focus on biofuels must not lead to a marked increase in food prices .
Last but not least , we must emphasise that biofuels are not the only way in which renewable energy can be used in the transport sector .
Electric cars are expected to play a greater role in future .
I hope that we will have a good debate today and that collectively Parliament can send a signal to the Commission and the Member States concerning the importance of achieving the EU 's targets for renewable energy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate Ms Thomsen on her excellent report .
Renewable energy has always been high on the agenda of the European Parliament , and now Member States are also increasingly aware of the need to strengthen their performance in this field .
Constantly increasing the use of renewable energy resources is one of the main pillars in European policy to achieve sustainable , competitive and secure energy supplies .
Therefore , Ms Thomsen 's report will play a crucial role in the formulation of the Commission 's proposal for promotion of the use of renewable energy that I intend to present to the College by the end of this year .
I would just remind you that Mr Vidal-Quadras 's report played a huge role in the formulation of our package on the internal energy market .
I am pleased to say that my approach in preparing the proposal is already very much in line with most of the calls from Parliament .
I would like to mention that the proposal will be adopted together with the greenhouse gas reduction and emission trading scheme proposals .
We will continue the integrated approach from the January package to ensure consistency between renewable energy and climate change policies , and create synergies between them .
Now I would like to turn to some concrete points of this report to discuss them in more detail .
I share your view that the completion of the internal energy market is a very important issue in our energy policy , and it is indispensable that renewables are rapidly integrated into the internal energy market .
That is one of the reasons why the Commission adopted the third internal market package on Wednesday .
Access to the grids is an essential precondition for the successful integration and expansion of electricity generation from renewable energy sources , as well as objective , transparent and non-discriminatory authorisation procedures .
You rightly pointed out the importance of reaching an agreement soon on assigning a share to each Member State to achieve the 20 % binding target for the whole EU in 2020 .
As you would expect , the methodology to be applied is quite a politically sensitive issue .
We are currently working on the proposal and the Commission is discussing this topic with Member States .
It is vital that the national targets are established in a fair and transparent way .
But just as important is the establishment of a trading scheme which can give the needed flexibility , and to ensure that this will work in an EU-wide market .
This will also contribute to our goal of producing renewable energy cost effectively .
I agree with you on the importance of creating and implementing national action plans .
National action plans submitted by each Member State and approved by the Commission should contain the national sectoral targets , the development paths in each sector and measures to be taken in order to reach these targets .
The Commission will assess the national action plans based on specific requirements and criteria laid down in a new directive .
I agree that renewable energy sources in the heating and cooling sector have to experience a significant growth , and this has to be ensured by the legislative framework .
The intention is to cover this sector in the directive as well .
Many heating and cooling renewable technologies are highly economical and there is a lot of potential in this area .
I welcome the support of your report on the minimum 10 % biofuels binding target .
I agree with you that we have to ensure that biofuels are produced in a sustainable way .
The Commission will include measures on biofuel sustainability in its proposal .
These measures are not aimed at limiting biofuel imports , but the standards would apply equally to domestically produced biofuels and imports as well .
To sum up , the new legislative framework on renewable energy sources should ensure that we reach the EU-wide target of 20 % by 2020 .
This will require serious investments to be made , a regulatory framework and , most of all , strong political will .
I believe that this report gives us confidence in it .
I would like to come to the last point .
There have been doubts expressed that the Commission intends to let nuclear energy count towards the renewables target .
Can I say clearly that this is not , and never has been , the case .
The 20 % target of the renewable energy in the final EU energy consumption will only be met by renewable energy .
Nothing in the internal market package adopted last week , or the forthcoming directive on renewable energy , changes this .
Honourable Members , you have been our strong support in creating a European response to the global energy challenge .
I count also on the support of the European Parliament for the legislative proposal of the Commission .
But I get more and more encouragement coming from Member States .
Today , Gordon Brown , at the Labour Party Conference , said , ' by investing in energy efficiency , renewables , carbon capture , clean fuels and new environmental technologies , I want Britain to lead in carbon-free vehicles , carbon-free homes and carbon-free industry .
And I want the new green technologies of the future to be the source of British jobs in British businesses . '
The only difference is that I want it to happen in the whole of Europe .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mrs Thomsen for her report as well as Commissioner Piebalgs , because I believe that an alliance between Parliament and the Commission can genuinely be achieved .
In that respect , I consider that Parliament has already made a fundamental contribution to promoting renewable energies , with a vision of the future and of the use of renewable energies to tackle the major problems that lie before us .
There has to be general consensus on such an important endeavour and our starting point has to be a gradual approach , because I believe that a systemic policy is needed if we are to apply the various renewable energies to the system as a whole .
Firstly , I should like to stress that biomass was also discussed in depth in the Environment Committee as well as the importance of a gradual approach , especially as regards the use of agricultural forest residues and urban solid waste , because their exploitation offers considerable advantages , without tilting the balance between energy , food and raw material uses .
For that reason , what is before us is an extremely important task and not an impossible challenge .
There has to be general progress in the system as well , and I am referring here in particular to heating , cogeneration and trigeneration so that the energy content of resources can be fully exploited .
We also need an overall policy underpins and gives priority to electricity supplies generated from renewable sources , so that incentives can also be provided for the conversion of biomass into gas , paving the way for much greater rationalisation and efficiency .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first let me thank Mrs Thomsen for her balanced report .
I would like briefly to outline the key points of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's opinion .
Our committee expressly welcomes the proposed Roadmap for Renewable Energy as an important contribution to the sustainable development of Europe .
We need to make more efforts to develop renewable energy sources .
On the one hand , Europe has to safeguard its energy supply and reduce its dependence on foreign imports .
On the other hand , we must observe our commitments to climate protection .
In the energy mix of the future , bio-energy will also have a key role to play in boosting rural employment and the rural economy in Europe .
At the same time , the promotion of bio-energy must not lead to distortions of competition .
The set-aside rules no longer fit into the system and should be abolished , partly also because of the shortage of agricultural land as a result of the competition between food production and renewable raw materials .
In its opinion on Mr Lang 's report on an EU biomass and biofuels strategy , our committee already attached special importance to the introduction of an EU certification system .
On the one hand , we must avoid putting additional administrative burdens on our own producers by applying existing regulations , such as the one on cross compliance .
On the other hand , biofuels imported from third countries should also be certified according to strict environmental criteria , in order to ensure a positive environmental balance .
When we promote biofuels we must not allocate the available resources primarily to research into second-generation biofuels .
There is still a considerable need for research into first-generation biofuels .
Adequate attention should also be paid in research and development programmes to decentralised means of producing biofuels because of their many advantages .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) The European Council of March 2007 adopted an agreement that the European Union should generate part of its total energy mix from renewable energy sources .
Tomorrow the European Parliament will be voting on the corresponding report , in which we give our support to the proposals of the Council and Commission for future legislation on the matter . I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Thomsen , on a magnificent report based on wide-ranging discussions with all parties .
The report calls on the Commission to submit a proposal for renewable energy framework legislation and emphasises the importance of creating and implementing Renewables Action Plans at Community and national levels .
Those plans must promote investment , innovation and research in all sectors relating to clean , low-emission energy sources . For that we need more investment in research , development and innovation to ensure that renewable resources achieve a level of competitiveness similar to that of conventional energy .
We in the EPP-ED Group do not advocate binding targets ; we believe compulsion , as well as the setting of sectoral targets for renewable energy resources , should be subject to subsidiarity .
What we do advocate is calling for ever greater efforts from the Member States in regard to research , support , reducing red tape and simplifying authorisation procedures , so as to facilitate the development of renewable energy sources .
And , in defence of the internal market , we believe that an effective and efficient harmonised support scheme should be the long-term objective in Europe in order to ensure the most efficient use of renewable energy technologies .
We call on the Commission to make sure that any framework directive on renewable energy includes measures to promote heating and cooling by means of renewable energy , which are the least developed technologies so far .
We also welcome the Commission 's proposal to promote biofuels and other renewable energy sources in the transport sector , and we call on the Commission and the Member States to step up efforts to develop second-generation biofuels so as to avoid the many tensions arising from the shortage of raw materials . That shortage cannot be blamed on the development of biofuels : there are a number of factors at work , including the common agricultural policy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would like to thank my colleague Britta Thomsen for this report .
It once again raises the energy debate at European level .
Our energy industry is affected not only by outsiders , but also by our own mistakes .
These should not be forgotten .
We have , for example , allowed our spare capacity to fall by around 1 % every year , and that is creating insecurity .
I want to draw your attention first of all to the position regarding electricity produced from renewable forms of energy .
Mrs Thomsen and I have drafted an amendment to her report on this very subject .
It is important that there is proper support for electricity produced from renewable sources of energy .
Renewable energy should also be a means of relieving fuel poverty .
The industrialised countries must develop techniques and methods to help ensure that poor nations can rely on a supply of energy .
Now economic poverty , information poverty and energy poverty are all hitting the same people .
Meanwhile , in Europe , there cannot be a viable single energy market as long as most of the Member States fail to adhere to jointly-made agreements .
It has therefore turned out that solidarity in the EU looks likely to lack solidarity .
It is always awkward setting targets for energy production and use , and it has to be based on reliable science .
Sector-specific targets for renewable energy at national level therefore need to be established with careful consideration .
The circumstances relating to energy vary enormously .
We should , for example , discuss with the Member States monitoring schemes , classifications of biofuels for transport and the status of nuclear energy , when calculating targets for renewable energy .
Nuclear power , as an emission-free form of energy , should not raise the target for renewable energy .
The Commission has classified peat as a fossil fuel , although the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has moved it into a category of its own , somewhere between fossil fuels and biofuels .
Now we have obtained new and positive results from research into peat 's effect on climate , with reference to the lifecycle model .
When a bog is exploited first for peat production and then either for afforestation or the cultivation of reed canary grass , it has less of an effect on climate .
At present in the Emissions Trading Scheme peat has an emission factor of 106 , whilst with coal it is only 94.6 , because the calculations have not taken account of the entire lifecycle of peat use .
This should be put right quickly , Commissioner .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , may I thank the rapporteur for the excellent work she has done on this report .
Renewables have been part of the energy mix in Europe and part of European energy policy for a number of years and this report very usefully highlights why they have not yet expanded to their full potential .
One of the problems has been access to the grid .
We have a distribution network for electricity which was designed to be one-way and now requires technical adjustments in order to become two-way and be able to handle decentralised electricity generation .
Member States should be doing more to get rid of the technical and administrative barriers currently hampering the expansion of renewable electricity .
The biggest potential from renewables exists at the two ends of the scale .
On the one hand , we need a new commitment and investment in large-scale renewable energy projects such as offshore wind farms in northern Europe , solar collectors around the Mediterranean and tidal barriers .
At the same time , at the other end of the scale , we need to maximise use of renewables at a domestic level - technology such as solar thermal , photovoltaic panels , heat pumps and biomass heating .
I particularly welcome paragraph 38 , which stresses the need for compulsory use of renewable technologies in all new and renovated buildings .
It is time for a major revision of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive , not least because the renewables roadmap needs to be considered hand in hand with the EU 's action plan on energy efficiency .
The binding target of 20 % EU energy from renewables by 2020 is much more likely to be met if we succeed in cutting total EU energy consumption .
The way to cut carbon emissions is to have renewables as an increasing element of a decreasing energy requirement .
On the question of biofuels , I would emphasise the absolute necessity for all biofuels , whether imported or produced in Europe , to satisfy sustainability criteria in respect of net CO2 savings , biodiversity protection , water resources and effects on food production .
But I think we should accept the Commissioner 's reassurances and continue to support the 10 % biofuels target .
In December , though , we will need to look very carefully at the Commission 's proposals to make sure that they meet the strict sustainability criteria Parliament is demanding .
Finally , this roadmap for renewable energy should not just be a roadmap for Europe .
By supporting investment in renewable energy technology in the developing world , we can achieve two crucial objectives .
First , much-needed growth can be achieved without the cost to the planet of increased carbon emissions and , secondly , developing countries can achieve , through renewables , a degree of energy independence and energy security .
They can be sheltered from the fossil fuel price shocks which have ruined so many developing economies in the past .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , speaking on behalf of the UEN Group in this debate concerning renewable energy in Europe , I would like to thank Mrs Thomsen for preparing a complex report on this subject .
First of all , the author of the report is right to say that the most important issue , also as regards the future of renewable energy in Europe , is to develop a common European energy policy .
Unfortunately there does not appear to be any progress in this area , even though there have been some ill-defined promises about including this policy in the EU Reform Treaty .
It is almost two years since Poland , which has already experienced the consequences of differing energy policy interests among individual Member States , for example with regard to the construction of the Russo-German Baltic gas pipeline , presented guiding principles for the creation of such a common energy policy at a meeting of the Council of the European Union .
Unfortunately , at that time this proposal did not attract any interest , as it ran counter to the interests of the most important EU country , i.e. Germany .
I would like to express the hope that this time the European Commission will approach the task of preparing a common energy policy more seriously .
Secondly , in order to allow producers of various types of renewable energy better access to the distribution network in different countries , it is vital to separate distribution grid operators from energy producers .
If we do not do this , then electricity producers using traditional sources that are also either the owners or controllers of transmission grids , will not want to make them available to those who produce energy from renewable sources .
The final proposals from the European Commission in this regard met with vigorous opposition from powerful energy interests , principally from France and Germany .
It will be interesting for us Members of the European Parliament to see how the European Commission deals with this opposition .
Thirdly , the strategic objectives for renewable energy , namely the generation of 20 % of total energy from renewable sources and achieving a 20 % energy efficiency improvement by 2020 , are deserving of attention and support .
I would like to express the hope that , in order to achieve these ambitious objectives , the European Commission will propose introducing appropriate support instruments not just at EU level , but also in Member States .
I would like to draw particular attention to the production of bio fuels , which not only increase the amount of renewable energy used , but also mean that agricultural resources are not used only for the production of food , and in this way reduce overproduction .
By the same token I do not agree with the argument of the report 's author that the production of bio fuels could result in an increase in food prices and that it will therefore be necessary to open the EU market to food coming from third countries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the future is already upon us .
The time for renewable energy sources has come , and only a boom in renewable energy , together with much greater energy efficiency , can help us cope with the climate change crisis and the energy supply crisis .
I am grateful for this excellent report .
We can map out a medium- and long-term road for promoting renewable energy and motivating the reticent , of whom , I see , there are still a considerable number .
The report emphatically demands that the Commission produce framework legislation for the promotion of heating and air conditioning by means of renewable energy .
It calls for a level playing field for renewable resources on the energy market and a reinforced emission trading scheme , with internalisation of the costs of polluting energy sources and removal of the massive , perverse subsidies for fossil fuels .
It seeks to promote offshore wind energy , takes a firm stand on high-temperature solar energy , and calls for more funding for research into the storage of renewables and the adaptation of national grids .
Finally , it asks the Commission to draw up an action plan in favour of bio-construction , given that 40 % of all EU energy is used in buildings .
And now we come to a point of conflict .
The debate on biofuels raises a moral issue and a question of principle : to eat or to drive ?
If we approve a binding target of 10 % for biofuels in this report , we must be aware that we are fuelling a conflict between 800 million car drivers , on the one hand , and 2 000 million of the poorest people on earth , who are competing for the same grain .
The euphoria engendered by biofuels risks endangering the food supply of Europe and the world .
And we do not even know whether the energy balance is positive .
Given rising oil prices , it is becoming cheaper by the day to burn cereals rather than make bread or feed dairy cows .
We must therefore proceed with great caution and not adopt binding targets , which have , moreover , already been called into question by major international institutions and many scientists .
We cannot allow the remedy to be worse than the disease .
On this crucial issue we must trust to good sense and apply the precautionary principle .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , according to a forecast by the International Energy Agency , oil will become an extremely scarce natural resource in five years ' time .
Natural gas will be even scarcer by the end of the decade .
Today 80 % of the EU 's energy is produced using fossil fuels , mainly oil and gas .
That is why the Commission 's proposal for a directive on increasing the use of renewable energy resources is necessary .
Renewables today account for a little over 6 % of the energy consumed in the EU .
Of that , biomass and the incineration of waste account for 4.2 % , hydroelectric power for 1.5 % , wind power for 0.3 % , geothermal energy for 0.3 % , and sunlight for hardly anything .
The aim to raise the share of renewable energy resources to 20 % , in other words triple it , by 2020 seems way too ambitious .
On the other hand , the European Parliament had previously decided to ask for still more : 25 % by 2020 and as much as 50 % by 2040 .
The Commission 's proposal for 20 % refers to an EU average .
Only Latvia , Sweden , Finland and Austria exceed that target today , but these countries do not escape the directive : instead , higher targets are being set for them .
The EU 's biggest countries bring up the rear , with the United Kingdom at 2 % , Germany 4 % , Poland 5 % and France , Spain and Italy 6 % .
If the 20 % target set in the directive is to be achieved it will depend on how willing and able the big Member States ' are to increase the use of renewable energy .
It would be interesting to know how they will do it .
If they simply pay lip service to the directive , the Commission will have no way of forcing them into it .
They may , however , be forced by circumstances outside the EU as a consequence of rising prices for oil and gas and as a result of our disposable lifestyle .
Mr President , the Thomsen report rightly advocates a vigorous approach to ensuring that renewable sources make up a major proportion of our total energy use .
Fossil fuels are after all finite and the use of renewables reduces the amount of greenhouse gases generated .
It also creates the diversification we need in order to reduce our dependence on just one or two energy sources .
I am fully behind the rapporteur when she says that biofuels must be used in a responsible way only .
The EU must work towards international agreements which will ensure that sustainability criteria can be applied to biofuels within the context of the WTO .
It matters very much what kind of biofuel we use , how it is grown and how it is used .
Biofuels are only sustainable if the whole cycle from producer to user has the lowest possible impact on the environment .
This means that biomass must be not only produced sustainably but also burned sustainably .
In production , that means that crops must be replanted after harvesting .
In combustion it means , for example , that the emission standard must be just as strict as for other fuels .
More extensive strategic choices are also required in the face of undesirable effects like the depletion of virgin forest and the competing imperative of food supply .
In poor countries , especially , biomass production puts pressure on agricultural land and pushes up food prices .
What specific policy measures does the Commission envisage to eliminate these undesirable effects ?
Lastly , the rapporteur wants proper account to be taken of the differing circumstances of the Member States .
But one Member State has a greater potential for exploiting solar energy , whilst another is more likely to be able to harness wind energy .
So a harmonised system , of the kind which the report envisages for the longer term , is no obvious matter .
A system of support is most effective when it is geared to those energy sources with the greatest potential and that , Mr President , differs from one Member State to the next .
Mr President , may I first commend Ms Thomsen on the work and commitment that she has put into this report .
Mr President , you will not mind me reminding you that we come from a party that thinks ' green ' but votes ' blue ' , and that leads me to a general statement that we are all in favour of renewables as a general principle .
However , we support realistic , achievable renewables , not expensive subsidies for unattainable targets .
And it has to be said that this year the Commission and the Council have set some very ambitious targets .
I want to reflect a little on the dilemma posed by large-scale hydro or tidal schemes , or a massive shift into biomass energy crops , because each has advantages , but each also has environmental implications and costs .
For example , in the region I represent , the Severn Tidal Power proposal has huge potential for electricity generation but an equally huge cost .
The last estimate was EUR 20 billion , which is quite a lot to anybody .
That cost is justified , however , partly by CO2 emissions saved and partly by flood damage prevented , and the value of the electricity generated is only a small part .
Then we have to consider the huge environmental impact of such a scheme on the Bristol Channel and its associated features such as the Severn tidal bore , a special feature , and the surrounding wetlands .
So it seems to me that there is a dilemma , a conflict between the two interests , and the same applies to converting a lot of land to produce miscanthus or other energy crops .
We must be realistic about legislating for binding targets which cannot or will not be met .
We in the European Union have a long record of adopting admirable targets and then failing to achieve them .
If we continue in this vein , we risk bringing the legislative process into disrepute .
If we adopt regulations requiring changes in people 's behaviour , then it seems to me we must will the means , either by providing enough time for change or by fiscal incentives in combination with a regulatory stick .
Finally , let us not forget the huge potential of energy efficiency ; but that is for another debate .
Mr Chichester , I think you failed to hear when the Commissioner quoted extensively from Gordon Brown 's speech to the Labour Party Conference today or else you were otherwise occupied , but we were very much fascinated by this intervention .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , warm thanks to the rapporteur , Britta Thomsen .
It is a good report .
I hope it will be adopted on Wednesday by as clear a majority as in committee , for in spite of the somewhat critical remarks by Mr Chichester we achieved a broad , almost unanimous majority in favour of the report in committee .
As I said , it is a good report , and it is also an important and necessary one .
You know that the Commission is currently preparing a framework directive to implement the spring Summit decisions on achieving a target of 20 % of renewables by the year 2020 .
The Commissioner has spoken to you about it and it was good to hear him say clearly that the Thomsen report will play a relevant role .
What is the issue now and what is really important ?
Firstly , we have successful directives , especially on electricity but also on biofuels .
So the important thing now is to take up and to strengthen and improve those successful directives , as pointed out in the Thomsen report .
Secondly , we must commit ourselves to what the Commissioner already agreed in plenary last year , which is to include the area of heating and cooling , in order to minimise the deficits we have in that sector and improve market penetration .
Hitherto we have taken a clear sectoral approach , and I believe we must not forgo this .
It is also extremely important to ensure that the national action plans include really clear sectoral targets , binding targets , to ensure that here too we have a broadly-based development of the various technologies .
It is most important to decide how the 20 % are to be assigned among the Member States .
That really means we must ensure a fair distribution of burdens , or rather opportunities , a distribution that really is based only on potential and on what has already been achieved , what already exists in the countries concerned .
So we really must take a very clear approach here .
I am glad that the report states very clearly that we are concerned here only with renewables and not with low-CO2 energy sources .
May I thank Commissioner Piebalgs once again for making that clear .
I believe the Commissioner has a major responsibility here .
We have seen a genuine new impetus , with the presentation of the electricity directive .
I hope the same will happen after the framework directive , which , I hope , we can expect before the end of this year .
Mr President , Churchill once said that the best way to make a task seem difficult is to postpone it , and I think that is one way of describing the energy debate we are having in Europe today .
In answering Mr Chichester , who says he thinks ' green ' and votes ' blue ' - well , what is left , maybe , is to act ' green ' as well .
The proposal from the Commission and the decisions we have in place on 20 % of the total energy consumption in Europe by 2020 being derived from renewable sources is , indeed , very good .
It is also nice for everyone - for all voters , industry and citizens in Europe - to see that Parliament , thanks to Ms Thomsen 's work on this report , is also very decided that this is a good way to work and that this is the way we should do it .
Is it possible ?
There are question marks , of course , when people ask questions .
I think it is perfectly possible .
If we look at what can be done in industry by trigeneration and by using renewables , it is perfectly possible .
In households , on heating and cooling , it is also perfectly possible , and in the transport sector also .
I am very happy that , in combination with what we have here on renewables , other regulations in place in Europe are changed .
It is about time we put more ethanol in petrol , and with the new decisions we will at least have half the rate that Brazil has .
I think it is about time that we discussed whether we put biogas and natural gas as well , which is the best way of boosting the volumes we need .
When we do that , we also have the market in place and then the development goes on by itself , step by step .
There are some responsibilities , of course .
The renewable action plan - both at European level and national levels - has to be good and come into force quickly .
The second area I want to point out is taxes .
I cannot understand why we tax people out of behaviour that we want them to have when it comes to fuels of different kinds .
The third thing is regulation , where we can still do a lot and where we have to do some cleaning also in the European system .
Finally , I think we are in the midst of an engineering revolution that has the same consequences as when we went from steam to electricity , and now we are going from electricity to smart energy , and this is a very good step on the way .
( PL ) Mr President , the road map for renewable energy is an important document , thanks to which it will be possible to obtain renewable energy .
The continuing increase in the prices of oil and gas could be helpful for the achievement of the objectives listed .
The European Union has only about 2 % of the world 's gas and oil resources .
Its economy is and will be dependent on the price of raw materials as well as political stability in oil-producing regions .
For this reason the objective of 20 % of energy from renewable sources seems unsatisfactory .
The European Union should follow a diversification policy as regards the production of electricity , which should take into account the different possibilities of creating renewable energy in various countries and regions .
Local and regional action plans need to be created for the production of renewable energy and for energy saving , and these should be supported by local government , national governments and the European Union .
Research programmes relating to energy production should be given priority .
Also , where necessary , the possibility of developing nuclear power , which reduces CO2 emissions , should also be taken into consideration .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Thomsen for a very far-reaching report .
( DE ) Mr President , let me begin by warmly congratulating Mrs Thomsen on her very good and comprehensive report .
This report , which I hope will be adopted by a large majority , follows the tradition of this House of urging the Council and the Commission to promote renewables .
Let me briefly address the central issue that will come up in the next few weeks when the Commission presents its draft directive .
The key question is security of investment .
We need investment if we are to reach the 20 % target .
We must look at when and where investment has proved successful over the past six or eight years .
There are two systems in Europe : the system of guaranteed input prices and the system of green certificates .
A total of 90 % of all renewable energies apart from large-scale hydropower were produced under the system of guaranteed input prices .
They were produced more cheaply than under the system of green certificates and , most importantly , this made it possible to introduce new players into the electricity market .
Those figures all come from the Commission 's last report dating from December 2006 .
I am rather shocked by what I am hearing now .
There is information that a majority in the Commission will probably be in favour of abolishing this good system and introducing a trading system with green certificates .
I must seriously warn the Commissioner against adopting that strategy , which would benefit only major , dominant energy firms such as E.ON , RWE , EDF and others , because it would lead to investment uncertainty and make other players reluctant to invest in future .
You will be judged on whether there is local investment , which should be on the basis of a comprehensively guaranteed security and not the kind of haphazard mechanism of green certificates .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that Europe must work harder on developing renewable energy resources , whether because other resources are diminishing rapidly or because in the whole energy mix renewable energy sources represent an important tool for lowering emissions .
I deliberately mentioned the whole energy mix since I consider it to be the fundamental factor in this matter .
In my opinion , when developing renewable energy resources , and especially when laying down the rules for such development , we have to think carefully about how to proceed .
Our aim is not to reach the target percentage level of renewable resources but to lower emissions and decrease dependability on other resources .
Therefore , we must not forget about the energy mix .
As the practical application of other worthy and ambitious goals and declarations has demonstrated , including here in the European Parliament , we achieve nothing by simply setting percentage quotas without taking into account the geographical , economic and other conditions that are typical of individual countries or regions .
We must proceed carefully so that we remain competitive in comparison to other countries .
We also have to remember that some renewable energy sources , for example solar or wind energy , require considerable financial resources .
Therefore , it is ' yes ' to renewable sources but ' no ' to a militant attack without factual debate and arguments .
Indeed , energy from renewable sources is still not cheap ; many countries or consumers simply cannot afford it .
( DE ) Mr President , in March 2007 the European Council , headed by our Chancellor Angela Merkel , decided that 20 % of total energy consumption should come from renewables by the year 2020 .
The advantages are self-evident : lower CO2 emissions , less dependence on energy imports from unstable states , growth and employment opportunities , especially in rural areas .
Following the summit decision , we now have to implement those objectives .
The following points are particularly important here . The Commission must have the necessary powers and resources to be able to ensure that the individual Member States actually comply with the objectives set at the summit .
If we want to achieve a target of 20 % of total energy consumption being made up of renewables , then every Member State must play its part .
At the same time , as provided in paragraph 9 of the report , each Member State must be free to choose the most appropriate renewable energy source in the various sectors .
Another key issue is improving energy efficiency .
We can only achieve the 20 % renewables target if we improve energy efficiency as a whole .
There is an enormous untapped potential in the area of building insulation and energy-saving electrical appliances , where there are many innovative technologies that could already be marketed .
We must also do more than before to introduce renewables in the heating and cooling sector , given that 40 % of total energy used in the EU is used in buildings .
There is a huge potential here for the use of renewables .
Modern structural planning and energy-saving new buildings can help ensure that renewables cover the entire energy demand for buildings .
Biomass is another source of renewable energy , which must be further developed because of its versatility and base load capacity .
We must ensure , however , that biomass production is sustainable and does not compete with food production .
Here , as stated in paragraph 57 of the report , we must ensure that biomass is managed according to internationally recognised high standards of sustainability .
It must also be ensured that overall the development of biomass has a positive effect on the climate and energy .
It is also important to note the contribution of nuclear energy to climate protection .
At present , we cannot do without nuclear energy as a low-emission technology .
A high priority must also be given to research into renewable energy sources in the EU .
Technological developments in this area are decisive to sustainable energy supplies .
In particular , we must further encourage and promote the development of storing renewable energy sources , for example on the basis of hydrogen technology .
All in all , I eagerly await the Commission 's proposals at the end of this year .
I hope the Commission will take many of Parliament 's requests on board .
( ES ) First of all , let me thank the rapporteur for her thorough and serious work .
Once again Mrs Thomsen has proved extremely knowledgeable on this topic .
The report presents an analysis of the situation that is both correct and balanced .
Fossil fuels are running out ; they come from politically unstable parts of the world and continue to be a major source of CO2 emissions . Moreover , our energy needs are growing all the time .
To meet those needs and achieve a secure supply , we have to find new massive energy sources that are non-polluting and decrease our dependency on the outside world .
In this context , advances in renewable energies are particularly relevant .
Thanks to investment in research , European Union firms in this sector enjoy a leading position on the world market and contribute in large measure to job creation and greater competitiveness - two major objectives of our Lisbon Strategy .
The situation with regard to renewable energies varies considerably from one Member State to another , and so do the - mostly inadequate - political and legal frameworks in each country .
Nevertheless , the limited existing legislation has proved effective in stimulating more sustainable development in many of the Member States , despite the fact that in such important areas as heating and cooling , there is still no legislation at all .
If we are to move forward , it is crucial that the framework legislation proposed by the Commission should be ambitious .
It must improve and strengthen the existing regulations and set binding targets for electricity generation , transport , heating and cooling .
It is also imperative that the Member States put those agreements into practice without delay .
To meet the binding 20 % target it is also essential , as the report very rightly stresses , that electricity generated from renewable sources should have better conditions of access to the grid .
We need open , non-discriminatory and effective access for renewable energy to grids that are sufficiently developed to cope with large quantities of electricity from renewable energy sources .
I agree with the rapporteur that separation of ownership of the transmission system operator from commercial activities is the best guarantee that there will be no discrimination against renewable energy producers in terms of access to the grid .
The implementation of projects of European interest for trans-European energy networks must also be speeded up .
The recent appointment of coordinators for projects encountering technical , political or financial difficulties is a step in the right direction .
Finally , both the Commission and the Member States must continue to promote investment , innovation and research in these sectors .
And they must make all necessary efforts to ensure that energy from renewable sources is produced at accessible prices . Achievement of the targets set in the framework legislation must not impose a burden on consumers and firms because of an exhorbitant increase in energy costs .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Ms Thomsen on her excellent report .
I also wish to congratulate the four draftspersons of the opinion who offered useful additional points and advice .
Even to the most difficult-to-convince-people , and that probably includes Mr Chichester , who has now left , it is now clear that our planet is warming up dangerously and that climate change is a real threat to life on earth as we know it .
How much of this change is due to natural climatic variation and how much is due to the accumulation of climatic change gases in our atmosphere is still a matter of some dispute , among scientists and politicians .
Where there is no dispute is that the accumulation of gases such as CO2 is certainly making climatic change worse , much worse , and even at this late stage , when the catastrophic effects of climate change have commenced , the world is awakening slowly , perhaps too slowly , to the urgent need to do something about it .
The EU is one of the frontrunners in trying to deal with this problem .
The road map for renewable energy in Europe is certainly an important step in the right direction and I am sure it will have the full support of most MEPs , but once a proper legislative framework is achieved , Member States must be compelled to implement it and effective monitoring systems must be put in place .
In order to have a real effect in halting gas-induced climate change , two further goals must be achieved .
Firstly , a road map for renewable energy must extend further than the EU to cover as much of the world as possible .
This is a formidable task , indeed .
Secondly , we must understand that we must make our citizens themselves understand that , along with action and renewable energies , we need to reduce energy spending in general .
If we go on increasing our energy needs indiscriminately and seemingly in a limitless fashion , then , irrespective of how many road maps on renewable energy we draw up , all will be ineffective in the end .
( FR ) Mr President , if we mean to tackle global warming and to translate this ambitious road map into practice , it is absolutely essential that we make the link between energy and environment .
Of course , we have warned repeatedly that the Member States will not achieve the target of a 12 % share for renewable energy by 2010 .
So how can we expect them to achieve 20 % by 2020 ?
The Commission 's method of development calculation fails to take into account the environmental costs of energy production and we continue to produce energy policies piecemeal , whereas what we need is an integrated , comprehensive approach .
Energy is an area of policy where we are capable of doing much better and achieving rapid results .
For example , energy efficiency needs to be promoted so that all of us can eliminate unnecessary spending on energy .
Administrative procedures also need to be simplified .
In France , for instance , you have to complete a bureaucratic obstacle course in order to fit a solar panel : no fewer than seven separate procedures are involved in turning an energy consumer into an energy producer .
However , what we do must also be consistent with cooperation for development .
What are the Union 's proposals for developing renewable energy sources under the partnership agreements with the ACP countries ?
When we talk of solar power , for example , the poorest nations tell us that they simply cannot afford the technology .
And what about those Member States that finance the cultivation of biofuels in countries in the South ?
In Africa and Asia , jatropha plantations are springing up even in regions where drought is a problem and where the demands of food security are pressing .
Not only that , but the Union bears responsibilities towards the third countries that supply our raw materials for energy production .
European investment in Niger 's uranium mines or in the Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline must be accompanied by transfers of technology for clean energy production based on microprojects .
The energy crisis , Mr President , is an environmental crisis ; it calls for emergency plans and binding policy measures .
We need to pull out all the stops on renewable energy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Piebalgs , ladies and gentlemen , as we speak the Kyoto targets are being discussed in Washington and I believe the UN is right to discuss these global targets and to set targets as part of a top-down strategy , as well as creating the necessary instruments .
We believe it is important for us to concentrate on the bottom-up strategy , namely the Lisbon Agenda , and we should seek to ensure that employment and growth are achieved mainly through energy efficiency targets .
We have new objectives for various trades here .
We can produce a real economic impetus and a win-win situation through insulation and many other energy-improvement measures .
I believe that in terms also of security of supply it is important to focus on renewables .
Renewable energy , which is growing in our latitudes , is a secure source that is available to us at all times .
We should ensure that we really do achieve the target of renewables accounting for 20 % of our final energy consumption by the year 2020 .
We need EU-wide criteria for support measures , for incentives , for subsidies , for taxes , for the whole financial framework that we need to set up here .
That is a challenge and I think it is one that Commissioner Kovács also faces .
Secondly , we need transparent and fair network access .
We need the ' must-carry principle ' and we should consider penal charges for non-transport in this case .
We need harmonised planning procedures with a one-stop mechanism under which authorisation procedures can be concluded within a given period , i.e. a maximum of three years , to ensure that energy production is available at the right time .
We also need to safeguard the consumers ' right to order 100 % of renewables from their suppliers and therefore to have secure energy supplies for decades to come .
Nuclear energy is not a renewable energy , which is why I would ask for it to be dealt with in a separate report .
( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Thomsen has delivered an outstanding report on renewable energy and I wholeheartedly endorse her commitment and the stated target of 25 % .
Combating climate change is an enormous challenge , but it offers great opportunities too . Opportunities for new technologies and clean and renewable energy .
In addition to established sources such as wind turbines and solar panels , we shall probably also have energy sources such as high-altitude wind power from one kilometre up , sun reflectors , tidal power , wave energy , geothermal energy and algae fuel technology .
It is an exciting trend and I welcome it .
Investing in renewables brings more advantages than merely reducing CO2 .
It reduces our dependence on non-EU countries , it breaks the power monopoly of the energy giants and it leads not only to huge innovation but also to more new jobs , about a million of them .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is of course all very well , but it also needs good policy .
There are three points of importance here .
Firstly , the need for decoupling .
Total decoupling is an absolute priority if renewable energy is to develop rapidly .
At the moment it can take a long time for a wind turbine park to be hooked up to an electricity grid and that is unacceptable .
I hope the proposals which the European Commission has put forward this week can be made a little more robust , that we can resist the pressure of the energy monopolies and ensure that the proposals do not get watered down .
Secondly , there are biofuels .
We have good ones and bad ones .
At present everyone seems to be focusing on the bad ones .
With good reason , because there are grounds for questioning the usefulness of some biofuels which bring hardly any environmental benefit .
Some biofuels are very detrimental to biodiversity and to food prices .
But under strictly controlled conditions biofuels can help towards a more sustainable system of energy supply , subject to guarantees that tropical rainforests will not be felled in order to fill up our cars .
I agree with the paragraph in Britta 's report which says that clear criteria must apply to this 10 % level of biofuels in the energy mix .
In my report on the Fuel Quality Directive I put forward proposals on this and I look forward to hearing your reactions .
Lastly , the matter of subsidies .
Regrettably , subsidies are still given for the production of fossil-based energy .
Over the last 10 years the European coal sector has received about 50 000 million euros in product-related aid .
Aviation fuel is free of duty , a hidden subsidy .
The inclination is now to give generous subsidies to renewable energy . That is not the right thing to do .
We must end the subsidising of fossil fuels as soon as possible .
Instead of giving subsidies we must compel energy producers to draw a substantial part of their production from renewable sources .
Then there will be no need for subsidies .
We must be careful not to replace our addiction to oil with a new addiction to subsidies .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first let me thank the rapporteur for presenting this report .
I believe it is important in this context to point out that we must look at energy policy in terms of a number of different objectives .
How can we ensure security of supplies , how can we ensure it does not harm the environment , and how can we also get it at a good price ?
If we take account of those three factors in each of these debates , we will realise quite soon that renewables naturally play a part , probably an important part , in the future shape of energy , but that this sector alone cannot resolve the problem of energy supplies in terms of price formation , environmental impact or security of supplies .
That is why it is important to ask the questions that have already been put clearly by various speakers today , for instance to look at the question of how and where we can use renewable energy in the most economically intelligent manner , as we do for other resources .
We must consider where we can put the euro to the most effective use , which means we must not , for instance , promote solar energy in an area where conditions are not at all conducive to its use .
We must consider whether decisions and percentages , whether binding targets will really bring us forward or whether it would not be more sensible to do a little more to promote subsidiarity and to support initiatives that go in very different directions in different sectors depending on the Member State concerned , while leading to a comparable objective .
At the same time we must identify the drawbacks that also exist in the case of renewables .
We have already had debates about biofuels .
Six months ago the subject never even came up .
We have debated wind power and the damage it can cause .
In my country we have problems with finding enough space to develop wind power .
That does not mean saying no to these renewables , but it does mean a differentiated debate and a differentiated response , for in the end a sensible energy policy must not raise false expectations it cannot fulfil but must raise expectations that it can then fulfil step by step .
I thank the Commission for its very open and differentiated approach .
( FI ) Mr President , we cannot cut carbon dioxide emissions in line with our targets unless we employ the twin strategies of energy efficiency and renewable energies .
There are at present big differences between the different Member States as far as the use of renewables is concerned .
We need binding country-specific energy efficiency targets and targets for renewable energies .
The rapporteur is absolutely right when she focuses attention on two very practical matters with regard to how we achieve these targets within the European Union .
We must insist that the Member States with large populations and which at present produce a very small part of their energy using renewable energy sources should close this gap .
The efforts made on the part of the small countries will not be enough on their own to solve the problem .
The other important observation , something which has been raised here , is that we have to exploit natural phenomena .
We have sunshine ; we have the potential of biofuels ; and in some places we have wind .
These phenomena need to be taken into consideration in national programmes .
It is crucially important that the policies pursued by the Member States should be sustained and consistent .
Only in this way will we get investors and sponsors , as well as industry , involved .
Unless the support systems and regulation are on the right track , allowing us to achieve a sustainable energy policy , we will not accomplish the real revolution which has been called for in energy policy here .
Regarding biofuels , we need to speak in favour of second generation biofuels and not as if we were promoting competition between food and fuel .
( ES ) Mr President , the decision of the Heads of State and Government to approve a binding target of 20 % for renewable energy sources in our energy mix for 2020 has had a great impact throughout the world and constitutes a milestone in Community policies on climate change and energy use .
Tomorrow Parliament will be voting on the corresponding report , in which we express our support for the proposals of the Council and Commission for future legislation in this field .
As co-legislators , we are under an obligation to develop viable economic policies that meet society 's real needs , always bearing in mind the available technological framework .
The target of deriving 20 % of our energy mix from renewable sources will be economically viable only if two conditions are met : the price of a barrel of oil remains high and the price of a tonne of CO2 is suitably dissuasive .
The Commission 's impact studies are based on a price of around 20 euros for a tonne of CO2 .
The current price fluctuates by 12 to 15 cents .
With these figures the cost-benefit calculations are not as attractive as we would wish , and this must be taken into account in the next revision of the emissions trading scheme if we want to send industry and consumers the right signals .
There can be no doubt that the diversification of clean energy sources must continue to be the main priority in energy policy .
Thanks to the Council 's courageous action in March , the time has come for Member States to negotiate the distribution of burdens and obligations .
In conclusion , Mr President , I therefore call on the Council to ensure that distribution takes place quickly on the basis of a solid compromise in which no party feels itself a winner or loser .
( HU ) I congratulate Mrs Thomsen on her excellent report .
I agree with my fellow Members , and in particular with my colleague Mr Paasilinna , that we cannot be doctrinaire in matters relating to energy and that we must not think of renewable energy as a panacea in itself .
It will not solve Europe 's problems on its own , but it is a very important step in the right direction .
In this regard we are all in agreement , and this point is masterfully underlined in Mrs Thomsen 's report .
At the same time , however , several Members have made the point that technological progress is needed , because the new Members States and poorer Member States in particular perceive the use of solar power , wind power or - in the case of my country , where thermal springs abound - geothermal energy , to be extremely expensive .
I would ask Commissioner Piebalgs to urge the Commission to consider carefully how these technologies might be stimulated in Europe , perhaps also by means of tenders .
I do not mean simple technologies of the kind my fellow MEPs and I saw recently in Tibet when we were told that households were equipped with solar power .
We were reluctant to believe it , but it later transpired that they were referring to a very simple little plate capable of heating a jug of water in half an hour .
I am thinking of altogether more serious technologies .
As regards the agricultural sector , biofuels are very important , and I agree with Mrs Myller that we must not create a situation that pits biofuel production against the food industry and food production .
Let us also be sensible about bioethanol production , because sometimes producing bioethanol consumes more fossil fuel than it enables us to save . I believe , therefore , that we need to take a diversified approach on this issue .

( SL ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , renewable sources of energy meet two major challenges : firstly , the challenge of securing a reliable supply of energy , in that they provide diversity and reduce reliance on imports and , secondly , the challenge of climate change , in that they do not cause direct releases of greenhouse gases .
Renewable sources of energy have been popular in Europe for some time .
Renewables are a subject which scores political points .
Their importance to further social development is advocated by us politicians , economists , scientists and power engineers , and also by home-owners who are not normally involved professionally in the fields of power generation or environmental protection .
However , the proportion of renewable sources in the overall energy mix is increasing only slowly .
Why is that ?
Perhaps we politicians are not engaged enough ?
I do not believe that is the case since the field of renewables accounts for the majority of European legislation relating to energy .
However , I do believe that in establishing an appropriate framework we have emphasised the technical and supervisory aspects and neglected the economic aspect and an overall assessment .
I believe that we should not deal with renewable sources in isolation .
We must assess their advantages and weaknesses alongside other sources of energy .
We must consider their contribution to the diversity of the energy mix , to the reliable supply of energy , to the reduction in releases of greenhouse gases and to the formation of a knowledge-based society .
We must assess the extra research and development needed .
We must carry out a macro-economic assessment to build on our earlier technical approach .
An important factor in deciding on investment is the financial cost of releasing one tonne less of carbon into the atmosphere , for example .
Until we carry out an appropriate comparative cost analysis to build on our conventional approach to policy-making , we will not achieve the desired results in our energy and environmental policies .
However , if we do , if we do carry out an overall analysis , the barriers between the various sources of energy will be removed since only a heterogeneous , lasting energy mix will be important .

( ES ) Mr President , almost everyone agrees that we in the European Union are facing three basic challenges : the first is the exhaustion and rising price of conventional energy sources ; the second is the need to reduce our growing dependence on energy imports ; and the third is to help hold back climate change .
Clearly , renewable energy sources can make a major contribution to meeting these challenges .
We now have a commitment to achieve 20 % of total energy generation from renewable sources by 2020 . Obviously , Member States are free to choose the renewable energy sources that best suit their own situations .
But they must commit themselves - there must be an unambiguous political commitment - to meet the targets we have jointly set ourselves .
I would like to stress four points .
First , renewable energies are not incompatible with other energy sources that can help stabilise supply , but they must be the preferred option .
Other energy sources , such as nuclear power , should not be discarded , but the persistent problems of waste management and high construction costs have yet to be solved .
The use of biofuels , however , requires great caution and should be based on criteria of sustainability .
It could otherwise give rise to serious environmental damage and have adverse social consequences .
On the other hand , there are great possibilities for developing the use of renewable energies in the construction of new housing and infrastructure .
Finally , there is the social dimension of energy policy : the introduction of renewable energy sources must not give rise to price increases that put heating or electricity beyond the reach of consumers , especially the most vulnerable sections of society , which are especially hard hit by rising energy prices .
Mr President , I think it is actually quite fun to have a lively audience .
We do not always get applause and cheers and shouts .
I know it is forbidden , but I think it is actually quite fun , so it should be allowed .
If you would allow me , I would like to make three points .
The first one is actually an echo of what the Commissioner said .
I think that we need a common energy policy .
It is very important , of course , that we look at the national targets , but as an overall approach we must look at it from a common perspective .
This means that we need to revise a lot of the legislation in the pipeline and we need to focus , as Mr Paasilinna said earlier , on a proper energy mix while looking at the whole programme .
My second observation is about fair burden-sharing and I am quite happy with the 2020 aims in this respect : they are good and they are ambitious .
I am not 100 % sure that we will ever achieve them , especially on the renewables side , but nevertheless it is a good aim .
But , in doing this , it is very important that we have a careful look at the burden-sharing .
I do not want to be in a situation whereby small states such as Finland , which already has 25 % renewables today , have to hike up their burden to , say , 45 % , whereas the five biggest Member States , which actually consume 60 % of energy , keep much lower standards .
So let us be really fair on this .
On top of that , of course , a country like Finland is not going to have too much solar energy , unfortunately .
The third observation I have is about the methodology for calculation .
It seems that wind and solar are penalised in relation to biomass .
Fine , let us try to live with it but look at it very closely .
With the national action plans , I would like to hope that the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport has enough staff , or is able to recruit enough staff , to deal with , monitor and implement the issues .
In my remaining time , these are my three points : firstly , we need a common energy policy , secondly we need fair burden-sharing and , thirdly , we need to be very careful with the methodology for calculation .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Thomsen on her excellent report .
Considering the challenges posed by climate change , our high dependency on fossil fuels and the growing challenge of creating rural jobs , the European Union needs a clear , easy-to-follow regulatory system enabling it to operate effectively as regards renewable energy production , and especially as regards biomass production .
We need to create the kind of legal environment for producers that clearly sets out activities and operating frameworks relating to renewable energies .
There is little point in our having directives to increase the share of renewable energy if the appropriate conditions are lacking ; those concerned will not want to risk starting up this new kind of production .
We cannot allow a situation to arise where we mislead farmers by encouraging them at European Union level to produce the raw materials for bioenergy production , while in some countries the regulatory framework at national level does not provide an optimal environment for doing so .
A long-term , well thought-out programme is needed , because otherwise producers will see this new type of production as too big a gamble .
We must guarantee security of production , but we cannot expect consumers to pay the higher retail prices .
Producers need incentives , and in some cases tax allowances will need to be provided to ensure that the transition does not entail operating difficulties for them .
We must provide appropriate incentives to ensure that biofuel production will not bring about a rise in food prices , because this would undermine the whole programme . Thank you for your attention .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to focus in on two areas of Mrs Thomsen 's excellent report , namely the building industry and motor cars .
If we are to meet the targets for CO2 in the automotive sector we have to invest more in research and development .
That much is obvious .
Our review of the multiannual budget gives us an opportunity to do that , Commissioner .
The research effort on new technology and renewable energies for transport needs to be stepped up dramatically .
It should be one of the priorities for our brand-new European Institute of Technology too .
Europe 's automotive sector can give a lead here , ladies and gentlemen .
Some Japanese car makers are now advertising the manufacture of ' zero emission ' vehicles as their goal .
I think that we in the European Union are well capable of being the first in the world to make that goal a reality .
Then there is that other sector that is crying out for new environmental technology : construction .
This need has been highlighted time and again .
It is the sector which the European Commission itself describes as the one with the greatest potential for reducing CO2 .
Construction of new , low-energy housing , ' passive housing ' , is still in its infancy and still relatively expensive .
Here too , it is high time we moved up a gear , not only on research and development , but also on tax incentives .
We could perfectly well lower the rate of VAT on energy-saving materials and renewables in construction still further , perhaps even to zero .
The European Commission in any case has plans - you know this better than I , Commissioner - to put forward new proposals for lowering VAT by 2009 , and they could ideally include these ideas for energy-saving measures in the construction sector .
So major challenges await us in the months and years ahead .
And they require bold and resolute action .
( LT ) The thorough report by my colleague Mrs Thomsen will help us live in a cleaner environment and resist climate change .
Ambitious action plans on renewable energy at European and national level as well as monitoring of their implementation will be included in the Common European Energy Policy and reduce dependency on energy supplies from third countries .
However , some countries have significant water , solar or wind energy potential , while other countries have less potential .
Therefore , action plans for different countries should be drawn up individually , with everything calculated on a real basis .
It would be useful if the European Commission were to direct support from the structural funds towards the production of renewable energy as well as the insulation and heating of residential blocks .
The use of renewable energy should also be promoted in fiscal policy .
In Europe , we face a rise in food prices related to the increasing demands of biofuel . That cannot be .
What can an ordinary EU citizen living from salary to salary say if the need to increase the use of renewable energy sources cause higher electricity and housing prices ?
The market cannot regulate everything .
It is necessary to provide assistance for those in financial difficulty , especially those who are suffering the most from rising energy prices .
Generally speaking , I am sure that we will have to change our lifestyle and limit our extravagant consumption in the future . Human beings have harmed the planet and it is therefore our responsibility to help it recover .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , energy supplies are becoming an increasingly serious challenge , not just for the European Union but worldwide .
In that context the use of renewable energy sources is crucial , both to ensure security of supplies in future and to make a decisive contribution to reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
We must support and promote innovation .
We must also invest more in research and development of new technologies , whether in the field of transport - e.g. research into new fuels or the construction of new engines - or in the field of the thermal or energy-based use of resources such as heating , electricity production , insulating materials and so on .
One good example is combined electricity-heat production from biomass by power-heat coupling , which is also being used increasingly in Austria .
Another key aspect is energy saving .
Regional , decentralised concepts are also of crucial importance .
We must use the opportunity offered by the decentralised production of energy and biofuels from renewables because it can also produce sustainable energy and use raw materials that are available on the ground .
The use of agricultural products to produce energy will certainly not prevent the production of adequate food supplies , since enough productive farmland is available and that land can also be used adequately .
The suspension of set-aside in the 2008 financial year is , therefore , really welcome .
Furthermore , the use of renewable raw materials can contribute substantially to the economic development of rural areas because of its positive impact not only on land use during normal crop rotation but also , in particular , on employment and the creation of new jobs in rural areas .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent job she has done .
We must bear in mind that the ambitious goals to which the European Union has committed itself , aimed at reducing emissions of gases responsible for the greenhouse effect , increasing the use of renewable sources of energy and enhancing energy efficiency , can only be achieved if we implement them in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , beginning with social and economic actors at local and regional level .
Decentralised energy policy , hand in hand with research programmes and campaigns aimed at changing consumer habits , could bring tangible results not only in terms of use of renewable energy sources but also in terms of employment and regional development .
Local production , and possibly conversion and consumption , of renewable energy sources create new jobs , while regional economic stability is increased by diversifying energy supply and making it efficient .
I would like to emphasise the paramount role of financial incentives both as regards connecting renewable energy sources into existing networks and getting renewable energies onto the market .
It is in the fundamental interests of local authorities and regional organisations ( the President interrupted the speaker , requesting him to speak a little more slowly ) to support enterprises ' activities in the field of innovation and research and development .
By supporting partnerships between the public and private sectors , the European Union could help public and private-sector players in society to join together to provide an economic shot in the arm for regions whose development they would like to stimulate .
In order for this to be successful , it is vital for local businesses to be informed about development opportunities and to assess the characteristics and specific needs of the region concerned .
I recommend that the European Union should monitor closely Member States ' compliance with what is expected of them , as regional and local initiatives will be unable to flourish unless Member States put in place frameworks of their own that are compatible with EU legislation .
Member States have an obligation to create a legal environment that not only enables increased energy efficiency and use of renewable energy , but also provides every possible economic support and incentive to foster local and regional development initiatives .
( LV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the targets put forward in Europe 's energy strategy is to increase the proportion of total energy consumption accounted for by renewable energy resources to 20 % by 2020 .
Latvia is a leader in this sphere , since the proportion of renewable energy in Latvia is already 37 % .
When allocating targets for the proportion of renewable energy to each Member State it is difficult to do so fairly , and to ensure that each Member State is actively involved in making use of renewable energy .
I can support the rapporteur 's position , that we must take care that the larger Member States do not obtain reductions and targets for renewable energy proportions that are lower than 20 % .
In view of the fact that the five largest Member States account for at least 60 % of EU energy consumption , reductions for the large states would entail a disproportionately large burden on the other states .
It must be acknowledged that the EU has already had negative experiences on a similar issue .
The approach taken by the European Commission when allocating CO2 emissions quotas was , at the very least , strange .
According to the Commission 's own information the aim of the emissions trading scheme is to help the Member States to meet their Kyoto commitments .
The new Member States are meeting their Kyoto commitments , but their emissions quotas are being significantly reduced .
For example , Latvia , which has the lowest CO2 emissions quota per inhabitant in the European Union , will receive only 55 % of the emissions quota it requested .
Estonia and Lithuania will receive 52 and 53 % respectively .
The quotas for other new Member States have also been significantly reduced .
In contrast , almost all the older Member States , which are not fulfilling their collective Kyoto commitments , have been allocated more than 90 % of the emissions quota requested .
It is not surprising that five new Member States were forced to challenge this decision in the courts .
I welcome the position taken by the rapporteur on the allocation of additional EU budget resources for achieving the targets of the European energy strategy , establishing this field as a priority and revising the EU Financial Framework for 2007-2013 .
The targets put forward in the European energy strategy are to be welcomed from both an economic and an ecological viewpoint .
It only remains to appeal to the European Commission not to repeat past mistakes and to allocate these targets fairly , ensuring that each Member State is actively involved in the achievement of the targets . Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) Mr President , I must first of all point out how regrettable it is that the EU 's earlier target of increasing the share of renewable energy in the EU 's energy mix to 12 % by 2010 will in all likelihood not be met .
Despite this fiasco , at the spring summit in 2007 the German Presidency set Member States the even more ambitious goal of increasing the contribution of renewable energy to 20 % by 2020 .
I believe we need to speak candidly : I fear that the current target , like its predecessors , is also in danger .
It is in danger , moreover , of being sabotaged by the Member States .
For this reason , I strongly urge the Commission and the Member States to reach an agreement as soon as possible regarding the practical implementation of the 20 % target for renewable energies .
Member States have already had to submit and prepare their renewable energy strategy , taking into account cost-effectiveness and a sectoral analysis of the potential in each country .
For this reason , the targets set in the Renewable Energy Road Map need to be followed by detailed implementation plans with defined national targets and binding sub-targets for each energy sector , as well as sanctions should the targets not be met .
We need sanctions because countries resistant to implementing the common targets are , let us not forget , jeopardising international confidence in Europe 's commitment and reliability as regards combating climate change .
With the chance of achieving global agreement hanging in the balance as it is , this could put paid to it completely .
Europe has a historical obligation and must demonstrate by its own example that there is life beyond fossil fuels , that competitive technology exists and that secure self-sufficiency is possible .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to comment on two points in Mrs Thomsen 's report .
Right at the start the report states that : a ) ' conventional energy resources are about to run out ' ; b ) ' we are experiencing an increasing dependency on imports ' of raw energy materials ; and c ) ' climatic changes ... will have dreadful consequences for the inhabitants ' .
The first point I want to make is that the increasing dependency of EU countries on imports of raw energy materials is the only unambiguous fact , about which there is no doubt .
This is indeed a serious political problem .
However , it cannot be solved by giving unilateral preference to so-called renewable energy resources .
The solution must be far more complex .
That is why I want to stress some aspects that are , in my opinion , missing from the report in question .
Firstly , the individual Member States are responsible for their own energy policy and the corresponding right to have their own energy mix .
Secondly , there is nothing in the report to emphasise that economical spending of the limited funds at our disposal is a necessity , and I stress the word ' economical ' when talking about spending such funds .
I also consider it necessary for the European Union to cooperate with the US , including coordination of their policies towards countries that export raw energy materials .
Finally , the report makes no mention of the importance of nuclear energy .
My second point is that the predictions on which the report is based , i.e. that conventional energy resources will soon be exhausted and that climate change will have a dreadful impact on the human race , are debatable .
We should not treat them as incontrovertible facts .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to start my closing words of this debate with what Mr Vidal-Quadras said : there should not be a feeling of winners or losers in this policy area because renewable policy is definitely one that we need , for three basic reasons .
First of all , climate change : without renewable energy sources it is rather naive to expect that we could master the climate change challenge .
Second , competition for energy resources : the world is growing , people are living better and energy resources are even scarcer and the run for energy resources could also be geopolitically dangerous .
Third , let us not be misled by the costs .
We have a rather nice situation today , because , at USD 80 per barrel of oil , we have an exchange rate going up to EUR 1.4 .
So as a result , we have been sheltered from the oil price increase .
But these are not related processes ; it is just a coincidence .
We saw that , when the euro was launched , the expectation was one to one .
If we stayed at the same exchange rate , we would have energy resources today 50 % higher , and then a lot of parliaments would be discussing emergency aid .
So , economically , we also need renewables .
Is it a lot to ask for this technological breakthrough ?
And it is not subsidies which we are calling for , it is investment aid , because 20 % of final energy consumption is not 100 % , it is not 50 % : it is just one fifth , and we need this technology to be applicable .
So , why do we need Europe ?
Because it has scale and scope , and also there have been calls .
There is potential in the Member States that are not rich , at least in GDP per capita terms .
There are Member States where there is not so much potential and we need to find the way to use the whole potential of the European Union .
The richer countries could invest in the countries where there is more potential , because , as a result , we will all benefit by having new technology which powers us from clean energy sources .
I quoted Gordon Brown not because of any political affiliation .
I quoted that , even the UK , where today there is not so much penetration of renewable energy , there are calls for this policy - meaning this attitude - and that we need binding targets because , to achieve a long-lasting policy goal , only binding targets matter .
If they are just indicative targets , we just measure until the next elections and so on .
If they are binding , it means long-term policies are in place that facilitate investment and that facilitates the rules of application .
Now , on the challenge a lot of you put forward about food energy sustainability .
Well , I would like to dispute that at this stage renewable energy has any considerable impact on food prices .
There is definitely more growth in welfare in the world .
People are eating better : in India , in China , in third world countries as well .
So everywhere in the world people are asking for more resources and it is fair to ask .
Definitely , the world market price answers with higher prices .
It will increase the production , but it will not change basically that we will have low oil prices or low food prices again .
It will stay reasonably high and , for this reason , this challenge does not come from renewable energy sources .
At the same time , I am from the part that believes that we need defined sustainability criteria and we will do this in this directive , because the counter-argument could be that there already is water legislation , waste legislation and soil legislation .
' Why do we need an additional source of bureaucracy ? ' some people ask .
I believe , if we are embarking on particular policy areas that are contested from the point of view of society and from the political groups , then we need to provide an answer .
And certification , if even sometimes cumbersome , is needed to really provide an answer that none of the energy resources will be provided in an unsustainable way .
But , I really believe that the report is very well balanced .
It is very well balanced between these challenges and I hope very much that in the House it will find broad support , because this broad support would mean better support also for the Commission proposal at the end of the year .
So , it is well done and I would like to again thank the rapporteur and all the rapporteurs in the political groups and different committees , because I think it is well done .
It is exactly the equilibrium that we need , and now we need broad support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 25 September 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) The present situation regarding power generation and climate change is giving rise not only to positive solutions but also to rushed decisions , which may ultimately have many adverse effects .
What I have in mind is renewable sources of energy that essentially provide new solutions to supplementing diminishing conventional sources of energy and reducing the volume of harmful emissions .
On the other hand , we are witnessing and even taking joint decisions on their ill-considered and rushed introduction by setting excessive binding targets to be attained at all costs .
It is no coincidence that an OECD study and warnings by many experts point out that the ill-considered promotion of certain renewable sources ( such as biofuel , biomass , etc . ) is causing irreparable damage in other areas , such as agriculture and water management , thus disturbing the overall balance of nature .
It reminds me of the shooting of sparrows in China during what was known as the ' Cultural Revolution ' .
By that I do not mean that I am against renewable sources of energy .
However , it is necessary to use those that exist naturally in well-considered areas of use and in capacities that allow them to renew naturally without any effort to increase production artificially in a headlong attempt to attain binding targets as quickly as possible .
Current knowledge and technical solutions enable us , and will long continue to permit us , to use renewable sources only as a supplement .
Therefore , let us look for solutions that will be more reasonable and effective in the medium term . Nuclear energy is a good example .
in writing . - Finland is one of the world 's leading countries in utilising renewable energy sources , especially bioenergy .
The share of renewable energy in Finland is ca .
25 % .
The objectives concerning the use of renewable energy sources must be realistic .
In the fight against the climate change , the availability of reasonable priced bio mass , vital for our forest industry , must be ensured .
In Finland peat has been defined as slowly renewing biomass fuel .
As indigenous fuel , peat has a considerable effect on regional policy , and it increases employment and the security of energy supply .
No emission-free , low-emission or other form of generation that is emission-neutral , sustainable and cost-efficient can be ruled out , including nuclear power .
All forms of energy must be assessed on the basis of the overall interests of society .
The share of carbonless energy sources , including nuclear energy , should be increased in the fight against climate change .
Nuclear power increases independence from imported energy , is environmentally cleaner than other options and an economical energy source .
I therefore find it very important that Member States are free to choose the most appropriate renewable energy sources given the differences in geological , hydrological and climatic conditions in the Member States .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , if we are to promote renewable energy sources we have to be precise about what need we are aiming to meet by using them .
It is one thing to be a trailblazer , whatever the price , achieving one 's targets and percentages , and quite another to find multi-sectorally sustainable energy solutions that have far-reaching consequences .
It is already clear that the target percentages set and the EU 's environmental and climate targets are , unfortunately , incompatible in terms of their achievement .
Despite that , we have decided to try to meet the targets , with the result that we have an energy market which is artificially manipulated at the consumers ' expense and energy solutions which are unsustainable in terms of climate balance and which need to be revised .
Compliance with a minimum binding target of 10 % for biofuels used in transport would be an unfortunate example of this .
If this is about the fight against climate change , then switching to biofuels will not be the answer .
It can hardly be the right way to go in a world where a food shortage is a likely scenario , given the greenhouse gas phenomenon .
The concern expressed in a study published by the OECD that state subsidies for biofuels could lead to a rise in the price of food and damage to forests is a genuine one , considering that their contribution to the prevention of climate change may be smaller than predicted .
The same concern is raised in an article in the journal ' Science ' , where the benefit of biofuels to climate is compared with afforestation over a 30-year period .
The findings vary depending on the raw material and production technology , but in all cases afforestation in a given area of cultivation would absorb two to nine times more carbon than the reduction in emissions achieved by using biofuels .
What we need now is common sense when it comes to meeting targets .
Otherwise we will soon realise that the decision sharply to raise the share of renewable energy sources to one fifth of energy production was a hasty one and one that will one day be a threat to the environment through the overfelling of forests .
in writing . - ( DE ) Renewables must play a significant role in our future energy policy .
Nuclear energy must not play a part in this scenario because unresolved safety problems still remain .
Renewables are our future .
For that we need innovation and the development of new technologies .
We need far more investment in research so that we can bring innovative solutions in all areas onto the market .
In March the European Council agreed to cover 20 % of the EU 's total energy demand through renewables by the year 2020 .
In so doing , the Heads of State and Government took an important step and spoke out clearly in favour of giving more support to renewable energy sources .
That is why I call on the Commission to submit a forward-looking proposal for a legal framework for renewables .
It is crucial for us to have the appropriate instruments available at European level in order to achieve the Council 's targets rapidly and efficiently .
in writing . - ( RO ) Today , the EU depends 57 % on gas importation and 82 % on oil imports .
It is estimated that , by 2030 , the EU will depend 84 % on gas imports and over 93 % on oil imports .
The EU needs an energy policy that would allow economic and social development , but would also ensure environmental protection by efficient actions against climate changes .
I consider the next 5 years crucial for the planning and approval of " Projects of European Interest ” for TEN-E , to diversify energy supply sources and increase energy efficiency at a Community level .
In order to limit climate changes , the EU has planned for the renewable energy resources to provide 20 % of the European energy consumption by 2020 .
Thus , both the Member States and the Commission must do an inventory of the renewable energy resources on their territory and define action plans for their efficient use .
We request the Commission to get actively involved in this inventory .
Structural funds and the European fund for competitiveness and innovation , as well as the Research Framework Programme 7 can and must be used by the Member States for investments in energy technology .
Development of the Community 's railways - Certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community - Rail passengers ' rights and obligations ( debate )
The next item is a joint debate on
the report by Georg Jarzembowski on behalf of the European Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 91 / 440 / EEC on the development of the Community 's railways and Directive 2001 / 14 / EEC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure ( PE-CONS 3635 / 2007 - - , and
the report by Gilles Savary on behalf of the European Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community ( PE-CONS 3636 / 2007 - - and
the report by Dirk Sterckx on behalf of the European Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on rail passengers ' rights and obligations ( PE-CONS 3637 / 2007 - - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tonight we can all be satisfied with the overall result of the railways package .
As rapporteur on the progress of Community legislation on the development of the railways I may not be particularly happy , but when we look at the results we have achieved in regard to passenger rights , in particular compensation payments for train delays and the Europe-wide certification of train drivers , we can on the whole be satisfied .
I want to start by discussing my own report .
The good news is that as of 1 January 2010 the national rail networks must be opened up for use by all railway undertakings providing international passenger services , without any discrimination , whether the undertakings are public or private .
That will finally create a European single market in cross-border passenger transport and open the way to more offers by a wide variety of railway undertakings , to the benefit of the customers .
We expect the railway undertakings actually to make use of these new opportunities and to make customer-friendly and competitive offers , in relation particularly to air travel costs .
If that proves successful , we have a chance to revitalise cross-border rail transport .
And this is where in a sense I am following on from the previous debate , for we will then also have an opportunity to reduce environmental pollution within the European Union .
One unsatisfactory result of the conciliation procedure is that because of the strong resistance by the Council it did not prove possible also to open up the national railway networks for national railway services , which means that the European internal market for railway services remains incomplete .
To be honest , however , the reason for that lies in the vote we ourselves held in this Parliament on 18 January this year .
The majority of Members voted in favour of the opening up of networks for national rail services too , but we did not reach the required qualified majority of 393 votes on that Thursday .
Nonetheless , in the conciliation procedure Parliament did manage to ensure that the new directive requires the European Commission to submit a report by 31 December 2012 in which it also proposes measures for further opening up the passenger rail market .
For the record , I would ask Vice-President Barrot to repeat his commitment to submit a report by 31 December 2012 and also to take further steps to open up the rail market .
Parliament and the Council also reached agreement that we should certainly restrict the opening up of networks for cross-border services if that jeopardised the economic equilibrium of public and regional passenger services .
That must not , however , lead to some form of protectionism , to a railway trying to protect itself from competition ; restriction is possible only if a national government authority confirms , on the basis of an objective economic analysis , that opening up would jeopardise regional passenger services .
Unfortunately a further restriction slipped in during the procedure , which is that Member States may impose a levy for the benefit of public passenger and local services .
Parliament did , in fact , succeed in limiting the levy so that revenue from it must not be greater than is really necessary for the performance of the public service .
I honestly hope that - aside from one country , and even then I hope that will not be the case - Member States will in fact never make use of the possibility of restricting the opening up of the networks .
At any rate , I hope Member States will implement this directive without delay and that we will be able to offer more international passenger services here in Europe and give our citizens a chance to use rail rather than air transport when crossing borders .
I would now like to say a few words on behalf of my colleague Elisabeth Jeggle .
Unfortunately , she is absent due to illness .
First , Mrs Jeggle wanted to thank Mr Savary for the close cooperation between the shadow rapporteurs in relation to the third rail package and say that she is also very pleased with the results as regards the certification of train drivers .
We have managed after all to ensure that there will be a uniform European train driver 's licence , for there is no point in opening up the networks if trains have to stop at borders to change drivers .
We want a European internal market .
We want European freight trains - here the networks have already been opened up - and now also international passenger trains to be able to operate regardless of national borders , because we want efficient rail services .
In that regard , the introduction of a European train driver 's licence is of key importance .
Here we really can be satisfied with our legislation .
I would point out , however , that it is a question not just of train drivers but of all those entrusted with safety in rail transport .
As you know , just as a plane cannot take off if there are not enough stewardesses because they are responsible for passenger safety in the event of an emergency , similarly we need conductors and other individuals on trains .
We are not talking about the chef in the restaurant car but about railway personnel such as conductors and others who are responsible for passenger safety .
Here we and the rapporteur have jointly managed to persuade the Commission to undertake to submit a report , two and a half years after the directive enters into force , on the possibility of introducing uniform European certification of those employees too , to ensure that we do not have any safety deficit in this area of international rail services either .
Train drivers and other personnel must be properly trained .
We are glad that this train driver 's licence also represents a step towards train drivers ' mobility , for drivers who hold a European licence can also change their place of employment within the European Union as they please .
We are being fair , however , which is why we jointly ensured that if a person who was trained in one railway undertaking voluntarily moves to another one , the training undertaking is entitled to compensation for the training costs .
I may say , on behalf of Mrs Jeggle , that we are very pleased with the outcome .
There was good cooperation and she asks the House to approve the package as a whole .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , allow me to say at the outset that I share the general satisfaction with this Railway Package .
We have come a long way .
We had four texts when we set out and we have ended up with three .
We started work in 2004 and here we are now in September 2007 .
In other words , we certainly took the slow train rather than the TGV .
It has been a long journey but we are now at the end of the line .
We have made it , I believe , thanks first and foremost to the considerable determination of the Members of this House and the fact that they pulled together : I refer particularly to all the parliamentary groups and to the three rapporteurs , who are with us today , but credit also goes to everyone , including the shadow rapporteurs , who did his or her bit .
We are also indebted to the European Commission , and I should like to thank Commissioner Barrot and his colleagues for their cooperation at difficult stages , because the conciliation procedure was extremely tricky and the odds appeared to be against us .
We are indebted , too , to the German Presidency and to the German Federal Minister for Transport , Mr Tiefensee , who invested considerable personal effort : he participated in a number of conciliation meetings and I believe that without his determination to succeed we should not have this Railway Package before us today .
I am thinking in particular of the most problematic text , namely the proposal on passengers ' rights . In that regard , I would also pay tribute to the work done by Dirk Sterckx .
The degree of resistance to rail passengers ' rights is a somewhat curious thing .
It is true that railways are different from roads inasmuch as they are subject to remote control .
It is also true that delays can sometimes have a knock-on effect ; it is true that security has to come first and that trains may be delayed for quite respectable reasons .
Nonetheless , we are lagging decades behind air transport in this respect , and the obstacle we encountered was the tremendous conservatism of the European railway world : its tremendous resistance to passengers ' rights - which was in the end overcome because we agreed to derogations that may leave us looking at implementation in 15 years ' time , around 2023 .
So , while we may be proud of this text , we have less to shout about with regard to the timetable : it is not really good enough , in my opinion , to introduce passengers ' rights over a possible 15-year timescale if our aim - and it is our aim today - is to develop rail travel .
I must say that I am also personally pleased by the introduction of a European rail driver 's licence - for that is what is meant by ' certification of train drivers ' .
It is a somewhat complex matter .
Georg Jarzembowki outlined the details pretty well , and I believe that what we have before us reflects excellent work by the Members of this House on all sides .
I am grateful to Mr Jarzembowki 's group , which does not always take such an open approach on these matters but which , in this case , was particularly supportive .
I should like to think that what has been achieved sets a good example because it came out of dialogue between both sides of the industry in question .
It is , in effect , an example that can be held up to anyone doubting the capacity of the European Union to be a Union of its citizens .
I think it deserves to be publicised .
Let me say , too , that I attach great importance to the commitment we have made - a commitment obtained by the European Parliament - concerning train staff responsible for security tasks .
These people are not train drivers but they nonetheless save lives because , on board trains , it is their job to do so and it is very important that there should be a system of certification for them , even if it will naturally be at a different level from driver certification .
I hope , therefore , that the clause incorporating that commitment , which we succeeded in having included , will be honoured .
Lastly , with regard to opening up and liberalising rail networks , I believe that if we are serious about creating a Europe-wide rail culture , we have to begin by accepting that other people 's trains will run across our territory .
That prospect is unavoidable .
For my own part , I advocate a staged approach .
Not all of us will achieve the same level of readiness and , moreover , even when we have our impressive directives in place , there will be entire countries that will still not open their networks .
I am thinking here of Ireland because it has no international lines , and possibly also of Finland because it is , to some extent , the end of the line and would be more inclined - quite legitimately - to open its network to Russia ; and I am thinking particularly of all the countries that have different load gauges and different track gauges .
In other words , the big challenge and the first challenge , when we talk of creating a Europe-wide rail culture , is interoperability , and that is where we need to focus our efforts over the coming years .
This Europe-wide rail culture will of course require directives about liberalisation but we need to begin by investing in the networks to make technical interoperability feasible .
Opening the market to competition between France and Spain will mean little , because so long as we keep different track gauges we will not increase either freight or passenger traffic .
The report on certification of train drivers can be seen , in some respects , as a report on interoperability . What is required is social interoperability that will allow drivers from different countries to think of themselves as Europeans , rather than nationals of a particular state .
It is my belief that if we can move beyond national cultures on the railways , then we shall be able to ensure that the railways have a future .
As road traffic and air traffic continue to grow , that is an urgent task .



rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am aware that mine was the most complicated of the three reports and that , as Mr Savary says , this was the hardest knot to unpick .


All in all I think we reached an honourable compromise in our discussions with the Council .


I should like to thank all those involved , more especially the shadow rapporteurs , Messrs El Khadraoui , Rack , Zîle , and others , together with the Chairman of the Conciliation Committee , Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca , who in my view conducted the negotiations most skilfully , and of course the German Presidency too , as Mr Savary already said ; I think Mr Tiefensee and his people put in a lot of hard work on this and were most persuasive in the Council ; thanks are also due to the Commission people , the Commissioners and their departments , because I think we had a lot of help from that quarter too .
What did we achieve ?
An honourable compromise , as I said just now .
I think Parliament has made sure of a few important things here .
First , we have basic rights for all rail passengers , something that was not at all our goal at the outset .
These basic rights are : guaranteed personal security , liability of the railway undertaking in respect of its passengers , luggage , the services it provides , insurance ; it also means that disabled people have the right to travel , without discrimination .
I think we have secured something very important for all rail passengers here : the guarantee of personal safety for all rail passengers . These are guarantees that the railway companies are obliged to give everyone from the end of 2009 .
The second important point , to my mind , is that we have made a difference where it mattered , not between international and national traffic , but between long-distance and local traffic , in other words on the basis of objective data within a single European market we have said , look here , for these passengers you have to do these particular things , and for others we can 't ; so we are making a different distinction from the one between national and international .
I think that is not insignificant .
For long-distance travel we have secured a system of compensation and assistance in the event of delays , which also covers people who regularly suffer delays , for example commuters and season ticket holders ; we have assistance for the disabled at stations and on board trains , certainly on long-distance services and hopefully for all passengers as soon as possible ; we have got provisions on the handling of complaints included in the directive .
We have distinguished between urban , suburban and regional traffic , allowing for exemptions , but only when these have been defined by Member States and on condition that they are subject to scrutiny by the Commission .
I think it is not unimportant for Member States to be able to say look here , we distinguish between regional routes on the basis of our own criteria .
We have set out one or two very specific rules here .
That , I think , is what the European Parliament has achieved .
I began by doing my best to convince the Commission to abandon its original distinction between international and national and we then managed to persuade the Council to do likewise .
The first was easier than the second , I have to say .
We met with a lot of resistance in the Council but we managed to steer quite a lot of things in the direction we wanted .
But we have had to agree to the process being slower than we had actually wanted , for example the provision that allows a five-year exemption for long-distance services which may be extended twice more .
But again , that exemption will only be allowed if Member States and railway companies can justify it to the European Commission .
It is important , not only that an exception is allowed , but that it has to be justified .
All in all I think we shall have made significant progress by the end of 2009 .
Basic rights . We are starting a debate which railway undertakings and regulators in the Member States , cannot dodge any longer .
They have to make a start , they must at last start talking to passengers , rail users , about what their rights are and how they are going to guarantee those rights ; and I appreciate that it will be a very protracted debate .
For a number of reasons railway undertakings are not always the fastest of operators , in some cases not just because of their history and corporate culture , but also because we are talking serious investment here , and that takes time .
My view was that Parliament had to take account of that too .
In any event , railway undertakings and Member States can now no longer avoid talking about quality improvements and better customer service .
I think the third package generally is a welcome step towards a European rail market .
An open market , a dynamic market , in which different players compete for clients , which means they have to look after their clients too .
My report on passengers ' rights is a contribution to this , I think ; Parliament 's position has been that on principle all rail users are objectively to be regarded as equal .
I think Gilles Savary 's report on train driver certification is an important step forward .
In an open market you need that kind of thing to ensure that trains can operate anywhere and that borders are no longer an obstacle .
It is a pity that we did not do what we should have done in connection with Georg Jarzembowski 's report and market access .
That we continue to differentiate between international and national and are not doing the same for domestic rail services as we are doing for international transport , namely opening up the market and giving players in the relevant infrastructure as much of a chance as possible .
I think Parliament has rather missed the boat there , or should I say the train .
We all know why that was .
I do not know if we would have succeeded in the Council , but it is a shame we did not go all the way with this , as the British put it so nicely .
I think Parliament has done what it could , Mr President ; we pushed the Council hard to move forward , as far forward as possible .
Would we have liked to achieve more ?
Of course we would , but I hope the majority of the House will accept that Parliament needed above all to get a decision taken here , that we have exhausted all our opportunities in conciliation and that we have achieved some progress on the European rail market which is important both for the travelling public and for the economy of the Union .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 19 and 20 June 2007 , following long and tough negotiations , particularly on the question of passengers ' rights , the conciliation committee finally reached agreement .
Clearly , the agreement reflected effort on the part of all the institutions , but the European Parliament did contribute significantly in moving this third Railway Package forward .


So I should like to thank Mr Vidal-Quadras , who led your delegation , as well as the rapporteurs , Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Sterckx and Mr Savary , and the chairman and members of the Transport Committee , who closely followed these issues and managed to achieve real advances on the text of the Council 's common position , particularly in relation to passengers ' rights .
I am pleased that the ' package ' approach taken by Parliament and the Commission has been successful .
It has enabled us to have these two texts adopted just two-and-a-half years after the Commission produced the proposals - even though the number of Member States practically doubled in the interval .
I have to acknowledge , Mr President , that it was Parliament 's tenacity which has resulted in the parallel adoption of the amended Regulation on public passenger transport services by rail and by road .
It was by no means obvious two years ago that we would get this far .
I extend my thanks to the House .
I should like now to outline briefly what has been achieved on each of the three texts .
Let me begin with the opening up of the market in international rail passenger traffic .
Two issues dominated discussions at the conciliation stage , namely the report that the Commission is to prepare on implementing the opening up of the international passenger services market and the levying of a charge towards the financing of public services .
On the first point , Parliament was keen for the Commission 's report to include the opening up of the domestic services market and to be accompanied by an appropriate legislative proposal .
The conciliation committee came up with a compromise whereby the Commission 's report will include an analysis of the prospects for opening domestic markets to competition .
This will take account of experience in applying the rules on public services , and of the differences between Member States .
If necessary , Mr Jarzembowski , the Commission report will also propose complementary measures to facilitate the gradual opening up of the market .
I am aware that , from your point of view , the compromise ought to have been more ambitious , but it has two advantages .
It allows us to implement the new legislative framework , including the provisions for public services .
It also sets a clear time scale for detailed analysis of the impact of this new legislative framework in all the Member States .
So we will have an opportunity to consider the relevance of complementary proposals by the Commission .
The second focus of negotiation was the levying of a charge towards the financing of public services .
A number of Member States hoped that all rail services within their territory , whether national or international and irrespective of their providers , would contribute collectively to the financing of public passenger transport services , via the levying of a charge .
When the Council adopted its common position , the Commission accepted this as a possibility insofar as it was compatible with Community law .
The compromise reached in the conciliation committee took on board several elements from Parliament 's second reading .
I am grateful to the parliamentary delegation for giving it their support and I can assure you that I am committed to completing this legislation to the best of my ability .
That brings me , Mr Savary , to the certification of train staff .
Apart from the more or less technical questions that were easily resolved prior to the final meeting , two issues still had to be addressed : partial reimbursement of training costs if a driver left a company early ; and the directive 's field of application .
The solution reached on the partial reimbursement of training costs was to ask the Member States to address the problem through national measures because , at the end of the day , harmonisation of their solutions was not essential .
With regard to the field of application , I think we have found the best solution .
The European Railway Agency will commission a more detailed study of the profile and tasks of those members of staff on trains who contribute to their security .
We will then be in a position to target our proposals more effectively for those staff , but you were quite right to highlight how extremely important this question of train crew certification is .
I will move on now , Mr Sterckx , to rail passengers ' rights and obligations .
The final phase of the negotiations focused on the field of application of the regulation on rail passengers ' rights .
From the outset , Parliament was keen to see these rights introduced for all railway services , including national services .
However , a large number of Member States felt that this would pose major difficulties , particularly when it came to applying the regulation to local services , the characteristics of which are quite different from those of international or long-distance services .
In the end , the solution contained two key elements : a new distinction between types of service , and lengthy transition periods .
The key parameters for application of the rules are now about long or short distance , with short-distance services including urban , suburban and regional rail links .
So the regulation no longer refers to ' national ' and ' international ' services .
This new arrangement , to which you made a substantial and skilful contribution , Mr Sterckx , enabled us to reach agreement on what had been the main sticking point .

This solution concerning the field of application has many advantages : it accords better with the internal market than the initially envisaged parameters depending on a national / international dimension ; it gives the Member States more flexibility because , in defining at national level what constitute urban , suburban and regional services , within the framework fixed by the regulation , it will be possible to take account objectively of the dimension and structure of the territory in question .
The compromise has also deferred application of certain sections of the regulation for a transition period of five years , which may be renewed twice .
This solution lessens the immediate burden on the railway companies , while retaining the obligation to transpose the rights that the regulation establishes into national law .
This means there can be no let-up in the railways companies ' efforts as they look to the future .
I would remind you , too , that the regulation will include a minimum core of rights that will apply , without exemptions , from the moment that it comes into force .
These rights concern availability of tickets , civil liability in the event of accident , passengers ' personal security in stations , and non-discrimination in respect of passengers with reduced mobility .
Quite a lot , in other words !
It is a good outcome and it will enable us in future to offer rail passengers a better service .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have shown that together we can move things forward .
Clearly this is just one stage .
We will now have to attend to the proper application of the rules that Parliament and the Council have adopted .
The Commission , in its role as guardian of the Treaties , will work untiringly to that effect .
Because I arrived slightly late , having come straight from Cyprus , I missed hearing the three rapporteurs , but I did catch Mr Savary 's point that interoperability is vital to the Europeanisation of the railways .
It is the price to be paid for shifting a proportion of our freight traffic onto rail - and we recognise today just how advantageous that will be , particularly in terms of our priority of tackling global warming .
Of course , this package is not perfect , but it has the great merit of being a reality and I cannot adequately express my appreciation , Mr President , of all the MEPs who contributed to its adoption ; for us too , it marks the beginning of a new stage , in which I personally intend to invest considerable commitment and vigilance .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , many of us probably know the story of the Captain of Köpenick , and many of us have also laughed at what happened .
Yet that story was not and is not all that funny .
Just because someone is wearing a uniform , that does not mean he can or should have or claim any powers .
It is not so very long ago that rail passengers in Europe , in our Member States , came across many little Köpenicks .
The conductor was an official , the customer was not - he was subservient .
European Community legislation has breathed a lot of fresh air into those quasi-government structures and there has been a great deal of change in the space of surprisingly few years .
Monopolies and quasi-monopolies are slowly and increasingly becoming service industries more or less subject to competition .
Passengers are acquiring rights .
That is the subject I want to address .
In the Sterckx report the European Parliament set itself very ambitious objectives overall .
Our key objective was to ensure that where possible all passengers are guaranteed the same or similar passenger rights , regardless of the train they are in ; in particular , this must not be restricted to international travel .
Parliament regarded it as unacceptable for people to be treated differently on the same train .
The compromise that was reached with difficulty during conciliation did not entirely achieve that aim , but it almost did .
All passengers now have basic rights in very important areas : liability , rights of persons with reduced mobility , information , and then , stage by stage and at times unfortunately with very long transitional periods , further-reaching rights for all .
The key achievements are something to be proud of , especially when compared to air passenger rights , another matter we consider important .
They include fines , compensation for delays , improved access for persons with reduced mobility , wheelchairs , accompanying persons , and better information on all those aspects .
This will continue to be a major task in future too , so that we can ensure that passengers can claim their rights even if people in uniform treat them dismissively or distantly .
One final word , to avoid any misunderstandings .
As it stands , the new directive does not yet apply entirely to local services - urban , suburban and regional services .
We will have to introduce separate rules for local public transport , to ensure that there too customers are treated like kings and not servants .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner Barrot , perhaps I could start by saying that our objective in the European Parliament and in the European Union is to serve the people well and , as regards transport policy , to try to provide some genuine opportunities for growth , to give railways a new culture of growth and development , giving them an entrepreneurial nature and organisation and new opportunities for market growth .
The package that has been presented to us fulfils these two fundamental objectives .
For this reason I would like to say right at the beginning that we shall be voting in favour .
I would like to talk about the report by Mr Jarzembowski .
The first fundamental issue is the field of application of the new regulation , which relates to international railway passenger services .
During the work of the committee we examined and discussed , including in bilateral discussions with the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , the possibility of going one or even two steps further by liberalising national services too .
However , we accept the scope of the regulation as presented to us , which covers international , not cross-border , services , with the possibility of picking up and setting down passengers between stations within every Member State .
This is an effective and workable solution and we will vote in favour .
The second and more controversial area , also mentioned by Commissioner Barrot , is the possibility of introducing payments where there are negative consequences of liberalisation or threats to the efficiency and effectiveness of a country 's passenger transport system and provision of public services .
This point aroused concern and controversy .
The proposed solution may work in practice and the Commission will , of course , have to work closely with the Member States .
By the way , we are having great difficulty with the Polish translation , which does not convey the meaning .
The third very important aspect is the report assessing the effects of this liberalisation in 2012 .
This is very important .
We also agree that liberalisation is the right approach , though there is something of a difference between my Group 's position on this and , for example , the statement made by Mr Sterckx .
I would like to make it quite clear that this package forms a whole .
The reports by Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Sterckx and Mr Savary mean that there really will be a new level of quality .
I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to the rapporteurs , Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Savary and Mr Sterckx .
I think that we should also give special recognition to the approach adopted by Commissioner Barrot , the Directorate-General concerned and the German Presidency .
Of course in the next few years we might be able to see a synergy effect on the whole railway transport system in Europe , particularly passenger services .
For this reason I feel very satisfied , even though as a representative of a new Member State I have a few concerns : if there is a free market for train drivers then we could start having a flow of drivers leaving the country , but perhaps it might also act as a stimulant .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have always wholeheartedly backed the EU transport strategy , which is aimed at strengthening rail transport , as regards both passenger transport and freight transport .
The best tools for this are liberalisation and freer competition , which causes train companies to take a greater interest in the wishes of customers .
Increased competition will pave the way for rail transport to become more competitive and financially sustainable , and at the same time we will secure equal competition in relation to other forms of transport .
Road taxes will naturally be looked at with this in mind .
This year the first railway package came into force with the liberalisation of freight transport , and this evening we will consider the compromise concerning the third railway package , which will introduce further liberalisation , albeit far less ambitiously than we in the ALDE Group would have liked .
On the other hand , passengers ' rights have been secured , and an agreement has been reached concerning the common training of train drivers , who are , of course , a very important element in creating more efficient train operations across borders .
As my group 's rapporteur on the Directive on the certification of onboard personnel , I would particularly like to thank rapporteur Mr Savary for the results that we have achieved .
My group has particularly emphasised the fact that a reasonable solution has been found as regards financing .
We are therefore glad that training costs will be refunded if a locomotive driver changes job shortly after completing his training .
This training is expensive , after all , and we must not create a system whereby some rail companies are freewheeling and systematically avoiding paying their fair share of training costs by recruiting newly trained staff from other companies .
With regard to the personnel to be covered , we are satisfied with the fact that train drivers will be covered initially , while the question of including other personnel involved in safety will be assessed again in 30 months ' time .
It has been difficult to reach an agreement on which rail carriers should be covered by the passenger 's rights .
In Parliament we have maintained that national transport - and not just the 5 % of passenger transport that crosses borders - should be covered .
We succeeded in this , and a formula has also been found that ensures that passengers have fundamental rights .
This is important .
However , I have difficulty in understanding why passenger 's rights cannot be extended to cover all rail operations .
The work relating to this legislation and Parliament 's proposals concerning passenger rights has actually inspired the rail companies in my own country , Denmark , to voluntarily implement rules on passenger compensation .
This means that commuters are now also entitled to compensation when they are affected by delays , which does happen on occasion , of course .
Commuters are very important ; we will secure good conditions and ensure that they experience rail transport as a good alternative to other , more energy-intensive forms of transport .
It has been very apparent during the negotiations that the desire to alter the framework conditions for rail companies in the EU brings out strong emotions .
On the one hand , we would all like to have more rail transport .
On the other , there is considerable concern that national companies will be unable to cope with the competition .
In addition , there is not always strong enthusiasm for change amongst either rail companies or trade unions .
However , there are also some rail companies that are taking up the challenge and modernising and creating new organisational forms that secure effective door-to-door transport through the use of several modes of transport .
This is the future too , of course .
As politicians , we will establish frameworks that ensure that those who wish to provide competitive , effective and modern transport services have the opportunity they need to deliver .
I fully understand those who are fighting to retain their old privileges , but this is simply not the agenda that we politicians must pursue .
We will secure attractive , effective and safe rail transport .
I feel that the result that we have achieved is a step forward , and I would like to thank all three rapporteurs for their efforts . I would also like to thank Commissioner Barrot for his fundamental role in achieving a step along the path towards improving the efficiency of rail transport in Europe .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to thank all three of my fellow rapporteurs and also Mr Vidal-Quadras , head of the European Parliament 's delegation during the conciliation procedure .
Certainly , nobody is completely satisfied - not the rapporteurs , businesses , Parliament or the Council - but the best compromises are always those in which none of the parties can consider themselves to be one hundred per cent victorious .
It seems to me that the European Parliament 's most important success is the resolute position on passenger rights , and another gain is the term ' basic passenger 's rights ' - and it is particularly significant that this was achieved in relation to persons with special needs - as well as the achievement concerning the railway companies ' liability for baggage .
Certainly , we can express regret that the increased rights are entering into force in a limited way , and also at that fact that the entire package of additional passenger 's rights in cities and on regional routes will , in the majority of countries , not be guaranteed for 15 years at the earliest .
I am glad that competition is coming to international rail transport from 2010 , according to Mr Jarzembowski 's report , but even though a further step has been taken on internal transport , and there is at least a clear procedure under which the Commission must carry out analysis , this decision was not adopted with any deadline .
Similarly , I regret two aspects : the first is that a few countries that are Member States , including my own country , Latvia , in fact have no international passenger rail connection with EU countries at all .
As a whole , the operation of the entire package in the European Union is , as a result , partially restricted : it does not operate across the whole of the enlarged European Union and some Member States are , overall , little affected .
A second point that I certainly regret is that it was not possible to achieve improvements on the issue of freight with regard to the quality of transport .
I hope that this will happen in the future .
I will end , though , as I began , with a positive thought - we have achieved a result , and particularly with regard to passenger rights it is undoubtedly a positive one . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Barrot , the report now before us is a third-reading compromise and can broadly be described as a victory for the European Parliament over the Council , over the Member States that are often over-protective of their national rail authorities and shield them off .
I must , therefore , compliment the three rapporteurs , Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Savary and Mr Sterckx .

Following negotiations with the Council and the Commission , they managed to incorporate many of Parliament 's demands at first and second reading into the final document .
Passengers on European railways will now gain stronger rights , both domestically and internationally .
As a frequent rail traveller , especially in Italy , that pleases me and I hope Trenitalia also has to introduce European standards .
I would like to give a small example that shows that things are not nearly as customer-friendly on Italian trains as Mr Rack described earlier , saying that much had already improved .
Until about 20 years ago , a station with a catchment area of 20 000 inhabitants and almost twice as many tourists during the high season still had a ticket office that was always open and manned by officials .
Since then , not only has the ticket office closed down but the station is now completely unmanned .
There is a ticket machine in a very dismal area .
Last summer it was out of order for weeks .
A note was stuck on it regretting that it was out of order .
Nonetheless customers were told they needed a valid ticket to board the train .
With that sort of service on stations it is quite incomprehensible why one cannot also buy a ticket on the train , as in other countries .
Since a short while ago , anybody caught without a ticket on an Italian train actually has to pay a EUR 50 fine .
I very much hope that deplorable situations of the kind on the Italian railways will soon become a thing of the past .
I could quote many other examples , particularly of information systems not working .
I very much hope that the Swiss Federal Railways will be taken as a model .
In Switzerland the passenger really is treated like a favoured customer whom the railway administration serves , instead of being regarded as a nuisance and often merely as a disruptive factor for the railway .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the three reports presented again at third reading as the third railway package are concerned with a variety of very different issues .
The most pressing of these issues is the need for train drivers to be able to stay at the controls when crossing national borders rather than having to hand over to their foreign colleagues .
From the point of view of train crews all three versions had room for improvement .
But my Group is happy with the compromises reached by the rapporteur , Mr Savary , and we shall support version three in the vote .
On passengers ' rights in international rail transport , we have let an opportunity slip .
One area in which the European Union can do something useful is offering maximum safeguards for international rail passengers against the negative effects of competition , unnecessary fragmentation amongst rail operators and national short-sightedness .
The European Commission put forward a good proposal to provide a good long-distance service , as before , in respect of ticket sales and information .
Due to competition and cost-cutting that service is increasingly restricted to individual Member States and their immediate environs .
Germany alone has a good system here and all other railway undertakings would do well to emulate its example .
At Mr Sterckx 's instigation a majority of the House has markedly shifted the emphasis elsewhere .
Far more attention is now being paid to compensation for delays in domestic rail services and far less to the steady deterioration in international services .
In reply to passengers who complain that they waste time unnecessarily because they have to buy another ticket once they have crossed the border , the Commission says that it came up with a good proposal but that the European Parliament blocked it .
Because there is no better alternative at the moment , and because we approve other parts of these proposals , we shall vote in favour of this end result .
We shall continue to press for the improvements which formed the nucleus of the original proposal and which , sadly , are missing .
For my Group , the third part remains the most controversial .
Not only now , but also in the two earlier railway packages Mr Jarzembowski has advocated more competition and the operation of market forces .
That starts with international freight transport , but ultimately encompasses all rail traffic including domestic passenger traffic .
This means that the poorer working conditions in freight transport by road and air also become the norm in rail transport .
My Group thinks it should have been the other way round , leading to better safeguards in and regulation of road and air transport .
We do not agree that competition is a better answer than good cooperation between national railway undertakings to the problems in international freight transport or even passenger transport .
And we shall not be voting for these proposals in the third reading .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , harmonisation of railways across 27 states has very little attraction to the UK .
Competition may be good for commerce , but you can leave us out , as we will deal with the economics of running our own service .
If the standardisation process necessarily involves change of track widths , widths of platforms or changes of voltage on electrified lines , as it will in some parts of the EU , then good luck to you all , but leave us out .
Such is the magnitude of legislation from this place on railways that we will be surprised if a private operator can be found who can jump through all the hoops at anything like economic cost .
We have only one rail link with the continent and this passes through a very useful tunnel .
Bearing in mind that we are all being railroaded by these directives due to one single tunnel , it may lead some to say that the Channel Tunnel should be concreted up in the middle and the British and the French could then use their respective halves for the safe storage of nuclear waste .
This would eradicate the expensive need to harmonise a rail link to the UK , as no rail link would exist .
Please try to control the endless stream of directives from this place .
Or , to put it another way , railways run on sleepers ; what a pity this place does not run on similar lines .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is well known that rail transport has always been the poor relation compared with road transport .
Indeed , with regard to goods traffic , rail has been losing the battle in every country in Europe .
I am pleased to say that the situation today looks set to improve , particularly since the Commission 's decision - as part of the first Railway Package - that at least 40 % of spending on transport should go to the railways .
Infrastructure , in particular , needs to benefit from this spending because all the closures of non-profitable railway lines have resulted in road transport taking over a significant proportion of both freight and passenger traffic .
Of my colleague Dirck Sterckx 's report concerning rail passengers ' rights and obligations I would say that it is essentially sound , focusing as it does on the protection of passengers , with measures including compensation when trains are late , a right to transport for people with reduced mobility , and carrier liability for passengers and their baggage .
However , one point of major importance to all families appears to have been completely lost in this report . I am talking about the right to reduced ticket prices for large families .
Certain Member States of the Union already have this system whereby a card entitles large families to reductions of between 50 % and 75 % depending on the number of children - France is one example - yet curiously there are no proposals or even plans for such an arrangement in the draft regulation .
However , if we want to step up the development of passenger traffic on the railways , this measure , which is attractive not only financially but also in terms of savings on travel time in comparison with road transport , would undoubtedly give us a strong card in the rail-versus-road battle .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I do not know if the same sayings are used in other countries , but in Poland people say that the railways are a state within a state , or that no one has yet won a battle with the railways .
It is therefore even more welcome that , after a great deal of work , the third Railway Package is coming into force and that the ordinary citizen will be able to win a battle with the railways , if , of course , they are in the right .
All of this is thanks to the fact that we are approving something that could be called a charter of fundamental rights for the railway passenger , i.e. basic passenger rights .
These include the right to obtain information about one 's rights , which is very important , the right to insurance and compensation and even the right to free movement for the disabled .
This is an issue that requires particular attention and should be carefully monitored . It should apply equally to small railway stations and to regional ones .
There are of course those among us who would like these rights to be more extensive and less restricted .
We are introducing certain limitations .
I would not , however , like to hide my satisfaction at what we have achieved .
I am certain that , knowing the determination of the European Parliament , we shall not stop at this point and we shall gradually act to extend these rights .
I would like , therefore , to congratulate all the rapporteurs , the members of the Conciliation Committee , the Council and the Commission .
I would like to congratulate them because I believe we have taken a great step forward .
It is an important step , because it is a step forward for the people .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to start by thanking the rapporteurs and everyone in the Council and Commission who helped to secure this outcome .
We have reached the end of a very lengthy process and the result , naturally , is a compromise which does not make anyone a hundred percent happy but does not make anyone a hundred percent unhappy either .
We all want the future for rail transport to be rosy , but we disagree rather on how this is to be achieved .
I would repeat what I have said on this before , namely that I do not see liberalisation alone , always , in all circumstances , as a miracle solution .
On the contrary , in many cases it will bring additional problems , certainly if it interferes with the public service obligation at local or regional level .
What does work - as the railway undertakings in a number of Member States show - is additional investment in comfort , punctuality and attractive pricing , and that of course requires political commitment .
Speaking personally , I am especially glad that we have successfully approved an equally important proposal on the liberalisation of rail passenger transport .
We want to open up the market in international passenger transport and make it more attractive , but without fully liberalising domestic passenger transport .
Opening up the market also means cabotage , but it can be restricted slightly if this cabotage right jeopardises the economic balance of public service contracts .
I know that a majority of my colleagues , admittedly not a qualified majority , were in favour of liberalising national passenger transport but , whilst that might perhaps be problem-free in some countries , I am convinced that in some other situations it most certainly would create problems , not least due to the big differences in the density and structure of rail networks ; so an approach tailored individually to each Member State has to be adopted .
This Directive , in conjunction with the Regulation on public service obligations , will provide a sound legal framework for this kind of customised approach .
On the matter of passengers ' rights it is clear that Parliament was keen , across party lines , to be a little more ambitious and to secure a higher level of rights for all rail passengers Europe-wide .
The fact that this remains de facto impossible for urban and regional transport is regrettable .
It is also unfortunate that long-distance domestic transport can enjoy exemption from this Regulation for up to 15 years , but it is certain that within two years all passengers on international trains will have a number of basic rights and that some Member States will emerge as trendsetters by making good use of the lengthy transitional period .
And we must give every encouragement here : Europe 's mills grind slowly , but they grind .
Little by little we shall improve passengers ' rights .
Bearing in mind what a regulation on passenger rights in air travel has achieved , I urge the Commission to carry out the necessary assessments without undue delay and take any initiatives needed to close any back doors , so that this Regulation does not fail to deliver on its promises .
Lastly , Commissioner , please publicise the content of the regulation promptly and on a wide scale so that all rail passengers are properly informed of the rights they have now acquired .
( PL ) Mr President , Europe is supposed to be for the people , the citizens , and not for the political classes , for the elites , or the chattering classes .
Recently the European Parliament forced through a reduction in the prices of international telephone calls from mobile telephones .
This was a concrete achievement .
Today we have a similar opportunity to take direct action on behalf of Europeans from the 27 Member States , on behalf of European railway passengers , who , from 2010 or 2012 will be able to travel more easily in their own countries and throughout the European Union .
This is another concrete step forward .
It is similar to the change concerning passengers ' rights to financial compensation for delayed trains .
Today the situation in the European Union from this point of view is certainly better than in India and Russia ( I have personal experience of these ) , but the European taxpayer is still unable , in practice , to demand compensation if the railway works badly .
I would like to remind you that last year Parliament , acting with the Commission and the Council , fought to have similar compensation for airline passengers .
This was another concrete achievement by the European Parliament .
For railway passengers we are talking about 25 % of the ticket price for a delay of less than two hours and 50 % of the ticket price for delays of over two hours .
These proposals are far more significant for Member States than sterile political disputes , even on the subject of the constitution .

( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , regarding the controversial proposal by Mr Georg Jarzembowski , in the approved text we have succeeded in allowing passengers to be picked up or set down from trains at any station on an international route , including stations located in the same Member State .
I trust that it will by extension be possible to apply this provision to international bus services .
This issue was actually the subject of several international disputes recently .
Regarding the report by Mr Savary , I am pleased that it includes the rights of the social partners and specifications for interoperability .
However , problems concerning the financing of training , the choice of examiners and examinations for train drivers still exist .
As far as language skills are concerned , it is essential to insist on certain minimum requirements in order to ensure transport safety .
Regarding the report by Mr Sterckx , I appreciate the request for the introduction of non-discriminatory access rules for persons with reduced mobility and cyclists .
Although the text also lays down a range of clearly defined technical requirements , I am not pleased that unlike the Swiss railways we talk about penalising rather than efforts to satisfy the demand for a transport service .
All of the above measures should be reassessed within two years of their introduction ; this is crucial in my opinion .
We will vote against the first report and in favour of the other two .
( NL ) Mr President , in my earlier contribution to the debate on this third Railway Package I intimated that not every outcome from this dossier would delight me .
Several months down the road my conclusion is that the agreement reached with the Council represents a constructive step towards further completion of the European rail transport market , in several important respects .
Realisation of the single rail market regularly encounters practical difficulties , and with this package we have eliminated some of them .
For a long time it was uncertain whether Parliament was not going too fast in seeking an agreement between Council and Parliament , whether it was not addressing problems which did not actually exist or which , if addressed , would throw up fresh problems .
I am thinking above all of liberalisation of the domestic passenger transport market and the achievement of rules on train crew certification .
The end-agreement between Council and Parliament reflects a good balance between efforts to resolve existing problems and a realistic scenario for the future as regards expanding the scope of the present agreements .
On the whole issue of market access the most important thing is that account should be taken of existing contracts .
That will enable otherwise inevitable breaches of contract and related claims to be avoided .
The idea of the levy to finance public service obligations is acceptable under current conditions .
Compared with the agreements on market access and certification the scope of these agreements on passengers ' rights is as broad in principle as it can be .
In view of the reciprocal agreements in the sector I think that is a good thing .
The agreements reached are largely a reflection of voluntary agreements in the sector and that is something I warmly welcome .
As a keen cyclist I am especially pleased by the provisions for carrying bicycles on the train .
These will hopefully make a real contribution towards easing congestion problems .
It is a fine example of co-modality in passenger transport .
In conclusion I must thank the rapporteurs for their hard work and congratulate them on the outcome .
Thanks to their efforts we are a little closer to a common European rail market .
My thanks too , of course , to the German Presidency and to Commissioner Barrot .
( PT ) Despite the fact that trains continue to offer a safe , environmentally-friendly means of transport , capable of carrying large volumes of goods and passengers comfortably and speedily , with a high quality of service , the truth of the matter is that an open , competitive railway system in the Community area is still a long way off .
Liberalisation is the only way to achieve the right financial and technological conditions for attracting investment and to provide the necessary impetus in order to make the railways more attractive and efficient and to achieve greater interoperability .
The negotiation of the Third Railway Package is another step in this direction and we hope that the combined will of the Council , the Commission and the Parliament reflected in that package will send out a strong and coherent political message , a message which is capable of mobilising the long-term investment which this sector needs .


I would like to congratulate our fellow Members , Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Savary and Mr Stercks , for their excellent work which has enabled us to discuss principles and guidelines today in relation to various matters .
For example , the matter of access to the market for international passenger services by rail from 2010 and the question of agreement in the sensitive area of the charges to be applied to international passenger transport services , where it is necessary to safeguard both the financing of the relevant public service and the economic viability of transporters .
It should be noted that this process will now be followed up because the opening up of the railways market is to be the subject of a new Commission communication , scheduled for 2012 .
Likewise , in the field of certification of train drivers , notable progress has been made over certificates and licences which in future , thanks to the Parliament , will certainly cover all train crew dealing with safety and , finally , there has been significant progress in the complex area of passenger rights and obligations with regard to compensation for delays and guaranteed mobility , for example , with a view to improving the efficiency and attractiveness of international passenger transport by rail .
Mr President , we all know that there is a very long road between the drafting of legislation and its full implementation and it is that road which we must travel if we are to achieve dynamic and coherent development of this mode of transport .
( ES ) This evening marks a new stage in the modernisation , indeed Europeanisation , of rail transport , with the establishment of common ground rules .
Mr Jarzembowski 's report , which carries out Parliament 's mandate to the full , shows that an agreement has been reached that is satisfactory for all parties , despite the present imbalance between countries that have open networks , those that have put time and effort into modernising their infrastructure - in Spain , for example , with regard to the track gauge problem - and those who need more time to achieve the minimum level required in order to compete on equal terms .
All in all , it is extremely important that the final agreement reflected in the Jarzembowski report preserves the Commission 's right to decide what proposal it will submit for the final stage .
In this sector , secure and sustainable as we know it and want it to be , it is essential that we proceed in a secure and sustainable manner .
We believed the most difficult part would be the opening-up of the rail networks ; in the end the human aspect proved the most complex .
What is important is not simply the agreement on train drivers as such , but the fact that Mr Savary succeeded in establishing quickly and firmly the conditions for trains to be driven by drivers who have their training and certification in common .
And we also have a promise that other crew members will be able to operate under the same or similar conditions in the not too distant future .
As I was saying , what proved most difficult in the end were the rights and obligations of rail passengers .
To have reached agreement that these will apply to national as well as international rail travel is a fundamental achievement .
Our citizens would not have understood that something should be agreed at international level when they have to put up with these conditions daily at national level .
While not as comprehensive as we would have wished , a secure basis has been established for the rights of all passengers to prompt and efficient information and assistance .
We know this is not enough .
We want to go further , and campaigning organisations - particularly , in my country , the National Organisation for the Blind - have asked for more . We must continue , but we believe that this evening with the Sterckx report we have opened up a promising avenue for progress .
As we conclude this stage , an equally promising stage is beginning that requires our full commitment .
We still have to deal with interoperability , all the safety aspects that need to be strengthened and Europeanised , and the task of putting flesh on the bones of the Agency .

Finally , there remains the great challenge of a European rail network for goods transport - the Commission 's forthcoming proposals for a dedicated goods transport network - and all the logistical support required in order to make the European nodes that are being established today into a real transport network for the future .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Jarzembowski for his work in preparing a text for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Directive on the development of the Community 's railways and on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges .
The text of the directive was agreed through the conciliation procedure .
This directive will be important for the continuing development of the Community 's railways , for passengers and for freight traffic .
The railways , which are already two centuries old , are becoming more important in today 's world because of environmental protection as well as congestion on the roads .
The problems as regards developing rail transport will be funds for modernisation and for constructing and equipping new networks .
In order to achieve harmonious growth , poor countries will need considerable financial support .
The text that has been agreed for the new directive will have a positive impact on further growth in the railways .
Mr Savary 's report on the rights of train drivers and Mr Sterckx 's report on rights and obligations cover further issues relating to railway transport .
I would like to congratulate them on their work .
( EL ) Mr President , the third rail package agreement is another step towards selling off the people 's wealth .
Public property is being sold to capital in order to multiply profits at the expense of the working classes and to increase their exploitation .
The regulation of rights and obligations contained in the package is no more than sugaring the pill of passenger transport deregulation .
Railway workers have expressed their vehement opposition to the deregulation of rail transport both in the two previous packages and in the present one .
We , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , are opposed to the selling off of the railways , especially in Greece , where rail transport is far removed from the people 's needs and in many cases continues to operate with obsolete infrastructure and equipment .
We side with the workers who are fighting for the development of public transport . We need a public rail service guaranteeing safe , high-quality transport , which will both meet the current needs of workers and be environmentally-friendly .
We will therefore vote against the agreement between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission . We point to the responsibility of the EU and the governments of the Member States in this anti-popular policy and in the plundering of the people 's wealth by capital .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as one of those who started the collection of signatures entitled ' One Million for Disability ' I encouraged men and women throughout Europe to actively support people with disabilities .
In early October the signatures will be handed over to the Presidents of the European Commission and the European Parliament to urge them also to do more to support a social Europe .
Today , almost on the eve of that occasion , we are debating the third rail package , which is also and from my point of view very specifically concerned with the rights and obligations of rail passengers .
A substantial part of the regulation focuses on the rights and obligations of persons with reduced mobility , whether as a result of age , disability or any other factor , and - particularly noteworthy - of any accompanying persons .
They have the same right to freedom of movement , freedom of choice and non-discrimination as all other citizens .
It has been a great victory on the part of the European Parliament that this part of the rail package will apply not only to international but also to domestic services .
That expands all rail passengers ' user rights and improves the quality and effectiveness of rail passenger services .
It means all travellers have a right to information about rail services both before and during the journey .
Gradually all buildings and vehicles will also be made accessible to persons with reduced mobility .
Passengers will have more rights to compensation and assistance in the event of delays , missed connections or cancelled trains , and the complaints procedure that was lacking in the past will create trust between passengers and service providers .
All those factors will make using the train more attractive .
Unfortunately , Member States can still apply temporary exemptions , yet this result does mean we are safely on the right road .
Now the Member States can prove how serious they were in March this year when they signed the UN Charter on persons with disabilities .
I expect my country , Germany , to set a good example in transposing the rights of persons with disabilities .
I thank the rapporteurs and all those who conducted the negotiations during the conciliation procedure and recommend endorsing this package .

( PT ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , the certification of train drivers is an important step forward Community transport legislation , one which is capable of kick-starting the revitalisation of the Community rail network , and Gilles Savary has played a vital role in this process .
It is also possible to promote use of the railways by creating incentives for improving the quality of service and by reinforcing the rights of drivers and passengers , thereby favouring modal equality .
The revitalisation of rail transport in the European Union makes an important contribution towards a sustainable transport system and towards the creation of the single European market .
This legislation will therefore strengthen the railways component of the single market , especially as regards international passenger transport , an area which is covered by the proposal for a directive to open up the market for international passenger services by rail .
Procedures have also been laid down for certifying train drivers in the European Union and the legal provisions which we have been debating also strengthen the rights of rail passengers , hence the importance of discussing these three reports and three directives .
The report on a joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the rail network in the Community therefore establishes specific legal provisions recognising professional attainment with a view to ensuring the mobility of train drivers throughout Europe and at the same time improving the mobility of international rail travel in the European Union .
These are positive steps which are to be welcomed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the measures needed to achieve interoperability have been thoroughly examined by harmonising the legislation concerning the training of train drivers and their certification , which is also a very positive step .
Significant progress has therefore been made towards achieving the railways component of the internal market by providing a clear guarantee of the rights of workers , undertakings and passengers , who are after all the European citizens who elected us .
Finally I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs Dirk Stercks and Georg Jarzembowski and , last but not least , Gilles Savary , for all their hard work . Thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
( NL ) Mr President , sincere thanks to the rapporteurs and to Vice-President Vidal-Quadras Roca for their hard work in securing a successful outcome on this complicated third Railway Package .
Some of the rapporteurs , Mr President , may feel they have to make the best of a bad job , having hoped to achieve far more , but I think the result we have is commendable in all respects .
It is a positive development that all rail passengers in Europe now have a number of basic rights .
The ability and the right of people with reduced mobility to travel are now much better regulated .
It is also good that additional rules on long-distance travel have been made compulsory , but those rules are not appropriate for urban and regional transport , so it is good that these have been exempted and will come under a different set of rules .
Mr President , we have had a substantial debate on the liberalisation of rail transport .
Not only with the Council , but here in Parliament too .
I am happy with the outcome .
Liberalisation was the right way to go on international rail transport , but not on national rail transport .
Mr President , the differences between Member States are too great to impose the national liberalisation of domestic rail links in a ' top-down ' manner from Europe , because busy regional networks are fragile and there has to be scope for putting put these out to private tender .
That too is a form of competition .
I am happy with that outcome .
It is cautious competition , but appropriate to these complex networks , I think .
Mr Barrot says the Commission will be analysing prospects for the further liberalisation of domestic passenger transport ; I expressly urge him to include in that analysis the question of putting networks out to private tender and how far that may benefit the operation of the market .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to welcome the fact that the inter-institutional Conciliation Committee has managed to reach agreement , and that the market in international rail passenger transport services within the European Union will therefore be opened up in 2010 .
Liberalisation is a good move ... ( the President interrupted the speaker ) ; open competition is a necessity in the passenger transport services market .
It will not only contribute to implementing rail transport reform , but at the same time will create the kind of competitive situation in which the main winners will be the consumers themselves .
However , we cannot just go straight ahead and force national rail companies into free market competition , since several Member States ' rail companies are facing financial difficulties .
In addition , their infrastructure is often exceptionally underdeveloped .
We therefore need to support their development efforts and we must allow them time to become competitive so that they are able to hold their own in the battle to win passengers .
Alongside liberalisation , it is at least as important to enhance passenger confidence in rail services by improving , extending and internationalising passenger rights .
The new legislation means that rail service providers will have to assume greater responsibility .
Harmonisation of EU legislation on the rights and obligations of passengers , information , assumption of liability for passengers and their luggage , the issue of compensation , handling of delays and provision for passengers with reduced mobility are all things that increase safety and at the same time enhance the reputation of rail service providers .
It is an ambitious goal , but absolutely essential for facilitating development of the European high-speed rail network and cross-border operating arrangements relating to it .
At the same time , it also increases confidence with regard to domestic rail passenger transport .
Increasing efficiency and improving rail network and service quality are truly fundamental not only in terms of developing a sustainable transport sector but also in terms of overcrowding and air pollution .
Of course , alongside the new legislative package , in the interests of improving quality we must also ensure that the directive is appropriately transposed into national law .
In view of these issues , the implementation report due in 2012 will be especially important , as will the companies ' annual reports .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work and all those who contributed to the success of the negotiations ; thanks to you we will at last be able to vote on this issue tomorrow .
Thank you very much for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President , I too would first like to thank the rapporteurs for their work - it was no easy job .
After all , the third rail package is the continuation of a long process of opening up the European rail sector to competition and harmonising standards in Europe .
Like many earlier speakers , I particularly welcome the proposed regulation on the rights and obligations of passengers .
Here , for the first time , uniform rules are being introduced throughout Europe to strengthen passengers ' rights .
As Mr Koch very clearly explained , among other things the regulation covers the provision of suitable access to trains , stations and platforms for persons with reduced mobility .
It covers liability in the event of injury or death . It covers the creation of a system of compensation for train delays and cancellations .
It is high time that not just air passengers but rail passengers also acquire minimum rights .
It is only at first sight that this regulation appears to place a burden on railway undertakings .
In the end , granting passengers minimum rights makes the railways more attractive .
Strengthening passengers ' rights makes a considerable contribution to promoting rail travel , which will result in an increase in the overall share of this mode of transport .
Travel by rail is finally to become a real alternative to flying within Europe .
That is important in terms of the climate issue .
The Commission proposal provided for the introduction of passengers ' rights only for international rail travel .
I am glad that we managed to ensure that its scope is now extended to all rail passengers , especially of course to domestic railways and not just to passengers in international rail services .
It is after all incomprehensible for a passenger on a train from Cologne to Brussels to enjoy passengers ' rights while someone taking a train from Frankfurt to Cologne is not entitled to the same rights .
It is a pity , though , that we have to be satisfied with the compromise of possibly having long transitional periods before these rights are implemented .
The consumer will not understand that .
( RO ) Mr. President , this legislative package has a truly European connotation , both in principle , and in essence , although it still keeps the designation " international ” , while militating for the internal market development .
For this stage , a distinction is still necessary and is an important step in creating an integrated railway network in the European Union .
Member States have the possibility to more efficiently amortize their long term investments , which are absolutely necessary for special infrastructure .
The services maintenance and quality costs may decrease to the benefit of passengers who , in their turn , will have the freedom to choose between commercial services and public services , at the same time having their rights guaranteed .
Moreover , by cabotage , all passengers can have access to competitive services .
Nevertheless , we have to admit that , in the new Member States , such as Romania , operations still go ahead under disadvantageous conditions .
For this reason , liberalization must be analyzed and approached differently from case to case , focusing on improving interoperability and cooperation in transborder sectors , as well as by reexamining priorities within the instruments of financing investments in special infrastructures .
Moreover , the Union has to prepare for the true challenge : to create a functional integrated network with the railway systems of neighbouring countries , by Trans-European Transport Networks and by Pan-European corridors , observing the expansion and facilitation of access to Central and Eastern Asia .
I specify that there is a risk of the appearance of false jobs , generated by the relocation of the workers of a neighbour operator to a new operator .
Therefore , a balance must be found between competitive economic policies and social policies .
It is also necessary to discourage any distortion of competition .
First of all , this can be done by transparency , as well as by preventing the creation of a monopolist alliance at the level of big railway operators that could block the access of new operators to the market because , in the end , the passengers are the ones who suffer .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to thank all the speakers , whose contributions illustrate the extent of this shared desire to develop the use of our railways significantly .
For the benefit of Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Savary , I would add that the Commission has undertaken to present a report 30 months after the directive has been adopted , with , if necessary , legislative proposals based on the European Railway Agency 's recommendations .
With regard to the certification of train drivers , our aim is to create a Europe-wide rail area and so , of course , we want to promote mobility for railway personnel .
Obviously , ladies and gentlemen , all this will work only if the Member States supply the necessary investment because we cannot have a successful railway policy until we make the trans-European networks a reality , and guarantee interoperability on all the major lines , notably through the ERTMS .
Clearly the duty to invest is crucial .
Investment is the price to be paid for giving full effect to the texts that you are about to adopt .
In relation to freight traffic by rail , there was , indeed , an initial proposal for a regulation on compensation for failure to meet commitments on service quality in this sector .
Subsequently , while recognising that the aims were sound , Parliament and the Council decided that the measure proposed was inappropriate .
Nonetheless , I have to say that I will continue to pay close attention to the development of freight traffic on the railways .
I am still concerned about problems of punctuality and the reliability of goods transport services by rail .
So I will submit a report towards the end of 2007 on the development of service quality and on suitable measures to tackle the problems .
This will obviously lead the Commission to propose a European railway network with a focus on freight .
I hope to present the report in October .
As many of you have said , any compromise is clearly just a step and may be seen to be limited , but a step can also be seen as a measure of progress .
For my own part , I am convinced that by adopting this third Railway Package , Parliament will send out a powerful signal to the people of Europe , who can make much greater use of rail as a means of travel .
I would add that we are in the process of establishing passengers ' rights , based on the notion of European citizenship .
With regard to aircraft passengers , much remains to be done in order to give effect to the law . In the case of rail passengers , they obviously need to be supplied with clear , straightforward information enabling them to understand what they are entitled to expect .
I believe , however , that we are effectively sending out a strong signal by demonstrating that we are determined to press ahead with development of a proper passengers ' charter to give everyone - including the least advantaged - greater access to mobility .
Such is my conviction and I would conclude , Mr President , by thanking once again all the Members of the House , whose observations will assist us in the process of closely monitoring how these texts are applied .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 25 September 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) I am very pleased that Parliament and the Council have managed to reach agreement on the third Railway Package .
With regard to my colleague Dirk Sterckx 's report , it is a particular source of satisfaction that we got the Council to accept that passengers ' rights and obligations should apply to everyone travelling by train in the European Union , and not just to international passengers .
All rail passengers are now to have significant rights , concerning , for example , compensation in the event of delays or cancellations , the information that is supplied to them , and access for people with reduced mobility .
With regard to Georg Jarzembowski 's report , opening the international rail passenger market to competition from 1 January 2010 ought to make rail a more efficient means of transport and to have a positive impact for passengers , in terms of prices and choice of train operators .
In addition , it will be possible to finance loss-making railway lines if they have a public-service remit .
This measure is important for guaranteeing universal access to rail transport .
The provisions introduced in this third Railway Package represent genuine progress for ordinary people , and I welcome them .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am very pleased that the approach I had advocated has been taken , namely opening passenger services to competition , but without rushing .
The third Railway Package provides for liberalisation of international passenger services from 2010 onwards , with a viable mechanism for financing infrastructure .
After the Commission delivers its findings on the economic , social and safety-related aspects in 2012 , we can consider calmly whether it is appropriate to extend the existing arrangements to include national passenger services .
We were keen that these measures to modernise the management of rail services should be balanced by significant steps to ensure safety .
Train staff will now have to meet common standards of qualification and training , leading to the award of a ' train driver 's licence ' .
Parliament has also secured a significant improvement in passengers ' basic rights on both international and national lines : there are provisions for liability in the event of accidents , and rights for people with disabilities or reduced mobility .
I am sorry to see , however , that intractability in the Council has resulted in derogations being permitted for up to 15 years with regard to implementation of the right to information , compensation in the event of delays or accidents and , indeed , provision for carrying bicycles on trains .
in writing . - ( HU ) One hundred and sixty years ago , in 1846 , the first Hungarian railway line was opened between the old city of Pest and the town of Vác .
Hungary 's first railway line preceded the French bourgeois revolution of 1848 by two years , and more or less the same people were behind both events .
This was hardly coincidental .
The railway fostered the rise of the middle classes , economic development , disintegration of feudal restrictions and the birth of unified nations .
In the second half of the twentieth century , motorisation eclipsed the development of the railways in Hungary too .
Fortunately , however , this was only a temporary decline .
The Hungarian railway is in rather a bad state at present , and this is one reason why it is important to apply for Community funds to develop it .
Development of international transit rail networks is understandably a priority .
Similarly , the importance of suburban railways has increased .
At least half a million people commute to Budapest daily for work or study .
The only solution to the chronic traffic jams is to introduce congestion charges and focus resources on developing the suburban railway .
Liberalisation is to be welcomed as long as it does not threaten railway employees ' jobs or the safety of railway operations .
It is likewise important to ensure that passengers ' rights are protected by sound guarantees .
I hope that , under the new system , with the help of government and EU funds and private capital , the Hungarian railway will once again become as modern as it was in the early days , in the era of great reforms .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 9.40 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
Proposal for a Council Regulation derogating from Regulation ( EC ) No 1782 / 2003 establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers , as regards set aside for year 2008 - C6-0302 / 2007 -
Mr President , yesterday my committee had an extraordinary meeting in order to examine the Commission proposal and the request to treat this proposal as urgent .
My committee agreed that the request for urgent procedure should be approved .
It was approved unanimously .
The Commission is proposing to set a 0 % rate of compulsory set-aside for 2008 .
This proposal must be adopted as soon as possible - that is , before the end of this month - in order to allow farmers to take their decisions for growing crops on set-aside land in 2008 .
The land concerned must be brought back to production because a poor 2008 harvest combined with 10 % set-aside will expose the internal market to potential serious risks .
The cereal market at the beginning of the marketing year 2007 / 08 is characterised by historically high prices both at Community and world level .
The 2007 harvest will probably remain close to last year 's level and will lead to further reductions in the EU of private cereal stocks by the end of the 2007 / 08 marketing year .
At global level , closing stocks in 2007 / 08 are expected to fall to an historically low level , especially in major exporting countries .
In this context , a normal 2008 harvest will trend yields , and the proposed derogation for set-aside in 2008 in the European Union would allow for a partial rebuilding of the private stocks , so I ask for urgency .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
( DE ) Mr President , I refer to yesterday 's plenary session and the one-minute speeches that took place at the start of the plenary session .
During those one-minute speeches there was an incident .
A Polish Member ( I do not know which Group he belongs to ) criticised our President in an improper manner in this House .
I defended the President of our House , as I thought was necessary .
I had the impression that many colleagues in this House saw things the way I did .
As a result my fellow Member , Markus Ferber , later threw a comment in my direction , the gist of which meant that I assume the right in this House to make comments on everything , which is definitely not the case .
I regret that I do not have the right to do this , but I do not comment on everything .
As a result I insulted Mr Ferber in the generally fevered situation with two German expressions , which I would not like to repeat here and which are not true either .
I therefore take it back , expressing my regret and would be grateful if you would convey to my fellow Member , Mr Ferber , that he should accept my apology and that I otherwise regard him as a very amusing fellow Member .
( Applause )
Mr Schulz , we shall include your comments in the record of proceedings and take note of them .
Restructuring of the sugar industry - Common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Katerina Batzeli , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the restructuring of the sugar industry - C6-0176 / 2007 - , and
the report by Katerina Batzeli , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector - C6-0177 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by thanking Ms Batzeli and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for all the work they have carried out on this proposal .
I will now start to place the proposal into its context .
As you know , the restructuring fund did not fulfil our expectations during the second year of the restructuring period , after actually quite a promising first year .
As you might remember , we were expecting about 1.5 million tonnes of quota to be renounced in the first year and more than 3 million tonnes in the second year .
In reality , the total renunciation in the first two years amounted to only 2.2 million tonnes against an expected 4.5 million tonnes .
I am still convinced that the restructuring fund is a good instrument as such , which should be strengthened and improved , taking into account the experiences that we have had up to now .
Concerning the proposal we are to discuss today , let me make it clear that we are not in a process of renegotiating the sugar reform from 2005 .
In light of the insufficient take-up under the restructuring fund over the first two years of its operation , the objective is to make a success out of it for the last two years .
Otherwise the final uncompensated cut of the quotas will kick in in 2010 .
This proposal aims to make a very attractive offer to those undertakings and to those growers that want to give up quota production in the marketing year 2008 / 09 , while in principle keeping unchanged the conditions for the last year of the restructuring period .
For the first time , growers will be able to trigger the restructuring process , but only up to a limit of 10 % of the quota belonging to an undertaking .
The percentage of the restructuring aid reserved for growers will be fixed at 10 % and this payment will be then supplemented by a top-up of EUR 237.5 per tonne of sugar quota and this sums up altogether to EUR 300 per tonne .
I think this is a very interesting offer for the growers and I do not see any need to go further .
That is why I will not be in a position to support the amendments in the report on the restructuring fund that asks for changes in the amounts paid , for example 6 , 7 and 12 , or in the percentage that goes to the farmers : namely , amendment 8 .
An element of retroactivity will ensure that those undertakings and those sugar beet producers who have already taken part in the restructuring scheme up till now have not been or will not be disadvantaged by having done so .
As requested in amendment 9 , the eligibility of inulin syrup producers and chicory growers for retroactive payments will be explicitly mentioned in the final text .
Moreover , undertakings that will be restructured in the marketing or growing year 2008 / 09 could be exempted from the restructuring levy applied to the quantity subject to the 2007 / 08 preventive withdrawal , provided that they renounce their quota accordingly .
And , last but not least , as an additional incentive for undertakings , their individual restructuring effort will be taken into account in case of an obligatory final quota cut .
In order to make it easier to reach a market balance during the restructuring period , it is proposed to make the preventive withdrawal a permanent tool , not only during the restructuring period , exactly as is proposed by Ms Batzeli in her report .
The proposed draft regulations aim to create a secure environment and to remove existing blockages from the system .
All these improvements should make the fund a success in the third year , without changing the common market organisation for sugar on the basis of the reform that we agreed in 2005 .
The measures proposed are balanced to create strong incentives for all parties that are involved in the restructuring process .
I want to thank you for your good cooperation , which makes it possible for us to adhere to the tight schedule that we have to work under and to have this much more efficient system in place for the marketing year 2008 / 09 .
I am aware that the fund must be improved to achieve its aim and , if this is not possible , I am quite sure that there will be no winners .
There will only be losers and , therefore , I have been very grateful for the support that I have met from the Agriculture Committee and the Members .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , allow me first of all to remind you that in its original opinion on the Common Market Organisation ( CMO ) in sugar the European Parliament pointed out that the Commission 's proposals ought to contribute to the essential viability of the new system and to the safeguarding of the sugar beet growers , the workers in sugar mills and areas of production , all of which will be affected by the elimination of quotas .
This was our political commitment and agreement , based on which we gave our consent to the Commission .
However , the final decisions by the Council in 2005 on the review of the sugar sector could not meet these high expectations .
The sector is particularly important for the equalisation of the arable crops market , the supply of European sugar and bio-ethanol factories , as well as the advancement of a new framework of policies for the modification of other CMOs under review within the context of the new CAP .
The Council 's decisions have seemed doomed from the outset to a short life and marginalisation because they were no more than a patchwork of national demands and complex mechanisms .
This decision and the way it is implemented at national level mean that the reduction in production to date has been no more than 2.2 million tonnes , whereas the target is approximately 6 million tonnes by 2010 .
I should like remind you that for any kind of reduced production after 2010 the producing regions , workers and producers will not receive any compensation from the Restructuring Fund , which is totally self-funded .
Such , then , were the important political issues occupying us in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development when we had to decide on the report with which you are acquainted .

Commissioner , in the Agriculture Committee we made significant improvements for the unimpeded implementation at national level of Community decisions . We did not seek radically to review the sugar CMO , and , in any case , you indicate this in your text .
We did not seek to propose a multi-speed review since in many regions such as Ireland sugar production has already been reduced in part or totally abandoned .
In addition , we have considered the existing budgetary savings amounting to approximately EUR 3 million .
If this money is not used , it will not be ploughed back into the sector but will fund other projects or will be paid back .
Finally , in light of the principle of proportionality and equality with regard to sugar beet growers , we must all agree with the principle of the retroactivity of the measures proposed in order not to create a climate of injustice for producers , mills and regions that have already joined the new system .
I should also like to point out that the ineffectiveness of the large degree of the Member States ' flexibility and subsidiarity worries us .
This flexibility has become an unofficial nationalisation of the measures : the Member States have been free to implement the new CMO as they please , bending to the pressures exerted on them by collective bodies and regional authorities .
The way the Member States treat the concept and policy of flexibility ought to be a matter of concern for us in future reviews , as should the issue of how this policy is to be used within the framework of health check decisions .
Commissioner , we must now move from political questions to technical issues , which will also decide the course of the CMO review .
With regard to the amendment of Regulation No 318 / 2006 , we consider that what is required is a fairer application of the final linear quota reductions by 2010 .
If a straight reduction in quotas is considered necessary in 2010 , our committee believes that this reduction should be conducted in two stages .
During the first stage there should be a linear cut of 13.5 % . During the second stage the Commission 's proposal should be implemented ; accordingly , the Member States and those undertakings which have renounced quotas during the restructuring regime would be exempted .
The exemption will be in line with the efforts made at national level .
However , I should like to point out to the Commission and the Council , not attending the debate here today , that we must bear in mind the reduced contribution of undertakings , which have either voluntarily reduced their quotas by participating in the restructuring regime or participated in the preventative withdrawal mechanism .
We propose a broader and more long-term use of preventative withdrawal , thus assisting smoother adaptation of the sector to future challenges .
Since the subject of preventative withdrawal has hitherto not been found in the compromise at Council level , I should like to include it , Commissioner , if you agree .
As for the amendment of Regulation No 320 / 2006 on the restructuring regime , which is in any case the central aspect of the reform , my report proposes :
firstly , to increase to EUR 260 per tonne the lump sum of EUR 237 per tonne which the producers will receive .
We insist on this , despite your disagreement , Commissioner , because we believe that it is a significant incentive for producers to move to the concept of a 10 % voluntary renunciation ;
secondly , to increase to 50 % the single compensation amount for producers from restructuring aid , which is currently fixed at 10 % .
This increase is a political commitment by the European Parliament ; it shows that the subsidies ought to go mainly to the producers .
The message more political than financial ;
thirdly , the compensation paid to undertakings for the production of bio-ethanol should be raised from 35 % to 100 % , since , in our view , a significant incentive should be given to contribute to the renewable energy sources sector ;
fourthly , and of particular importance for the regions , is the maintenance of aid for diversification in the regions where mills have closed : it should remain at EUR 109.5 per tonne of reduced sugar production until the 2009-2010 period .
Commissioner , we seek partly to improve funding in order to reduce the impact on the regions as well as to provide additional incentives .
The review is intended not to amend some general provisions but to strengthen incentives ;
fifthly , the renunciation of 10 % of quotas should apply first of all to small or less competitive producers ;
sixthly , restructuring aid must be increased for partial abandonment , from EUR 218.75 to EUR 625 for the 2008-2009 period . I have to admit that the rapporteur 's position is particularly significant in supporting issues of this sort .
I should like to point out as rapporteur that certain proposals of the Agriculture Committee ought to be re-examined to get things in proportion .
For this reason , I believe we ought to take into account funding from the Restructuring Fund and also additional funding from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund .
As rapporteur , I should therefore , like to endorse Amendments 27 to 30 , which introduce three fundamental principles :
firstly , a retroactive measure , because producers , undertakings and regions which have complied progressively from the start of the new CMO cannot be penalised ;
secondly , the amount of aid must be reasonable and acceptable to all sides ( and not EUR 625 for one year ) ;
thirdly , it is important to increase retroactively and until the end of the transitional period the amount of aid given to mills for partial abandonment of production .
In closing , allow me to express a note of warning .
Negotiations the Commission is holding with the ACP countries within the framework of the EPA are ongoing .
The Commission seems ready to abolish both the safety clauses with regard to the total quantities of sugar importable into the Community by each partner country and the minimum price clause for imported sugar .
In addition , it is also proposed that access to the Community market should be liberalised in a similar way for the sixteen Sugar Protocol countries .
Commissioner , I believe that we are called upon to do important work here . Such decisions outside the institutional framework should be invalid : they would invalidate the political and institutional role played by the European Parliament .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak , Mr President .
The Committee on Budgets fundamentally supports the proposal .
Let me also personally congratulate the rapporteur .
It is a very difficult task under any circumstances to try to persuade growers in a given sector to cut back their production .
Nor does it cast us in a very good light in the eyes of European citizens to be giving support and funding to this sort of thing .
Nevertheless , if it becomes necessary to intervene in such a way and , moreover , it has no greater impact on the overall budget of the European Union than the present arrangements , then it is appropriate that it should be better targeted and that some compensation and support should go to those who are genuinely taking action on this issue on the production side , as is happening in the present case .
It is a major problem , however , that there are cases where countries have already renounced some of their quotas , only to find that the regulations have subsequently changed .
The report proposes ways of resolving this and I ask Parliament to support these in this form . Thank you for your kind attention .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give a brief review of the last reform .
Many sugar beet growers are asking why a reform of this market regulation , which has stood the test of time over decades , is necessary at all .
There are two main reasons why this reform was and is necessary .
Firstly , it was decided a few years ago , in the wake of the arms initiative , that as from 2009 everything except arms may be supplied to Europe from the poorest countries .
The sugar sector is also affected by this .
The second reason is that there is a WTO decision and we have to remove surpluses .
This means that we have to take more than 6 million tonnes of sugar out of production .
Commissioner , we put forward proposals to Parliament in 2005 and you have just said that the restructuring fund did not fulfil our expectations .
Today I would like to say here that if the Commission and Council had followed Parliament 's proposals more closely in 2005 , greater volumes of sugar would probably have been renounced voluntarily .
We now have the opportunity to make corrections so that incentives are improved .
I can only ask the Commission and Council to follow the proposals .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli , for the report she has submitted .
The Agriculture Committee has largely followed these proposals - with minor corrections - and I am convinced that if the Commission follows these proposals , incentives will be increased to such an extent that much larger volumes of sugar will be renounced voluntarily .
I should like to state , Commissioner , that there are many members of the Agriculture Committee who have listened closely to the sugar beet producers .
If the requirements set out here are met , I believe that this reform will be successful .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Mrs Fischer Boel , I think Katerina Batzeli 's report and Surján László 's opinion are technically sound and politically very correct .
Restoring balance in the market is important , and we are still a long way from being able to achieve a market balance by 2010 with regard to European sugar production and sugar beet cultivation .
I do not envy the Commission or Parliament , because it is not easy to create order and equilibrium in a distorted , excessively complicated and oversubsidised system .
This sector , after all , was the beloved child of the CAP ( Common Agricultural Policy ) compared to other , less favoured sectors .
I fully agree on the need for counterbalancing .
If we implement the additional 10 % reduction , there will still be a surplus of 2.1 million tonnes in the system , and if we do not manage to deal with this by 2010 we will need to make a further reduction of 14 % .
I believe it is unfair , and I would ask the Commissioner and the Commission to weigh this carefully , that those countries which have made major reductions , namely Italy , Portugal and Finland , will still have to make a further reduction of 10 % along with all the others .
This is not fair .
I also agree that we should do more to protect the interests of small and medium-sized growers , because the ' first-come-first-served ' rule puts them at an informational disadvantage compared with the multinationals .
In Hungary one factory in five has closed down .
The best sugar manufacturer has ceased operating , but neither the manufacturer nor the growers have come off badly .
The only thing not covered adequately in the earlier regulation was compensation to employees , I mean compensation to the employees of the sugar manufacturer .
Lastly , I think it is very important that undertakings should not have to pay the restructuring levy if they reduce their quota .
There is a demand to this effect .
I ask Mrs Fischer Boel to support this , as it would encourage further reductions and help restore a balance in the market .
Once again , helping small and medium-sized growers is therefore very important because this has a major social impact on European sugar beet growers . Thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the UEN group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the reform of the sugar production sector in its existing shape is unacceptable .
It strikes primarily at beet producers and sugar factory workers .
The exceptional activity shown by European concerns in buying up sugar factories in Eastern Europe prior to their accession to the EU gives rise to the suspicion that this reform was already being planned back then , with vast sums in compensation for the owners of sugar factories who will be shutting them down .
In the new Member States , during the accession period farmers invested huge sums in upgrading their farms , including beet production .
Two years on it has turned out that production needs to be restricted , while the main beneficiary of the compensation for giving up sugar production will be the new owners of the sugar factories .
It is estimated that in Poland alone around ten factories will be closed .
The proposed adjustments , which allocate higher sums from the restructuring fund to growers , are good .
My doubts , though , arise from the support for producers who have been buying sugar factories over the last few years , because could it not just be that they have been buying them with a view to closing them profitably ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the sugar market regulation is not a showpiece of the Commission and Council !
Mr Deß has already said that if you had listened a little more to Parliament 's proposals , some of the glitches would not have occurred .
When we have an instrument like the quota , we must use it and not threaten it for 2010 , and then we must make flat-rate or staggered reductions and provide compensation for these .
Your way of doing this through pricing came to grief because you then increased the quota by a million tonnes in one go by converting C sugar into quota sugar .
Furthermore , financing by consumers by means of pricing has meant that the sugar industry has had no interest in restructuring .
Export subsidies have not been radically reduced .
This too would have been required .
The errors should be specified and they are not being corrected now either .
The restructuring fund and restructuring aid are essentially discontinuations .
The regions , trade unions and growers are against them .
No diversification has been adopted , as Parliament demanded , in order to safeguard the regions ' socio-ecological development .
Nor are all these errors now being corrected .
We are therefore remedying the wrong symptoms .
Another important point is that you now want to limit restructuring aid going to growers to 10 % .
It used to be that countries could fix a higher price .
We are putting forward another proposal here and I hope that Parliament will implement it this time with the referral instrument , because you have not honoured the promises you made to us at the last vote , but have now gone back on them .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , the new sugar sector regulation adopted in 2006 and already being implemented is a bitter pill and it has claimed its first victims .
We , of course , voted against it and were right to do so : sugar mills have closed and many sugar beet growers have ended up unemployed .
They receive paltry compensation which is intended to stifle their opposition and protests .
In my country , Greece , sugar beet cultivation used to guarantee that the people were self-sufficient in sugar ; it provided many workers and farmers with work and injected economic life into neglected regions .
Today , two out of five factories have closed , production has fallen by 50 % , unemployment in the sector has risen , farmers have been made destitute and whole regions have been devastated .
The amendments proposed today are aimed at fully implementing the new regulation .
There is to be no let up in the diminishing rate of production , fixed at a shortfall of 2.2 million tonnes and increasing to a planned shortfall of 6 million tonnes .
This means an even greater impact than we have already seen .
The winners will be the food industrialists , who will import cheap sugar ; the losers will be sugar industry workers , since more mills will close and further numbers of small and medium-sized sugar beet producers will be wiped out .
We oppose this and we will vote against the additional arrangements : they are hastening the completion of the basic regulation and are yet another criminal ploy in the campaign against the European sugar industry and its workers .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the European sugar industry is on life-support .
The respirator , now the EU , each year gives millions of euros in direct aid and intervention to European sugar growers .
EU taxpayers are financing an antiquated system which has seen its day .
Unfortunately the Committee 's proposals mean higher costs and a slower rate of reform , the direct opposite of adjustment to the market which this uncompetitive sector so badly needs .
Sugar-producing countries outside the EU must be given access to the internal market without restrictions .
International trade based on fairer conditions is a means for less developed countries to compete on the global market .
Liberalisation of the sugar industry would also benefit European consumers .
They would avoid having to finance an artificial system of support for producers through their taxes , and they would see lower prices in the shops .
This would benefit everyone .
Mr President , Commissioner , the common market organisation for sugar worked .
It was cheap and offered access to our market to ACP countries .
However , during the WTO negotiations , Thailand , Australia and particularly Brazil insisted on a sugar monopoly .
At the same time , to win allies during the Doha Round , Pascal Lamy , who was at the time European Commissioner for Trade , offered to abolish customs duty for the 49 least developed countries with the ' Everything but arms ' programme .
In 2009-2010 , Europe will begin to see imports of sugar in theory from poor countries , but which was produced with Kuwaiti , Saudi or other capital , in the Sudan or elsewhere .
European beet growers and sugar producers in outermost regions must therefore be sacrificed for the benefit of Brazil and other countries , hence the 2006 reform .
The same applies to cereals and milk . Soon it will apply to wine .
Our producers will disappear , which in Europe is what we call ' restructuring ' .
Of course , we pay cereal growers to stop growing crops : we call it ' restructuring aid ' , like the set-aside payment or the grubbing-up premium .
However , 18 months after this aid programme began , it is not working .
Commissioner , you are giving us the same old speech about grain mountains and milk lakes . You are saying that in 2007-2008 , there will be a 4 million tonne surplus , hence the two proposals today for a regulation to obtain the abandonment , apparently , of almost 4 million tonnes of sugar .
We are increasing financial incentives and annual withdrawals , and additional payments and subsidies .
Of course , this aid will stop after 2010 and our farmers will be wiped out , just like the ACP producers , not to mention workers .
The only winners will be importers .
These Malthusian policies have been applied to cereals since 1993 .
At 9 o 'clock , Mr Parish told us that there was a wheat shortage , that prices were rocketing and that set-aside needed to be abandoned .
So there is some hope at least : in 2011 , there will be a new regulation telling us that there is a sugar shortage and that we need to start growing it again !
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , as a Member of this Parliament for the Czech Republic where the sugar market has already been restructured , I cannot agree with the proposed changes .
They are inappropriate and unfair .
It is becoming clear that the reform does not result in a series of economically uncompetitive companies .
It produces a disproportionate situation from which only the big European sugar companies profit , with no benefit whatsoever to consumers and growers .
I cannot explain to the citizens how a number of countries have not renounced their sugar quotas at all or have done so only on a very small scale while the rest of us are now supposed to pay them more money for breaking a commitment .
First and foremost , I absolutely do not agree with increasing the aid in cases of partial restructuring to the level of full restructuring aid .
Secondly , increasing the amount of restructuring aid to beet growers and contracted suppliers of machinery from 10 % to 50 % is totally unjustified .
Thirdly , I do not support an increase of additional payments to producers or any increase of temporary restructuring aid ; nor do I support an increase in additional payments to suppliers .
Fourthly , the proposal to treat the dismantling of facilities that took place last year as having taken place this financial year and in the course of the following years is , in my opinion , completely absurd .
On the contrary , ladies and gentlemen , the key issue for me is taking into account the full amount of quotas renounced during the whole restructuring period .
I certainly do not support the move to allow the quotas renounced by companies from the financial year 2008-2009 to be taken into account .
I believe that unless the Commission intends to modify its purely bureaucratic and highly unfair method of managing the sugar reform , the best thing to do would be to abolish sugar quotas as quickly as possible and liberalise the sugar market .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the EU 's sugar policy is in a strange situation .
Sugar quotas have been reduced by 2.2 million tonnes but at the same time the Commission has been selling millions of tonnes of new quotas .
The net reduction is therefore just a million tonnes , whilst the target was six times that figure .
At the same time , the big producer countries have only increased their production .
For example , Germany has increased its production from what was around 240 000 tonnes a year and France from what was 350 000 tonnes a year .
It is primarily just the small countries that have reduced their production .
Of the biggest countries only Italy has reduced its production significantly .
The result of this has been that the small countries and those countries which are poorer off in terms of their natural conditions have had to reduce their sugar production .
At the same time again , more than EUR 3 billion - three thousand million euros - has accumulated in the restructuring fund , of which perhaps around EUR 2 000 remains unspent at present .
This money has mainly come from consumers , because consumer prices have fallen more slowly than producer prices , and this difference has accrued in the Fund .
On the other hand , it has also come from farmers , whose producer prices have gone down .
This money has been and is being paid mainly to the industry , in the form of a massive amount of compensation to the tune of EUR 730 per tonne , while at the same time just around 10 % , at best 20 % , of this cash goes on changing the industrial structure and tearing down factories .
The entire sugar policy is a warning example of what can happen when we start implementing agricultural policy on industry 's terms .
The industry is being paid huge amounts in compensation and we are getting very little in return .
It is to be hoped that in the future agricultural policy will be practised as agricultural and not industrial policy .
We should focus special attention on the importance of solidarity .
It should also be taken into consideration because all countries , including those which have reduced their sugar production , still have to pay prices for sugar which are higher than global market prices , although they are simply not allowed to produce it because the industry has decided against it .
In the same way , in the future we will need to ensure that we do not start applying any similar kind of system to other areas of agricultural production .
Mr President , I should like to thank Ms Batzeli very much for her report .
I should also like to thank Mr Deß very much for shadowing this report for the PPE-DE Group .
I think it was Margaret Thatcher who once said ' you can 't buck the markets ' , and the problem with the whole sugar regime is that it is exactly what we have tried to do over the years .
I commend the Commissioner and what she is doing , because it is a very complex situation and one that we need to sort out .
We need to take more sugar out of the system and we need to make Europe much more competitive in sugar production .
The whole thrust of CAP reform now is to give support to farmers for environmental reasons , but also very much to push them in the direction of producing for the market place .
I think that the reform of sugar this year is perhaps going to be easier than in previous years , for the simple reason that we have now seen cereal prices three times what they were last year .
Therefore , some sugar producers will perhaps decide that they will take the money in the restructuring and that they can grow cereals or oilseed rape and they can make a good living from that .
Because , whatever we do with sugar , we have to be sure , as I said , that we move in the direction of reducing the amount produced in Europe - but we must still allow the farmers to have a living from the land .
We also have to consider not only balancing sugar production in the European Union , but the fact that there are ACP countries from which we import sugar .
In my own country , the United Kingdom , Tate & Lyle imports over one million tonnes of sugar .
It is very concerned to make sure that it can get access to this sugar at the same time as we are reducing and reforming the sugar regime .
I would ask the Commissioner to look sympathetically at that side of the argument as well .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , almost two years ago a legislative package was adopted for the reform of the sugar sector , with the aim of adapting it to a globalised market that really left few opportunities for our farmers .
As you well remember , Commissioner , it was a traumatic reform on which it was difficult to reach an agreement in Parliament .
Now it seems that the objectives of reducing quotas are not being achieved ; that is why the Commission is putting forward this new proposal aimed at redressing the situation before it is too late .
We think that in principle , the Commission 's proposal is positive , as to a certain extent it gives farmers the opportunity to take the initiative to renounce .
However , in certain aspects , Commissioner , we also think that it is inadequate and that it may produce undesirable effects in some countries such as Spain .
I would therefore like to highlight two points that I think are very important .
Firstly , I would like to stress the importance of the amendments tabled by the Socialist Group , and I would like to thank our rapporteur , Katerina Batzeli for her work , on the need , in some cases , to extend additional aid for withdrawal for farmers to the 2009-2010 marketing year .
We think that this change is vital so that the measure does not fall short and the expectations of producers are fulfilled .
Secondly , I would like to draw attention to the amendment that was adopted in committee in my name , which comes to plenary as Amendment 11 , on deeming full dismantling to have taken place where facilities have been converted to bioethanol production .
This measure has two purposes : on the one hand , it encourages renunciation , as it gives a way into other markets for these facilities and , on the other hand , it promotes a sector such as biofuels at a time when there is so much talk of the need to increase supply .
Commissioner , this reform has already been traumatic for many countries , such as mine ; I think that there should be money and opportunities to maintain income for farmers who wish to renounce , but above all , for farmers who wish to continue .
( PL ) Mr President , the reform of the sugar market is one of those reforms whose sense is very hard to explain to farmers in the European Union , including farmers in my country , Poland .
The administrative and financial pressure to cut back sugar production from 18 to 12 million tonnes is not convincingly justified .
There is talk of a need for solidarity with farmers on other continents , though it is clear that this is not about their interests : it is not about farmers ' interests so much as the global interests of large concerns .
In the name of these interests , the European Union , under the auspices of successive ' reforms ' , is gradually disposing of its agriculture and setting forth down the very hazardous road of making itself dependent on food supplies from outside .
This policy is leading to a loss of security in food supplies , a security that is of great importance to future generations .
My fear is that it will not be long before everyone , and not just farmers , will regret these irresponsible reforms which are going on today , the harmful consequences of which we shall all soon recognise .
( PT ) As is well known , we are very critical of this reform of the sugar sector .
We always uphold food sovereignty and we therefore think it is unacceptable that a country such as Portugal , with only one sugar factory in Coruche and one small factory in São Miguel , in the Azores , which scarcely managed to supply half the country 's consumption needs , should be confronted with the obligation to reduce its quota for sugar produced from sugar beet .
It is clear what the consequences will be : farmers and undertakings will abandon production , thus creating more unemployment and adversely affecting the development of rural areas .
It is therefore essential - as thousands of small and medium-scale farmers asserted on the streets of Porto on 17 September whilst the Agriculture Council was meeting in Portugal - to change policy in order to take account of the specific situation in each Member State and their own production and consumption needs , securing farmers ' incomes and the development of rural areas .
That is what we are once again proposing to the Commissioner .
Mr President , before I begin can I remind everyone that it is not a question of beet or grain .
In Ireland , beet was grown in a mutually beneficial rotation with wheat .
Commissioner , sugar restructuring in Ireland was a disaster .
It was handled badly by the company Greencore and our Minister for Agriculture .
Many of my constituents have suffered and social displacement is widespread , which is why the least we can do is go back and compensate these people .
Our hope of having a rational biofuels industry that was integrated , rather than competing with food production , was set back by years , if not destroyed .
When I approached the Commission to try to head off disaster , I was told that the scheme was set and that to tamper with it , even for a good reason , would unravel the whole thing .
But now we are tinkering with the scheme .
Is it not possible at this stage of adjustment to do something about the mess left behind in Ireland ?

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Batzeli and Mr Deß , we all know that the proposed amendments to the regulation on the CMO in sugar aim to make participation in the Community sugar industry more attractive under the restructuring regime so as to achieve the target of reducing Community sugar production .
Allow me to make three observations about this .
Firstly , the Commission 's approach is positive .
This is particularly the case with its proposal to give even retroactively increased support to beneficiaries who have already complied with Regulation No 318 / 2006 , allowing them to feel that they have not been unjustly treated despite contributing first to the restructuring of the sector ;
Secondly , it has been made perfectly clear , I believe , that if the desired reduced level of production is not reached , future measures for a linear reduction will apply only to those Member States which have not made an effort to attain this target .
On the other hand , the regulation will take into account the countries which have made significant reductions and whose industrial units still remaining have now reached critical levels .
It is particularly important for countries such as mine to be certain that this position will not be forgotten when we discuss the future of the CMO in sugar for the post-2010 period ;
Thirdly , I should like to raise the matter of bioethanol .
Let us take this opportunity to examine seriously the possibility that perhaps in the end our enthusiasm for bioethanol will evaporate , and maybe many of the factories producing it will not be viable .
What will the future hold for the workers in this industry , and what will happen to the farmers ?
Shall we once again have to cope with an army of unemployed ?
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President . Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Regrettably , the restructuring of the sugar market has not brought the results we had hoped for .
In modifying the restructuring scheme , it must be taken into account that some Member States have renounced a substantial portion of their quota .
Hungary has abandoned 27 % of its quota , whilst the average for the European Union as a whole is just 10.5 % .
When determining the final quota reductions , therefore , I am in favour of taking into account the scale of production in each Member State .
It would be inappropriate if the same reduction was prescribed for all Member States of the European Union at the same time since production characteristics differ in each country .
Moreover , modification of the restructuring scheme should not impact negatively on Member States that have already implemented a higher-than-average quota reduction .
For this reason I oppose taking beet and isoglucose quotas together when calculating the ratio of the quota renounced to the initial quota .
Meanwhile , the maximum amount of restructuring aid should also be granted in instances where facilities are not dismantled but converted to alternative uses such as biomass or bioethanol production . Thank you for your attention .
( PL ) Mr President , the fact that , as part of the reform of the sugar market , sugar supply has fallen by 0.2 million tonnes in the last two years , an amount that differs considerably from the proposed level , should come as no surprise to anyone .
This outcome was foreseen by Polish MEPs , as witnessed by our speeches both before the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and in the plenary of the European Parliament .
The failure to achieve the intended aims indicates that adequate motivation and incentives , including opportunities for beet growers to take up other production , were not put in place .
This was acknowledged by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development when they proposed , among other things , raising the amount of aid set aside for growers and entities providing services from 10 % to 50 % of the aid allocated to a sugar factory business , and raising the extra payment for growers for the marketing year 2008-2009 from EUR 237.50 to EUR 260 per tonne of the quota which was being renounced .
It also needs pointing out that the Commission is currently not implementing the principles of the reform , the aim of which is to maintain production in the most competitive regions .
The proposed changes do nothing to counter the problems , let alone resolve them ; they are making the situation worse .
( ES ) Madam President , thank you very much to the Commissioner for being here .
I think that the Commissioner , the rapporteur and many of the speakers have highlighted the problems that there have been with implementing the 2005 sugar reform , and the fact that abandonment of production has suffered delays leaving it far short of the objective of 6 million tonnes provided for in the reform .
I therefore believe that we all welcome the proposal that the Commission is now putting forward , which will give a new impetus to abandonment .
The sector , too , mainly the beet production sector , is very pleased that the restructuring process is being speeded up given that , as the Commissioner also said , otherwise there will be an across-the-board cut in quotas in 2010 , with no aid funds to compensate for those cuts .
I think that the amendment I tabled on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is in line with this philosophy and this new proposal .
I am referring to Amendment 31 , which calls for a report evaluating the reform and , if necessary , proposals to extend this aid fund by one year during the 2010-2011 marketing year . It was initially planned for a period of four years , to compensate , as I said , for this initial delay in implementing the reform .
This is something that has been called for by producers , and I think that it should be supported , especially given that the fund is financed solely by the sector , and therefore has no financial impact on the Community budget .
I ask , Commissioner , for this amendment to be approved by the Commission , and of course also my fellow Members .
Finally , I would just like to thank Mrs Batzelli for her work , her reports , and the improvements she has proposed , with the support of the entire Committee on Agriculture , and for the proposal presented by the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that far-reaching reforms are needed in the sugar industry in the European Union to enable it to remain successful in the future .
Reducing production is an essential component of these reforms .
However , this reduction should focus primarily on companies that are uncompetitive ; unfortunately , the reality is often different .
For example , in my home country , the Czech Republic , the sugar factories that were new , effective and prosperous were closed and quotas were renounced on behalf of supranational producers .
Of course this had a very negative impact on domestic growers and consumers .
I would therefore like to appeal to the Commission to take competitiveness principles into account , to a greater extent than before , when implementing the necessary reforms in the sugar industry , and to pay much more attention to the development of the biofuels sector .
I think that biofuels offer new opportunities to sugar beet growers and represent the future .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the reform of the sugar market which was begun in 2005 is not achieving the anticipated results , despite huge financial outlay .
Despite large financial incentives , amounting to EUR 730 per tonne of reduction in sugar production , in the Community as a whole sugar production has fallen by barely 1.1 million tonnes , instead of the anticipated 6 million .
The next set of changes to the functioning of the sugar market proposed by the Commission are not only failing to improve the situation , they are actually making it worse , as they are not consistent with the main principle of the reform , in other words sustaining sugar production in the most competitive regions .
What I think is needed is , firstly , to create conditions for stable development for the most competitive sugar producers in the Community , to enable EU production to compete on an increasingly open world market .
Secondly , we need to draw maximum advantage from sugar 's export potential within the framework of the limit agreed with the World Trade Organisation .
And finally , thirdly , if these solutions fail to produce a marked improvement in the sugar market , it will be necessary to reduce production , but using a linear factor that is the same for all Member States .
( CS ) Madam President , I represent a country that invented the sugar cube .
High-quality sugar was something we used to be proud of but the European Union ruthlessly took this pride away from us .
If Regulation ( EC ) No 320 / 2006 is implemented , the Czech Republic will be penalised for its appropriate behaviour towards foreign investors from the original EU countries that it has allowed to take over the sugar industry in the country .
This Regulation is an inappropriate attempt to satisfy the interests of the big European sugar refining companies , while the interests of the countries that are the traditional growers and producers are being ignored .
It is therefore necessary , as the amendment by Mr Fajmon and others suggests , to enable Member States to scrap provisions a ) and b ) and leave it to the individual Member States to determine how to deal with the critical situation that would arise if the quota fell by 20 % or more .
Otherwise , the Czech Republic might , absurdly , become an importer of the traditional product it has been making for centuries .
One day , when our grandchildren are making a list of reasons why the Czech Republic should leave the European Union , the sugar policy and the regulations we are now debating will be at the top of the list .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , I understand very well that sugar quotas need to be cut further and I am in favour of it .
I also understand , in the light of the figures we have , that the previous reform did not succeed .
This issue , however , is how this future reform is to be implemented .
It should be fair to all Member States , and if we consider it from the viewpoint of my country , Finland , for example , there were two sugar factories in the country , and the previous cut in quotas , a reduction in practice of 40 % , led to one of them shutting down .
If there were to be another cut of 13 % under this reform , that would mean in the worst case scenario that all sugar production would end in Finland , because both factories would have had to close .
This is obviously an unfair situation for Finnish sugar growers and Finnish industry .
That is why I support the amendment which my colleague , Mr Fajmon , has tabled and which states that this proposal should not apply in any way to Member States whose quotas have already been cut by more than 20 % unless they themselves then decide otherwise .
I would hope that the Commissioner also understands the situation small countries are in .
In Finland , while we are now discussing the subject of cuts in aid to the south of the country under Article 141 of the Accession Treaty , the rural population 's belief in the European Union is very weak .
There needs to be some glimmer of hope , and above all these reforms have to be carried out fairly , so that all Member States get treated the same way .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I would like to thank all of you for all your valuable comments .
I think that we see the complexity of this issue from the comments delivered here today .
I would just like to make a few comments .
First of all , I am convinced that what is now proposed - which I would describe as a big carrot for the sector - will work .
The carrot is quite attractive because we now give farmers the possibility of getting 10 % of the restructuring fund , and the restructuring fund for the year 2008 / 09 is EUR 625 .
EUR 62.5 plus the top-up that we pay from the restructuring money - EUR 237.5 - comes to EUR 300 per tonne that the farmers send back to the Commission .
What I consider the most important thing is that , for the first time , farmers can trigger the restructuring fund .
This has not been possible before .
Previously it was only the industry .
Now farmers can say ' I want to leave and I want my EUR 300 per tonne , and I get the compensation for the reduction in prices on top of that ' .
And that is not a one-off payment : that continues .
I completely agree with Mr Parish .
I think that the alternative to sugar beet production is much more attractive now than it has been for decades , with the cereal prices , with the oil-seed prices .
Therefore , I presume that farmers will make their calculations and look at the bottom line of the most attractive way of arranging their future production .
I mentioned retroactivity the first time that I spoke .
Retroactivity is there so that those who have delivered from the very beginning will not be punished ; they will be compensated .
It is for beet growers , for inulin syrup producers and for chicory growers .
So there is no difference between the various types of beet production .
So I am confident , and I am very thankful for the quick reaction from Parliament , which I hope will allow us to find a political agreement in the Council tomorrow so we can send a clear signal to the sector , to the beet growers , so they can start planning their next production season .
I am quite sure that this will be to the benefit of the whole sector because , as was also mentioned here today , the alternative to not using this possibility will be a linear cut with no compensation .
So I am quite sure that lots of calculations will take place on the various farms and areas where this may be attractive , to deliver the tonnes that we need to find the right balance in our sugar sector .
Once again , thank you very much - especially to the rapporteur , Ms Batzeli - for all the work done on this difficult dossier .
The debate is closed .
The voting will take place today .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Madam President , in its current review of the sugar reforms , the European Commission is requiring European farmers and the European sugar industry to make yet further unreasonable sacrifices in the name of restoring a balance in the sugar market .
In my opinion on the European Parliament 's report drafted on behalf of the Committee on International Trade some time ago , I pointed out that it would not be possible to achieve the desired balance in the European sugar market as long as there is no legislation providing for effective import protection .
In its report , the European Parliament also put forward proposals to the European Commission and the Council of Agriculture Ministers to limit imports of sugar from third countries .
In the end the legislature did not incorporate these proposals into the final document .
I agree with the tabled amendment to the present proposal suggesting that Member States that have already renounced at least 20 % of their quota should not have to implement further quota reductions .
This would be equitable and just towards countries that have already made a serious effort to implement the sugar reforms .
At the same time , however , I think it is important that a review of the sugar reforms should also include measures to make the sugar industry more competitive .
With this in mind , I have tabled an amendment giving Member States discretion to decide first to make it possible for smaller , less competitive sugar beet growers to renounce the right to transport beet .
This is a significant advantage for smaller , less well-informed growers , but at the same time it will help the European sugar industry to become more competitive internationally too .
in writing . - It is regrettable that the Commission has returned within such a short period of time with a second sugar restructuring package for Parliament to vote on .
The initial package resulted in the demise of the Irish sugar industry , to the detriment of the country , farmers and growers .
Unfortunately , to date the compensation package has not filtered fully down to either farmers or contractors .
I disagree with the Commission 's attempt to limit the compensation paid to growers and contractors to just 10 % in the current package - allocating the remaining 90 % to processors seems excessive .
In the initial restructuring scheme a minimum of 10 % was allocated to growers and contractors , with Member States being given the flexibility to decide on the precise share out but with this package the Commission is very fixed in how compensation should be allocated .
It is clear that increased levels of restructuring aid are needed to reach the Commissions targets .
I welcome that increased level of restructuring aid will be paid to those who have already quit beet production .
I would urge that the compensation payments due to Irish farmers and contractors be paid out as a matter of urgency - this saga has gone on for too long .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the rules of the common agricultural policy have been being flagrantly violated in many markets in the industry for some time now .
The sugar market is just one more disreputable example of this .
The reform of this market adopted barely two years ago contained unfair solutions for the new Member States , as it gave preference to a few old Member States which generate surpluses in the so-called B quotas that are costly to the taxpayer .
One of the aims of the reform was to improve competitiveness in the sector .
Those who were supposed to remain in the market were those who were most competitive .
The revision that is currently being proposed is aimed at punishing those who are most competitive .
After all , that is what the introduction of new factors and the increased compensation with retroactive effect will achieve .
Is there any logic to be discerned in what is going on here ?
When the interests of the old EU are challenged , principles go out of the window .
Solidarity or an equal chance to compete no longer means a thing .
This is true of the entire agricultural sector in which the richer countries get the larger subsidies .
All attempts to do away with discrimination against the poorer new Member States run up against the disarming sincerity of representatives of the older States - you are right , they say , but we are not going to open up ' Pandora 's box ' .
But now , looking at the sugar sector , the arrangement that was signed up to not very long ago can be changed !
Just because it is affecting the interests of the older Member States and the big concerns .
Dangerous toys manufactured in China ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on dangerous toys manufactured in China .
Two Commissioners will speak .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
Toys are not like any other product .
They are designed for the most vulnerable consumer group of all and it is therefore perfectly clear that we must have the highest standards for toys where children 's safety is concerned .
A whole range of very grave issues have rightly been raised here in connection with the latest recall campaigns of an American manufacturer , which has recalled faulty products from the market at its own initiative .
First of all I would like to say that both cases concerned here involve products not licensed under European law for the European market .
Toys with lead paint have , of course , been banned in Europe for a long time , unlike in the United States of America .
Toys with magnetic parts or other dangerous parts which could become loose have also been banned , of course , for a long time in Europe .
What we have here , therefore , is not a problem of applicable law ( although I will be coming to applicable law , an area in which something has to be changed , later ) , but it is a problem of the implementation and observance of the applicable law .
Products we deal with every day cannot be one hundred per cent safe .
The best legislator in the world cannot guarantee that no defects will occur in production .
The best legislator in the world cannot guarantee that supply chains now organised on a global basis will not encounter a problem at any point .
Nor can the best legislator in the world prevent trade with criminal or fraudulent intent .
I would remind you of the case in which three people died in Greece after using a faulty steam iron .
This iron not only had the European CE marking , but also a specific German safety symbol .
Nevertheless the appliance was not safe , probably because it was counterfeit .
No legislator in the world can do anything to stop this .
That is the responsibility of the manufacturer and it is the responsibility of those who have to ensure that manufacturers comply with the existing rules . These are the market surveillance authorities of the Member States .
There is no European market surveillance system .
This comes under the sole responsibility of the Member States .
I would like to point out to you that we are in fact having to deal with a problem here that is very closely connected with economic globalisation . Today this means we have to deal with worldwide supply chains .
We have to deal with companies operating under pressure of costs , meaning that they are constantly putting their suppliers under pressure of costs , thereby contributing to prices constantly being reduced .
There is a very great risk that this will come at the expense of safety at some point .
This is the reason why we are constantly saying that the more international and more extensive the supply chain becomes , the greater the responsibility of companies to ensure that the existing regulations are observed at each individual stage of the supply chain .
This was not the case , for example , in the case of lead paint on toys produced by the American manufacturer .
A Chinese supplier supplied a paint here which it should not have supplied .
These is the truth of the case .
Corporate responsibility is foremost .
Companies are responsible for their product complying with the current European rules .
Then comes the responsibility of the Member States .
They have to ensure that market surveillance works .
And then it is up to us as European legislators .
We have to ensure that our legislation is kept up-to-date and possible risks are identified in good time and incorporated into the legislation .
This is why the Commission began a thorough review of the existing Toy Safety Directive more than two years ago .
The Toy Safety Directive is one of the oldest directives resulting from the ' new approach ' .
It is clear that the toy market has changed dramatically in the last 20 years and this new directive will therefore pick up on a whole range of recently recognised risks and hazards and will ensure , with very strict rules - on the use of chemical substances in toys , for instance - that dangers are avoided .
The directive will be brought before the legislator by the end of this year .
At the beginning of this year , we had already put before you an entire package of measures for strengthening market surveillance for improving protection of the CE marking .
Let me say something about the CE marking at this point .
The CE marking means that the manufacturer ( whether a European manufacturer or a manufacturer outside Europe wanting to sell in Europe ) provides an absolute guarantee that its product is fully compliant with the rules in force in Europe .
The manufacturer guarantees this with the CE marking .
That is what the CE marking means .
In a whole range of cases , the manufacturer is not allowed to use the CE symbol on the basis of a self-declaration and his own proof , but must be certified by a third body , namely whenever there may be a risk to users due to the product not working properly .
Certification by a third body is now mandatory in all such cases .
The way these bodies , which we call Conformity Assessment Bodies , operate can be significantly improved .
We have put forward the appropriate proposals and they are available to you as the European legislator .
In relation to toys , a decision now has to be made about a very difficult issue for the Commission and for you as legislator : do we want to move to having each individual toy coming onto the market certified by a third body or do we want to leave it that the manufacturers provide the guarantee by using the CE marking and therefore also assume liability - to which I must also add that the manufacturers have to be able to prove at any time and with full documentation , according to the rules in force today , that they have been using the CE marking lawfully ?
Or do we perhaps want to take a third way by defining certain types of toy in the new Toy Safety Directive , where we stipulate certification by a third body ?
I do not want to hide the fact that I have great sympathy for this latter solution .
I would like to give you an example : what do we do with all the toys containing chips ?
When children put them in their mouths , chips are a dangerous item .
There must therefore be a guarantee that these toy parts can under no circumstances pose a threat to children .
If we do not want to take Game Boys away from children - I do not believe that anyone intends to do this - the only possibility would then be to make certification by a third body mandatory at this point .
The Commission 's ideas are along these lines and I also expect to get some impression from this debate of Parliament 's thinking on this issue .
The final point I would like to mention is a request to manufacturers and consumer organisations .
Manufacturers need to be aware of the fact that the pressure of costs , as great as it still is , does not absolve them of the responsibility for a full inspection of every individual part of their production process and their supply chain .
The more international production and supply chains become , the greater the responsibility of companies active on the market .
Furthermore , consumer organisations would accomplish a great feat if they were to create an awareness that cheap is not always the same as good .
This is not just a question of safety , but also one of quality , because how often have you seen - even with toys the child opens under the Christmas tree - how a child plays with it just once before it is broken .
It might have been cheap , but it was not good !
Cheap does not always mean good , nor does cheap always mean safe .
This means the consumer needs to be aware that the price of a product has a direct bearing on the quality and safety of a product .
In relation to the low-price ideology , which is spreading in at least some Member States , this is a subject that gives me increasing cause for concern .
I can say in conclusion that European law today is in any case better than what we see in other parts of the world , that it can be improved and is being improved and that wherever toys are involved , the strictest standards of all are being applied and must be applied .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is really an honour and pleasure for me to stand here with Vice-President Verheugen to address Parliament on the critical issue of dangerous products and product safety .
The Commission is united , as you see , in tackling this issue and happy to give you its position from two complementary points of view .
Our open society and our open economy offer citizens choices that were unaffordable and / or unimaginable only a generation ago .
This is major progress , but it comes with a challenge , as we have seen in recent months .
I refer , of course , to concerns about the safety of products and , in particular , children 's toys .
Citizens need to know that their safety is underpinned by sound rules , efficient and vigorous authorities and responsible business .
I will start this brief exposé with a few words about law and its enforcement , because it is crucial .
I believe that the current regulatory framework for consumer product safety in the EU is fundamentally sound and will be reinforced by the pending Commission proposal on the New Approach Directives .
I refer in particular to the General Product Safety Directive with its RAPEX system referring to a fundamentally sound framework .
We already have the legal framework to deal with dangerous products made in China or anywhere else .
The challenge of ensuring an internal market of safe goods lies primarily in the effective enforcement of the present legal framework , and , if we read the directive again carefully , this enforcement power belongs to the Member States .
The Member States ' market surveillance authorities and customs controls have a duty to ensure that dangerous products are not placed on the market , or are withdrawn or recalled .
The Member States must have in place effective , proportionate and dissuasive penalties for infringements , and it is written in Article 7 of the General Product Safety Directive that it is really the responsibility of the Member States .
Of course , enforcement by public authorities is only complementary to businesses respecting their legal and ethical obligations , as Commissioner Verheugen stated just minutes ago .
It is the responsibility of manufacturers , importers and distributors to make sure that they place only safe products on the market and take necessary measures where they become aware of a risk to consumer safety .
Just a few words about recent product recalls , which , of course , are our major concern .
On the issue of these recent dangerous product recalls , the Commission would be more worried by silence than by activity , and transparency builds trust .
That is why I can only encourage the national authorities to enhance their surveillance and to inform the Commission about dangerous goods and not just to keep silent for one reason or another , such as not wanting to bother people before Christmas or just trying to tackle the problem in silence .
Of course , questions remain .
Are operators notifying problems sufficiently quickly , and are their internal audits up to scratch ?
How can we ensure earlier and more effective intervention by the market surveillance authorities and better monitoring of product recalls ?
Nevertheless , the recent recalls have shown that improvements can and should be made on the entire product supply chain , encompassing , amongst other things , product design , suppliers of contractor management , manufacturing process controls and finished product testing .
I would like to talk for a while on relations with China and the United States .
The Commission also questions whether China is doing enough .
During my recent visit to China , my main message was that Europe does not and will not compromise on consumer safety .
I stressed that and obtained the commitment of the Chinese authorities on specific progress targets .
There is no argument from the market which could compete with the safety of products and the safety of people 's lives .
I stand prepared to bring them to task should they fail to deliver .
In October , I expect the report from the Chinese authorities , and I am really doing everything possible to assure them that I will not hesitate to take measures if they fail to deliver .
Constructive cooperation with China has already produced results - withdrawn export licences of certain substandard products .
I have to say that I spent four days in China and , within these four days , there were recalls of the licences of the two biggest toy manufacturers .
This puts Europe well ahead in comparison with other developed countries facing similar issues .
As you know , on 16 September , the working group established by the US President issued a report with quite similar measures to those Europe has already taken on board to secure the safety of goods .
We are also in contact with the US consumer product safety authorities and policy makers with a view to mutually reinforcing our messages to the Chinese Government .
I have already talked with the chairwoman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) , Ms McCarthy , about the results from their visit to the United States .
Next week , when I am in the US , I will check how we could cooperate .
The aim is to give a crystal clear signal to the Chinese .
Adequate safety guarantees will not work as a bargaining chip in relations with one or another economic block ; they are a sine qua non for access to either .
I would like to conclude with the next steps which we envisage .
The Commission is committed to making every effort to ensure that toys sold for the Christmas season will not lead to unpleasant surprises , and this commitment is very clear .
Maybe we need a kind of Christmas pact with producers , with importers , with all the authorities in the Member States , which should ensure vigorous implementation , and consumer organisations .
The Commission will update Parliament regularly on developments , in particular on the conclusion of the stocktaking exercise reviewing the strengths and weaknesses of the consumer product safety mechanism currently in place in mid-November , and following the forthcoming EU-China Summit at the end of November .
At the beginning of next month , on the third , there will be a gathering of all the national authorities in Brussels at which we will compare our views on how the directives on safety are implemented everywhere .
We have already had extensive talks with all the toy makers , including Mattel , involving the sharing of practices .
As I recently informed the IMCO Committee , this is no time for knee-jerk reactions .
Together with Vice-President Verheugen and a number of fellow Commissioners , we will ensure the necessary , proportionate and appropriate response to the issues that have surfaced with regard to public confidence in the governance of global product safety .
Although Commissioner Verheugen was really quite exhaustive in his exposé , let me say that as regards revision of the so-called New Approach Package , taking special care of the health and safety of European citizens requires us to preserve the specific and successful system established by the General Product Safety Directive .
By the end of this year , we will produce the first of the reports we are obliged to produce every three years according to the directive , and you will see that this mechanism is really an effective one based on community , solidarity and proportionality .
I am convinced of your view as well in asking to put safety before one-size-fits-all streamlining and to consider favourably the draft regulation as originally proposed by the Commission .
We need also to be aware that this is not happening for the first time .
If you compare how we have been through all the unpleasant events which happen on the market regarding food safety , we can really enhance our institutional comparison and do our best on product safety because in this globalised world we cannot just be an island .
We need to exercise our control and to assure European citizens that the attention from Community authorities is the same everywhere and complements the efforts of the Member States .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , there is a Japanese saying ( and I emphasise ' Japanese ' rather than ' Chinese ' in the context of this question ) : ' A problem is a mountain of treasures ' .
I think Mattel 's problem has really focused attention on the important work that we do in this House , particularly my fellow members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on what is traditionally seen as rather a dry subject , one that concerns product regulation , market surveillance and conformity assessment .
Well , the public know why it is important now and I hope they will continue to focus on it .
I want to thank the two Commissioners for coming here today , but perhaps remind them first of all that an oral question was tabled , which they have , I think , anticipated and have covered most of our questions , but I also think we are a bit ahead of them .
You will see the resolution tomorrow that we will vote on , which takes a broad view about product , and particularly toy , safety in the global context .
There are a number of points addressed to both Commissioners .
I am pleased that Commissioner Verheugen has confirmed to us that the Toys Directive will be here towards the end of the year , something that we have been asking for .
I am pleased he has lifted the lid a bit on some of the thinking , but we invite him to perhaps share a bit more of that with us .
We have not been entirely clear which direction he is going in .
He is talking , perhaps , about some differentiated standards for particular areas .
I would merely caution him about that .
I am not entirely convinced , for example , that a toy containing a microchip is any more dangerous than a bicycle , but I let him ponder on that .
Let me just emphasise some of the points that we want to look at .
First of all , the big disappointment this morning is that there is no one from the Council here .
And they have a crucial role to play , as we know , in product conformity and assessment .
Secondly , I agree with the assessment of both Commissioners that the manufacturers and producers have to bear the brunt of the responsibility for managing a supply chain where they do quality checks and they ensure that they are producing consistently high standards of product .
Finally , I think consumers are entitled to more and better information .
I cannot understand why we are so reluctant to tell consumers where products are made .
The Council is sitting on a proposal in selected areas at the moment .
I think that the toy industry must really look seriously at a proper toy safety mark that it develops and manages itself so that consumers really have that assurance that , when they come to buy toys this Christmas , they will have safe , good quality toys .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I think that we in the European Union have to all intents and purposes achieved very high safety standards for products .
I agree with Mr Verheugen when he says that we can never achieve 100 % safety , but our aim in Europe must be to have the highest possible level of safety and we have not yet achieved that target .
We still have a great deal to do to make this target a reality .
These recall campaigns ( it is not just Mattel , there have also been others in recent months ) have shown that there is a very great need for action in the European Union to guarantee that product safety is at the highest possible level .
Three months before Christmas we are , of course , keeping a close eye on toys that need to be especially safe .
Our children are our future ; therefore we have to pay particular attention to their safety .
Hence we are already very annoyed that it is taking the European Commission so long to revise the Toys Directive .
I hope that it is true that this directive will have been revised by the end of this year , or even before the end of this year , so that we can actually bring it completely up to date .
I am also very anxious about which proposals will be forthcoming because this has always been very unclear to date .
There is one further point that is quite important , namely the implementation of this law .
The Commissioners have also been addressing it and that , too , is a problem .
On Monday I had the opportunity to go to a certification institute and to have a look and inquire as to what the problems are .
One very clear problem that was highlighted is that the CE marking does not contain what it actually promises .
We need to work on this and hence we are demanding that there should also be additional safety labelling , particularly for toys , so that safety can also be guaranteed .
It is not enough for inspections to be carried out when the products are already in the shops ; they must be made beforehand .
We need these inspections beforehand and they must also be compulsory wherever necessary and this is very particularly the case with toys .
A third and final point : the RAPEX system needs to be improved .
When we look at the figures , we see that activity in this area varies considerably from one Member State to the next .
I think that we have to appeal to the Member States here to improve and promote this system so that we are able actually to carry out the necessary product recalls as well as ban products .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I am pleased that there are in fact two commissioners here .
This is evidence of a dynamic approach to the recent problem concerning Mattel .
This problem is of course twofold , which is now also evidenced by the fact that it is less serious when it relates to China , and by the fact that Mattel too has made an error .
As I said , this problem is twofold .
I believe , first of all - and here I would like to reiterate Clinton 's words - that politicians must think first and act later .
These were the words of President Clinton during an election meeting last year , during which he also said that we must not immediately become stressed when a button is pushed , as in the case of toys .
I too am guilty of this on occasion .
When something happens , we politicians become stressed and immediately want more stringent measures and stricter regulations .
I believe that we must think first , before we take action .
Fortunately , this is what we did with our resolution .
This brings me to the second item , that is to say why the Mattel problem also has a positive consequence ; in particular , we are going to expressly consider the importance of a CE marking , a quality mark that indicates safety , and the way in which we can improve that mark .
I fully agree with what Commissioner Verheugen says about the fact that 100 % safety and security can never be achieved ; however - following on now from Mrs Gebhardt - we must nevertheless strive to achieve 100 % safety .
If a product bears the CE marking , this raises the issue of 100 % liability , which is of course of great importance to the consumer .
If the CE marking is present , then the consumer knows that if something should go wrong with the product he or she has purchased , he or she will always have recourse to the manufacturer or importer .
The resolution on which we will be voting tomorrow , Madam President , relates to this matter in particular .
I feel that we have prepared an excellent resolution ; the supervision - and here I am in complete agreement with Commissioner Kuneva , who says that we do not need more legislation , but rather that we must regulate existing legislation more effectively and efficiently - is open to improvement .
We cannot leave it to the individual Member States to exercise control in third countries .
I believe that a coordinated European approach in cooperation with the Member States is essential in order to achieve this and I hope that the Commission will make efforts to establish this .
Subsequently , Madam President , it must also be clear to consumers which marks exist .
We have the CE marking and , in the resolution , we are also calling for a toy safety marking , at the very least as a replacement for all existing national markings .
The aim is not to establish a selection of markings , as a result of which the consumer would no longer be able to see the forest for the trees and would therefore no longer be able to make a clear choice , as I feel that by doing so , we would be overshooting the goal .
Things must become clearer , with fewer , but improved regulations .
I believe that this is of the utmost importance .
Subsequently , I hope that we can introduce these markings on a voluntary basis , as the market will enforce it .
If we are going to create obligations , we as an authority must carry out monitoring and I think that the market , the consumer , will opt above all for safety and a clear marking .
If this were to happen , my group and I would be entirely satisfied with the decision .
We look forward to the revision of the Toys Directive , which you have already mentioned .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , inspections and a forest of new symbols - this completely misses the heart of the problem !
Inspections are good , laws are even better !
We do not need more pseudo-safety , or more pseudo-political action for the sake of action , but better laws and better standards .
CMR substances , carcinogenic , mutagenic or reprotoxic substances have still not been removed from children 's toys .
Toys should not become toxic traps for children .
Poison does not belong in children 's hands , even in minute quantities .
Mr Verheugen , I find it intolerable how you absolve your own failure by scolding producers and consumers .
We know that the legal basis , the Toys Directive , has not offered children any protection from toxic toys for years .
The Commission knows this .
You can glean from your own report of 2004 that you get a resounding slap in the face there .
It states in black and white that the Toys Directive has failed .
We have been sending reminders on the revision of the directive since 2001 and they have repeatedly been shelved .
It is not true to say that lead is banned in toys .
Lead per se is simply not banned under the Toys Directive !
Or can the Commission explain to us perhaps why it has not initiated any legal product recall campaign , and why it was a voluntary product recall campaign by the toy manufacturers ?
We should no longer therefore be leading the consumer to believe that we have got the problem under control .
We need better protection .
This must quite clearly mean that we have to change the foundation and replace absent standards with clear laws and bans .
It is downright absurd that carcinogenic substances are allowed to get into the hands of children .
Better controls are therefore of no help to us at all here .
Right now , then , we have to tighten up the laws and then carry out better controls .
We should not have our children poisoned while they play !
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , in the debate on the recall of the toys in question it has often been said that responsibility for the fact that dangerous toys are on the market rests with the country of manufacture , in this case China .
I regret that the discussion has not focused more on the responsibility borne by the firms which outsource production to countries such as China , in this case Mattel .
I do not want to single out this particular company for criticism since a great many firms outsource production .
They do so because they want to keep prices as low as possible . They want to increase profits .
But we must devote much more discussion to the responsibility incumbent on such companies .
They endeavour to keep costs as low as possible while at the same time taking no responsibility either for consumer safety or for the employees who work with these dangerous products .
We must put pressure on companies to make them understand that as consumers we demand safe products that we can trust .
We also demand that products be manufactured in decent working conditions without risks to the health and safety of employees .
It is of course especially tragic when it is children who are hurt by dangerous products .
Clearly we must join together to ensure that this is stopped .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the European Union and China are major mutual trading partners .
This means that China may be called to account for the quality of products supplied .
The European Union cannot resign itself to unsafe clothing or unsafe toys .
The Union should never allow its economic interests in China to take precedence over the interests of the European consumer .
This debate once again shows that the European consumer is served not only with low prices , but much more so with quality and safety , as Commissioner Verheugen also indicated .
This is all the more so , when the safety of children is at issue .
In this debate , I want to look not only at the importers , but most certainly also at the Chinese manufacturers .
Safety does not become an issue only if products reach Europe .
Consideration for safety must form a guiding principle at as early a stage as possible within the production chain .
After all , safety is not a luxury or a nice extra , not here and not in China either .
I call upon the Council and the Commission to convey this message to our Chinese trading partners in a clear and vigorous manner , and Commissioner Kuneva 's words in particular give me full confidence that this will in fact be done ; I wish her much perseverance in this difficult task .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , China knew and still knows about the dangers of many of its products , not just toys .
China has on many occasions assured us that the vast majority of its exports conform to European standards , but consumers have little faith in Chinese products .
The 2006 Commission report on dangerous products highlights an increase in dangerous infringements , by toys , hairdryers and lighters .
Toys are , in fact , the products with the highest number of irregularities , and China is the country of origin with the most infringements .
Commissioner Kuneva has warned that if China does not respond to the EU 's demands , the next step will be to ban the import of some Chinese products .
I believe that we ought to strengthen customs barriers because the EU should protect not only consumers , not only its industry , it should not only support free competition by means of equal market access opportunities , but it should also take action on social and environmental grounds as regards the highly speculative output of Chinese industry .
We need controls not only on the final quality of the product , but also a clear mark of origin and checks , before the distribution of Chinese products is permitted within the internal market , on the safety standards and conditions under which the products are made in their places of origin ; otherwise , the institutions will remain complicit in environmental disasters , social exploitation and unfair competition by Chinese industry .
Madam President , it is indisputably right that Mattel should have recalled these dangerous toys .
But a number of pertinent issues arise .
Firstly , for all our consumer protection laws , it was not the EU or any EU agency which picked up on the danger , but rather the parent US manufacturer .
Does that not tell us something important about the efficiency and the reliability of our own protections ?
Secondly , we impose on our own indigenous industry , in all spheres , severe standards and demands , ranging from health and safety through to CO2 emission .
Yet we throw open our doors to Chinese goods which are the product of woeful production conditions , fall far short of what we require of our own factories and come from plants which belch out emissions as if there was no tomorrow .
Little wonder we have driven so much manufacturing to the Far East !
But , what I ask is , with what net global gain ?
In fairness to both the workers and the consumers of Europe , it is time we brought some sense and order to our approach .
If we had not decimated our own manufacturing industry by punitive regulation , then maybe now we would not be so dependent on China and its shoddy goods .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioners , the recent recall campaign by a toy manufacturer acted as an alarm bell , and rightly so .
It is now up to us to deal with this problem in a rational and well-considered manner .
If , after many years of effort to achieve a high degree of consumer protection , also with regard to product safety , we are still sometimes confronted with situations in which non-compliant goods are produced , imported and introduced onto the market , that is of course not an ideal situation . Perhaps , however , it is not entirely possible to prevent this from happening .
Yet despite this , European citizens and European consumers can expect us to continue to deliver maximum effort in order to put a check on this .
In the case constituting the immediate cause for this debate , the products in question are toys from China .
In spite of this , I would like to make an appeal to the effect that we do not restrict ourselves to this - not to the fact that they come from China , because unsafe goods enter the market from other countries too .
In some instances , they are also manufactured by us .
It is better to come to effective agreements than to initiate protectionist campaigns .
Nor must we focus solely upon toys , even though one in four products in which a defect is identified is in fact a toy .
We must ensure that product safety is guaranteed on a general level .
We do not need to devise a new approach as such ; rather , we must close the gaps in the existing system .
We are working to achieve this with the proposals from the Internal Market Package for Goods .
I would like to make it clear to everyone that these proposals were drawn up with the aim of enabling the internal market to operate more effectively .
We always incorporate a high degree of protection for the consumer as an objective in these proposals and it now appears that this is actually the case .
The internal market and consumer protection are therefore not conflicting issues , but rather are entirely congruous and this is a path that we must continue to follow .
I have just one question for the Commission , Madam President : in our joint resolution , we are calling for an assessment to be carried out in order to examine whether a voluntary safety marking is available in addition to the CE marking .
I would like to ask the Commissioners what their response to this is .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I have been enjoying myself inserting ' toys ' and ' China ' into Google .
I would recommend you all do this , too .
You will then get entire lists of suppliers , the Chinese supply industry and producers and see all that you can buy there .
80 % of the toys from China end up on the Commission 's website and vice-versa .
The European market imports 80 % of its toys from China .
If you look at these two figures together , you can imagine the scope of what we are dealing with here .
Of course , you have to see that on the one hand we are now in a context internationally where the world economy is becoming interlinked and European industry and jobs are naturally dependent on supplies from China .
On the other hand , it must also be said that world-wide networking of this kind in industry only works when there is trust .
This trust is based on certain aspects that also have to be maintained .
Trust grows when there is fair competition .
Fair competition is achieved when there is assurance from the Chinese , and also from the producers and the supply industry , that they are actually able , and have the know-how , to carry out all the necessary checks for exporting their products to Europe according to the criteria of the European market .
However , trust grows , of course , and fair competition can be generated only when the producers , and specifically the Chinese government in this case , guarantee that the environmental , social and worker standards that we have will also be gradually introduced to the same extent by the Chinese , as otherwise we shall have conditions of unfair competition .
Unfair competition always has an impact on this country 's ability to make checks .
We can see this because all the data show that most of the problems we have with dangerous toys from China do not necessarily come from producers of the major brands , but from those who are involved in unsafe supply chains .
This monitoring operation therefore needs to be considerably developed by the Chinese .
Honourable Commissioners , we too must put our house in order , of course , and I believe much still lies in disarray in Europe .
I would not like to repeat what my fellow Members have already addressed , but instead list a few points concerning the Committee on International Trade and particularly the responsibility of European importers to introduce border checks and the need to initiate legal product recall campaigns and the issue of when to resort to import bans and import restrictions as a whole and under what conditions .
We will soon be having difficulty - at least in certain sectors , such as the textile sector - as the safeguards we currently have are expiring .
We shall then have additional problems at least in that sector .
( FR ) Madam President , what should we learn from the Mattel affair ?
I must make an initial observation , a digression certainly , but it is important , as has already been said .
If this trade saga has a happy ending , it is partly due to the sense of responsibility of the directors of this company , who took the necessary decisions : a mass recall and effective communication .
Secondly , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Kuneva , who has lived up to our expectations by calling for effective use of the RAPEX system , which of course could still be refined further , and by sending a firm message to the Chinese authorities .
Thirdly , I would like to express my frustration .
In reality , the Mattel affair is almost the story of a predictable failure : that of surveillance in the European Union of CE marked products , in this case toys , but they are not the only products affected .
In 2004 , during the debate on the directive on the eco-design of products , I and others here this morning - I see Karin Scheele , Peter Liese , Claude Turmes - criticised the presence on the European market of other dangerous products carrying the CE label .
Our joint resolution certainly contains interesting possibilities : the revision of the existing directives , enhanced cooperation - with China in this case - more resources allocated to customs authorities and national surveillance authorities .
The two Commissioners here today stressed this essential point .
I wish someone from the Council had been here this morning : we needed them to be here .
To conclude , if Europe wishes to protect the health and safety of consumers , it must track down and convict fraudsters , as it has done , but also ban the marketing of consumer products containing dangerous substances such as CMR substances and endocrine disruptors .
( DE ) Mr President , I welcome the importance the Commission is attaching to this subject today .
The fact that two Commissioners have taken the floor clearly shows that finally even the Commission understands that we have to act here .
However , doubts remain as to the statements when reference is made in the first instance to the responsibility of the Member States and manufacturers .
Certainly the Member States bear a good proportion of responsibility and market surveillance has been scaled back in recent years in many Member States .
This is the wrong response to the challenges of globalisation .
Nevertheless , this alone is not enough .
Revision of the Toy Safety Directive is urgently needed .
When we recognise that this recall campaign is now the fourth since November 2006 , it raises questions , for instance : who is actually following up these recall campaigns ?
What are the sanctions in the Member States and the law on importer and producer liability achieving ?
We urgently need a revision of the Toy Safety Directive , which also does real justice to the new challenges .
This directive is not a response to these new challenges .
We have to address subjects such as the law on collective action .
Mr Verheugen , you have rightly addressed the fact that we have to make clear to consumers that quality is also important and that prices and quality have to reflect this .
But then I also ask myself , of course , why consumers no longer have opportunities within their grasp , under a European law on collective action for example , for insisting that something should also be changed here in relation to costs ?
I would like to delve further into the subject of CE marking .
We have discussed this at length and across the board and are familiar with the failings and limitations of this CE marking .
I think it is wrong when it is suggested to consumers that CE marking is a clear signal that the product is safe .
CE marking is primarily a statement that this label complies with European directives .
It may relate to certain parts of a product , it may relate to a whole product , but it does not reveal anything as a whole about the safety of the product .
We have a flaw here , which needs to be removed from the new Toy Safety Directive as a matter of urgency .
( EL ) Mr President , 65 % of toys imported into the European Union are made in China .
In August one particular US toy company recalled approximately 18 million China-made toys from around the world .
The problem is the high levels of lead in the paints used in these toys .
This raises the serious question of what sort of future we want for our children .
In their desperate efforts to cut back production costs , multinationals are ignoring the cost being imposed on public health .
Mrs Kuneva , the Commissioner , has stated that she intends to revise the legislation on toys .
I congratulate her on such an initiative but , at the same time , regret the fact that the Commission is being called on yet again to close the door after the horse has bolted instead of preventing such unfortunate incidents .
( DE ) Mr President , when we hear about toxic substances in babies ' bibs , children 's clothing and toys , or even of self-igniting batteries , it is clear that our system of controls is not working properly .
Nearly all European manufacturers have at least part of their products produced in China or other low-cost countries where cheaper products are used in order to make more profit , despite higher raw material prices and salaries .
It is , of course , the importers ' responsibility to ensure compliance with the legal requirements and this depends therefore on their standards and controls .
We have a dangerous problem of mentality when responsibility is shifted onto producers with a few words , and manufacturers would rather pay fines than initiate recall campaigns .
This is where , in my view , the EU should start , perhaps by increasing fines so that they become more punishing , if information is not being passed on immediately and products recalled .
In addition , CE marking must in my view become more than pure self-regulation by the industry .
Mr President , we live and work in a global market economy , and we cannot expect to put in place legislation which interferes with that .
Commissioner Kuneva , I have nothing to say to what you have said .
I agree totally with everything you have said - my congratulations ; just make sure that it is implemented .
As far as Commissioner Verheugen is concerned , I am sorry to say that the buck does stop somewhere , and it is all very well for the Commission to continue to pass the responsibility on to Member States , or whatever , but in actual fact you have to implement the legislation that is put in place by this Parliament .
I believe , therefore , that it is the responsibility of your department to ensure that the products that come into the European Union are at least as safe as the products that we produce within the European Union .
I say to Ms Breyer , a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , who quite rightly talks about legislation : there is little point in putting in place legislation in the European Union if all we do is import products which do not meet the same standards that we are putting forward within the European Union .
We have put in place , for example , legislation on barometers .
How many children eat barometers ?
And yet we stopped barometer production .
About 10 minutes ago , we stopped the production of sugar in the European Union , and say we have to support Tate & Lyle , which imports it .
We have things like foot-and-mouth and blue tongue coming into the European Union because we live in a global market , and yet we are not enforcing the legislation at the port of import sufficiently to ensure the safety of the products .
We do live in a global market , and the last thing I want is to see legislation that is trade defensive .
We have to accept the fact that products are going to come in from the rest of the world , but they must be of the same standard .
I want to ensure the safety of my constituents - the children , the grandchildren of the people that have elected me - when they go to buy their Christmas toys to ensure and guarantee that they are not going to die from some lead paint .
I leave you with one last thought .
As a farmer , I have seen the effects of lead paint that cattle have licked off , that has been there for years , and it just kills them in a very slow and nasty way .
Ensure and guarantee , Commissioner , that my children , my grandchildren and those of my constituents are safe .
( SV ) Mr President , as a parent of young children myself , I find this matter highly relevant .
To be honest , I do not always think about what chemicals a toy contains or what standard of safety it conforms to when I buy toys for my children .
For me , it goes without saying that the toys I buy in Sweden , Brussels or Strasbourg are safe .
Perhaps you think I am naive , but I am not alone .
When I raided my daughter 's toy box three weeks ago and pulled out one thing and another , I asked some neighbours along my street what they thought about this when they bought toys .
They all said that , as long as the items were sold in toy shops and had a CE label , they felt quite confident .
So our consumers are lulled into a false sense of security .
It is now our responsibility to ensure that that sense of security does not continue to be false .
I therefore appeal to the Commission to review the Toy Safety Directive as soon as possible .
What can have higher priority than our children ?
Amongst other things , we must ensure that toys do not contain carcinogens .
We must introduce a ban on all carcinogenic and other toxic substances .
Many such substances accumulate in the body .
Children who are exposed to them will have them in their bodies for the rest of their lives .
This responsibility cannot be left to parents .
We do not have the expertise .
Who would buy a toy knowing that it contained carcinogens ?
We must modify and strengthen the CE labelling system .
Consumers today believe that the CE mark means that a product is safe , but if that is to be the case we must have a well developed system of market surveillance and a uniform testing system .
We must also ensure that retailers and suppliers of unsafe products are made to bear full liability .
I also welcome a review of the RAPEX system .
Having talked to Swedish consumer advisers , I understand that this is a very important tool and that it is used on a routine basis .
However , it is not complete until all EU countries make use of and contribute to the system to the full extent .
Finally I want to stress once again that our consumers must be given priority , for without safe and secure consumers we shall not have a flourishing internal market .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by creating an internal market , the EU , primarily and most efficiently , is implementing the free movement of goods .
The EU is implementing the New Approach Directives in order to protect consumers .
The Toy Safety Directive is one of them .
EU manufactures are responsible for the safety of the goods they produce .
Are importers responsible for the safety of goods ?
The situation in the European and global toy markets differs greatly .
Only last August , the US toy manufacturer Mattel recalled almost 19 million toys manufactured in China .
Mattel toys are sold in the EU too .
In 2006 half of all products sold in the EU that were deemed hazardous to health were manufactured in China .
The same safety requirements should be applicable not only to EU manufacturers , but also to exporters in non-EU countries intending to sell their products in the EU internal market .
I believe that manufacturers that transfer production from the EU to China can do much to influence this issue and they must take full responsibility .
They cannot simply make use of the cheap labour force in China , but should also be honest with their consumers - the citizens of their countries .
I would encourage the Commission to review the Toy Safety Directive as soon as possible , to introduce clear toy safety criteria and CE marking control and to protect our children from dangerous toys brought onto the EU market .
Furthermore , on the subject of the certification of institutions , I believe it should be compulsory for manufacturers and importers to lose their production certification if the products they place on the market are recognised as unsafe , that is , when confidence is lost .
( SV ) Mr President , we buy toys for our children so that they can have fun and be stimulated in their development .
Without exception , parents expect society to protect children , but current legislation makes it possible for us to put toxic bombs in our children 's hands .
Mr Verheugen says that lead is banned in toys , but the truth is that the law permits an intake of 0.7 microgram per day .
However , the law leaves industry to set the standard for how safety is to be achieved , and that is where protection for our children stops .
The standard says that the 1985 toxicity data are sufficient .
The Commission 's own experts want an update .
The standard says that the entire daily intake can be imputed to toys .
The experts say a maximum of 10 % , which would mean a requirement ten times more stringent .
The standard assumes that no child swallows more than 8 milligrams from a toy .
The experts think that is absurd .
The standard only requires one toy per category to be tested , not every product .
The experts think that is absurd .
The Commission 's own experts regard the protection as a disaster , and this is only the beginning .
Thirty-four aromas which are banned in cosmetics are permitted in toys .
Carcinogens , mutagens and reproduction toxins which are banned in cosmetics are permitted in toys .
Allergens are also permitted in toys .
The Commission has known about the problem for ten years .
Now we want legislation , a law which protects our children both on paper and in reality .
Why do the toys industry and the governments get the documents but Parliament does not ?
- ( FR ) Mr President , 65 % of the toys distributed in Europe , sold in Europe , are made in China , and the presence of our two Commissioners shows just how important this problem is .
This is not only a safety issue but also a health issue affecting a specific consumer group , namely our children .
When very young children are involved , the problem is even more serious .
We cannot compromise on safety , especially when the products concerned are intended for small children .
I especially worry about the failure of Member States to carry out the necessary controls .
We know that many products made in China are dangerous , but it does not just concern toys , it also concerns textiles and now vehicles .
Therefore , this is a huge problem and the European Commission must properly address this issue .
This is why I am in favour of raising safety standards - the famous CE safety mark - so that we can reduce the risk of dangerous substances being present in products that come from China .
I am mainly thinking of chemicals , which we have discussed a great deal .
It is a question of corporate responsibility , although Mattel showed that it accepted responsibility .
The responsibility of Member States is even more important : it is even more important because I am deeply concerned about what will happen with Internet sales .
How can we be sure that the toys recalled by Mattel will not go on sale to European consumers over the Internet ?
What control do we have ?
Consumer information is important : consumers must be aware of the risks of buying these products and must realise that low prices and cheap goods do not go hand in hand with health and safety .
It is also important that we introduce controls - controls at production sites , controls carried out independently and autonomously - and that we prevent these stocks of faulty products from flooding the market and doing more harm .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen has said that the subject occupying us today is primarily a problem of failure to comply with existing laws .
This is partly true .
We as the European Parliament should not neglect sending a clear message to the Member States that we cannot demand increasingly strict European laws and then not take enough money at home to guarantee their implementation .
It has also been stated , however , that we ought to apply the strictest standards of all in the toy sector .
This is where the Toy Safety Directive , which has been in existence for a long time , needs to be revised .
When this directive is revised , I am expecting a clear stance to the effect that the strictest standards of all will be applied and chemicals classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic and toxic to reproduction will be banned .
Today I hope that we in the European Parliament will hold to this position in the decisions we make .
Not only does this discussion about toys provide evidence that CE labelling is misleading , but also the many discussions at home with our citizens do so too .
As I see it , we are hoping for either an indication of origin or at least a certain level of quality .
I think that as part of the revision we should rethink how we can mislead our citizens less .
I would say straightaway that I cannot quite understand voluntary safety labelling either .
In Europe and the European Union we have to become better at conformity , but it makes no sense to develop specific labelling as a reward for the fact that we have been complying with the existing laws for a long time .
I am very sceptical about this and I think that it is more important to focus on monitoring the implementation of strict rules .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioners , as Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the People 's Republic of China , I would like to say that cooperation between the European Commission and China is of course of exceptional importance and that we are following the Commission 's activities there as closely as possible .
I would , however , also like to inquire about our Chinese colleagues ' activities in China . I can tell you that , somewhat by coincidence , a Chinese delegation is here this week , as our interparliamentary meeting is being held tomorrow and the day after , and also that one of the items on the agenda is precisely product safety and the way in which we can cooperate more effectively in that regard .
Should the Commissioner have any additional suggestions for items for the agenda - incidentally , we have already received a memorandum from the Commission in this regard - we would of course welcome those suggestions , as it is of course clear that cooperation between China and Europe is of particularly great importance .
I would like to point out that the Commissioner has already made efforts to that effect during the summer and that a further follow-up is expected in October .
With regard to collaboration within our RAPEX system , in which we exchange information with the Chinese and the Chinese AQSIQ authorities , affairs must run as smoothly as possible .
Nevertheless , it cannot reach a situation whereby we - that is the authorities , the government - assume responsibility for products .
If we are to control each product , manufacturers should be able to say ' let them go ahead and do it ; we can see what we are introducing onto the market ' .
Responsibility must remain with the manufacturer .
This also became abundantly clear in the Mattel case .
Manufacturers must ensure that their products are safe by means of research and checks .
Moreover , we must ensure that these checks are implemented as effectively as possible across Europe and China and that we can determine what is happening by means of spot checks .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is indeed a very calm discussion this morning .
I welcome this greatly , but it is a very difficult subject .
We have three problems in all with consumer products , and with toys in particular , and these have already been amply discussed .
Firstly , market surveillance - and you , Commissioner Verheugen , have indeed addressed the fact that an iron was wrongly given two different safety labels on Europe 's internal market .
This is bad enough , but the worst thing is that a Member State found this iron and did not inform the other Member States about it until a year later .
There is a need for change here , particularly in the Council .
Secondly , importer liability has already been addressed .
I can only support what has been said here .
However , I believe that a crucial problem - and this is my third point - lies in the fact that we have different approaches at European level .
On the one hand , we have the General Product Safety Directive ( GPSD ) , which applies to all consumer goods , and on the other hand the New Approach .
This varied approach to consumer products is still not completely watertight at all points .
Hence my belief that we need the CE marking that applies in the New Approach as a basis for safety and for products entering the internal market , and that we need additional certification for all those manufacturers on the European internal market and beyond , which must be voluntary , and which offers European manufacturers the opportunity to raise standards as a whole in global competition - because Europe 's internal market is the world 's largest internal consumer market , bigger than the USA and bigger than all the others in this product sector .
This solution - a voluntary one with a basic principle legally governed by regulation at European level - offers the consumer the security of knowing what has been assigned to a product by a certificate .
We therefore have an internal market-friendly solution as well as a solution for dealing with globalisation .
One further point on toys .
There are many different types of toys .
It is totally clear to me that a teddy , which children put in their mouths , naturally has to meet different conditions than a computer keyboard and we should also factor this differentiation into the implementation of the legislation .
Hence my appeal to our Members : let us therefore think about taking CE marking as a basis for all goods coming onto the internal market and additional , voluntary certification for consumer goods .
( FR ) Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the recall by the US toy manufacturer Mattel of several million toys made in China is significant for three reasons .
First of all , it confirms the urgent need for a revision of the 1988 Toys Directive .
Secondly , this event shows the need for greater control and market surveillance , the need to make CE marking compulsory and to ensure that it is truly credible .
Finally , we are right to question the failings of the current trade globalisation model , and to ask ourselves how the world 's leading toy manufacturer could not work with reliable subcontractors .
The European Union must be extremely vigilant , both in terms of health and safety standards and in terms of respect for ILO core labour standards , in all countries with which it has signed partnership , cooperation or free trade agreements .

( DE ) Mr President , first of all , thank you to both Vice-President Verheugen and Commissioner Kuneva for being here and enhancing the debate .
If commercial and economic policy has a truly important task , it is where the safety of our children is concerned .
Children 's toys have become increasingly inexpensive in recent decades and the cheaper the toy , the greater the likelihood that it was not produced in the EU .
I have to say even as a Liberal that there is justifiable doubt that parents always know best what is good for their children when buying toys .
The range is colossal and unmanageable .
Quality toys produced in Europe such as Lego , Playmobil , Märklin , Brio wooden trains or Wader plastic toys are also correspondingly expensive .
Competition needs people who can and want to take responsibility .
Anyone who buys their children the cheapest junk toys untested does not want this responsibility !
We also have to consider whether the Commission should launch an information campaign for parents like these .
Yes , I am in favour of free trade , but not at any price !
As Europeans , we have certain standards , and - this has been repeatedly addressed here - we have to implement them in a clearer way .
At this point I should like to highlight once again the ' Made in ... ' campaign .
Following the current events , it may be time to introduce a mandatory designation of origin , at least for toys .
I know Commissioner Kuneva 's efforts on this issue and can only encourage her in them .
The label on the product must be sufficiently large .
Even though we are not in a position to change production conditions in China , this would at least educate citizens about this to a sufficient level .
( ES ) Mr President , the recall of dangerous toys in August and September caused public alarm .
However , I do not think that we should add to the alarm as , in general , the toys sold in Europe are surely the safest in the world .
However , reality shows us that we need to improve European safety standards , especially for those products that consumers have direct contact with , such as toys or textile products .
The situation that arose should lead to greater market surveillance , inspection and the banning or withdrawal of dangerous products .
However , sometimes the only priority is increasing profit margins , generating growing pressure on businesses and increasing the risks .
We need to demand that China improves safety , but it is essential to cooperate with them to achieve these objectives .
Before the Christmas period , when millions of toys are bought in Europe , all the authorities involved , from the Commission to local authorities , as well as companies producing and marketing toys , need to act responsibly , maximise precautions and commit themselves to guaranteeing the safety of toys .
We all have a great interest in offering transparency , safety and confidence to European consumers .
( CS ) Commissioner , we have to give parents back their trust in the European market .
Since the health of children is at stake , we want to act fast and we are now discussing how to do that .
Ladies and gentlemen , I do not think that we need a new law or even a new marking as soon as a problem develops .
We must first of all persuade countries to test their product safety mechanisms .
Secondly , we must negotiate with third countries in order to ensure that they , too , introduce safety standards for the products they export to our Union .
The Commission 's analysis that we are soon to be presented with will expose the flaws in product safety control in Member States .
Then perhaps we will find out why , for example , Denmark and Austria allow more dangerous products through than Germany , despite having the same laws .
Commissioner , I am pleased that you have started the negotiations with the Chinese Government in such an uncompromising manner .
That is the right direction at last and I hope that the other Commissioners will follow that example .
Now I will turn back to Europe .
I would call on the Commission to focus on how to prevent misuse of the marking that tells citizens that they are buying a harmless product .
A new marking will not solve this problem .
We simply need sufficient sanctions for misuse of the existing CE marking .
In that way , without incurring high costs , manufacturers will improve their internal quality control and other dangerous products that are on the market will be quickly withdrawn , not just toys .
Significant penalties are incorporated in the Slovak legislation concerning toys , for example ; that is not the situation in the Czech Republic .
At any rate , countries are expected to impose fines for the provision of false information on toys , footwear and other products under their general legislation .
That is why I am asking the Commission to ensure that the Member States assume their responsibilities , for once and for all .
( PT ) The topic under discussion today has been on the agenda ever since the US giant Mattel recalled 21 million toys because they were dangerous .
Today I should like to congratulate the Commissioner for her promise of firmness and action .
I only hope that she will act effectively before the strong euro and the Christmas period combine to flood the European market with dangerous imported toys .
However , we still need clear answers to two questions .
Firstly , if the Mattel affair had not happened , can the Commission assure us that European consumer safety would have merited this attention ?
What specific lessons does the Commission draw from this on the meaning of the ' CE ' marking , the responsibility for control conferred on producers and importers and , in general , on the effectiveness of the enforcement mechanisms in the European market ?
Secondly , this is not a short-term problem .
What is happening with toys is also happening with textiles and many other products .
The European Union 's high standards with regard to the environment , health and quality are in practice constantly being breached by imports , subcontracting and relocation of Europe 's businesses .
How does the Commission intend to overcome that fundamental contradiction in today 's global market ? Thank you .
( SK ) Toys are very sensitive goods that affect human health from an early age .
The news that American toy manufacturer Mattel is withdrawing three million Chinese toys from the market on account of high lead levels and the detachment of small magnets concerned me as a strong advocate of consumer protection and at the same time prompted me to initiate legislation .
The issue of small magnets , which , I should mention , pose a new safety risk that should also be dealt with immediately in a directive on toy safety , must be brought before the European Parliament without further delay .
Within the Rapex system it is necessary to explain its objective so that it is understood by all Member States alike .
It must be stated clearly whether the primary objective of Rapex is to notify the risk posed by a specific dangerous product or to notify identified channels by which dangerous products reach the single European market , which is very time-consuming .
Experience shows that the CE conformity marking does not provide sufficient certainty that the product concerned is in fact safe .
In the case of toys the situation is further complicated by the fact that the manufacturer does not have to issue a declaration of conformity .
To the supervisory authority the CE marking is the only indication as to whether conformity , that is to say de facto safety , has been assessed .
In the debate on whether it is desirable to support or abolish further use of the CE marking I support its retention , provided that entitlement and marking are monitored by the Member States ' supervisory authorities .
I should mention that the consumer public is beginning to perceive this marking as a technical passport for all products entering the single European market .
In drawing up the legislative package relating to the review of the new approach directives known as the ' Goods Package ' , in which I am closely involved as one of the shadow rapporteurs for the PPE-DE political group , it is necessary to discuss in greater detail the need to place further marking on goods , such as the K-markt quality mark already in use , or new marks that would place an excessive burden on undertakings , primarily small and medium-sized businesses , and might be confusing for final consumers .
I believe that together we will succeed in creating effective tools to ensure that this year children only get safe toys for Christmas .
( RO ) Mr. President , the latest voluntary withdrawal of dangerous products manufactured in China raises serious questions related to the correct implementation of the European legislation on consumer protection .
These products bore the EC label , thus facilitating the exportation of the toys to the European market by the Chinese manufacturers .
Many consumers misunderstand the significance of this mark , believing that this symbol is a guarantee that the products were manufactured in Europe .
Nevertheless , giving up the EC mark is not a viable solution , because it represents an advantage for the European manufacturers in international trade .
It is necessary to find an additional label to the already existing one , which would introduce mandatory inspections and drastic penalties for those abusing the EC mark .
In order to prevent any future placing on the market of potentially dangerous products , it is important for the national consumer protection authorities to improve their measures of monitoring and investigating compliance with the EU legislation .
Moreover , national authorities must assure consumers that they have the right to get their money back for the dangerous products they purchased .
( PL ) Mr President , most of the events that have been linked to the withdrawal of toys of Chinese manufacture have centred on excessively high levels of lead .
A short-term solution to this problem is to withdraw post factum all articles that give cause for concern .
But this is a solution that is effective in the short term , and one with many tragic consequences , such as the suicide of the boss of one of the companies that produces the toys .
A much better and more promising solution is to establish a safe limit for the amount of lead in the manufacture of toys , and of other articles too .
Previous arrangements have been based on a recommendation formula which has negligible force , as witnessed by the large discrepancies between the permissible amounts of lead in different Member States .
We have to introduce genuinely binding limits that hold for all EU countries .
Furthermore , as much as I approve of the RAPEX system , I am of the view that the most important thing where the safety of imported toys is concerned is to concentrate on coordinating actions at the level of the whole Community .
Incidentally I would like to point out that the EU should apply thorough monitoring of all products imported from China .
The subject of toys is just one element in a broader problem area .
I would like to use this debate to draw attention to something that appears to have been forgotten .
I do not hear too many voices talking about child safety in China .
Children from this country are frequently exploited for work in inhumane conditions .
The employment of children who are often under ten is universal , for example to work in brickworks .
This is an exceptionally live issue , particularly with the Olympic Games coming up .
According to a report from the International Trade Union Confederation , factories producing gadgets for these Olympics are allowing breaches of employment laws , including the exploitation of small children as slaves .
Although international organisations like the Fair Play Alliance , for example , are concentrating on conditions for the manufacture of souvenirs for next year 's Olympics , I am of the view that the European Parliament should take a stance on this matter .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to say to the two Commissioners that I agree with your view that we have a problem with market surveillance .
This represents a weak point within the internal market today .
The initiatives of the Member States relating to market surveillance are simply not good enough .
For example , in my own country , Denmark , there has been a cut in the funds allocated to general product safety monitoring .
I urgently request that you use all the funds at your disposal to pressure the Member States into doing more in terms of market surveillance .
It is absolutely crucial that we secure and strengthen this .
However , market surveillance alone is not enough .
We also need better rules , and this is something that we are working on at the moment ; this includes the product package for the internal market and subsequently the Toys Directive .
We need minimum rules for market surveillance .
We need to impose stronger requirements on producers and importers , and we need to enforce the consequences of not abiding by the rules applicable to the market .
However , we are working on this and we hope that it will be implemented soon .
( NL ) Mr President , it is good that we as a Parliament are making our voice heard in the discussion that is taking place in the media , as product safety directly affects our citizens and our children .
Mr President , I stand here with a positive attitude , because international trade contributes towards improved prosperity , both here and elsewhere in the world .
China is a major trading partner .
For that reason , we must invest in strong contacts and fair trade relations that benefit China and also our citizens in Europe .
We therefore cannot and must not tolerate non compliance of our trading partners ' products with the safety standards that we have laid down in our legislation .
Approximately half of the warnings in respect of dangerous import products relate to products from China , and not only to toys , but also to toothpaste , body lotion , beds , colour rinses , dog and cat food and even pacemakers .
Mr President , we in Europe must improve the order in our regulations and checks and make appropriate efforts so that safe products are manufactured in China and third countries .
That is of course one of the responsibilities of the manufacturers themselves , who must not aim solely for the lowest price , but it is also the responsibility of our Commissioner for Trade , Mr Mandelson .
I feel that it is commendable that two commissioners are represented here , but would you also please ensure that Commissioner Mandelson places product safety far higher on the agenda for the trade conferences , because it is at these conferences that we can exact measures and must put up a fight .
We must of course also offer technical assistance , but product safety must constitute a major element in trading agreements with , for example , China .
If necessary , we then have an incentive - in other words , sanctions .
Therefore , Commissioner Kuneva , take a firm line in our trade relations too ; involve Commissioner Mandelson , because thus far , he has unfortunately not yet shown appreciation for this topic .
Mr President , one of the first speeches I made in this House 23 years ago was on the then proposal for a Toy Safety Directive .
I welcome the plans now to strengthen that Directive .
But let us make it clear : the Mattel problem would almost certainly be with us with or without a strengthened Toy Safety Directive .
I believe we need three courses of action , which other colleagues have mentioned this morning .
Firstly , we have to push manufacturers to take a greater interest in their supply chain and , if necessary , apply penalties to those who do not take that interest .
Secondly , we need the Commission to bring together the Member States to ensure tougher inspections in Europe , to ensure adequate customs control and to ensure the application of the existing European Union laws .
With China , we know that it does not respond to health and safety concerns , but it does respond to economic threats .
We should consider banning the use of the CE mark on all products from China until it establishes a clearly independent , high-quality accreditation and testing centre or centres in China .
Only then can we have some confidence in the goods that are coming from China , and only through such action will China respond .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , in the summer , Mattel recalled 20 million toys from China , thereby reopening the debate on the value of CE marking and sanctions against operators who do not meet European standards .
What will it take before the EU reacts ?
Brazil has already banned imports .
The United States and Canada are starting an inquiry .
As for us , we are debating .
The Commission must take action .
This means : revising EU legislations on toys before Christmas , insisting on the need for maximum harmonisation ; ensuring that manufacturers comply with safety standards , as well as social and environmental standards - why not introduce a new European label to reinforce CE marking ? ; reviewing the effectiveness of controls and penalising manufacturers if necessary ; clarifying the responsibilities of producers and importers ; stepping up market surveillance through real customs cooperation between Member States .
The responsibility and credibility of the EU in the eyes of consumers is at stake .
How can we encourage consumers to have a positive image of Europe if we cannot restore their confidence ?
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , there are countless unscrupulous manufacturers and company directors around the world who trade within the WTO .
They do not care about the environment any more than about the health of their employees and customers , or that these may be children .
For them , profits must be had at any price .
These are not just Chinese companies and they do not just sell toys .
They must be confronted with institutions and legislation capable of blocking their fraudulent - even criminal - practices .
We have to recognise the weakness of our control systems and question the meaning of CE marking on products marketed in Europe .
This marking should mean that products comply with European legislation and not that they might comply with them , which is misleading for consumers .
CE marking is pointless if it is not based on genuine product safety .
This is what European consumers demand , just as they demand that their health be put before market interests .
To this end , the European Union must be firmer in its negotiations with the WTO .
( PL ) Mr President , what we are doing today is reacting to a critical situation , as we fear for the life and health of our children .
In the proposed resolution we are concentrating chiefly on product safety , the product being a toy .
What we are looking for is for this product to be made according to European standards .
We want better control , we want a safe product , because European consumers , be they large or small , must feel safe .
But this is not the only possible reaction .
Fellow members , a toy is not just a market product , and regarding it from the aspect of safety and price alone is not good enough .
A toy is something more than just another form of goods - it shapes a child 's thoughts , helps it to develop , impacts on its education - which is why I am calling for the Commission , when it reviews the Toy Safety Directive , to bear these things in mind too .
Commissioner , we are using this review to give our children something more than a Chinese product that reflects American popular culture .
Our children must have a wider choice of toys , including toys that have a European spirit to them .
They deserve this .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a batch of toys imported from China turns out to be unsafe .
That requires cooperation with the Chinese authorities .
Work needs to be done at the start of the product chain where this happens .
Multinationals are not without guilt .
They invest in the country because of the cheap labour force .
I expect the Commission to adopt a comprehensive , high quality and safe product policy that is based on the following measures .
I support what my fellow members have said with regard to imposing a rigorous revision of the legislation relating to the CE marking , with liability regulations for importers and facilities for placing sanctions on those that infringe upon the regulations .
Mattel declared that it made a mistake and I therefore expect the Commission to reprimand Mattel heavily .
An agreement must be made within the framework of the WTO to combat unsafe products from China or elsewhere , even those for onward export .
A greater level of cross-border cooperation is required on the part of the market supervisory authorities and customs .
That requires political will and requires financial resources .
These already exist for safety in the workplace and for food safety , so why not for product safety too ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in recent years the approach taken to ' free ' trade has been completely ideological : the single dogma of laissez-faire globalisation .
We now find ourselves struggling with problems such as dangerous products , which is particularly worrying in that toys are involved .
Is there a problem with China ?
Yes !
It concerns the guarantee rules that must be complied with .
Yet we are thinking about an effective guarantee mark that would be in addition to the CE mark and , for products from outside Europe , even the possibility of a recognition mark , the ' made in ' mark .
There is also a problem , however , with Western multinationals manufacturing products in China or elsewhere , which have major responsibilities for safety and control , including for toys ; there is also the problem that products declared to be made in Europe should really be made in Europe .
We cannot ask China to respect employment rights and environmental standards , as it must do , while concealing the fact that our multinationals are also responsible for violations of this kind .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it was really a very interesting and very deep discussion and I am grateful to all of you .
This discussion brought a lot of doubts and a lot of concrete measures , which , in a way , had already been anticipated by the Commission .
I am glad to say this because , as we can confirm , these measures are well elaborated upon together with Parliament .
I believe that , whatever kind of signals we could give , like the resolution you produced , or proposals by the Commission , or trying to intervene with benchmarks from the Commission to compare how the different Member States work on the ground , we can succeed only if there is a common vision for the future , a vision which is based on open societies and free market , and in the first place , when we are talking about consumers , that we will not comprise on consumer safety .
Finally , I should like once more to reiterate that for me this is of the utmost importance and I will not compromise on this issue .
Several of you referred to RAPEX .
RAPEX works 24 hours a day , 7 days a week , which means that there is no delay in notification through RAPEX .
And I would like you to talk to your local communities to advertise RAPEX , because through these notifications we have , in many ways , already prevented dangerous goods from being put on the market .
It is very important to reiterate that by recalling goods , economic operators are complying with an obligation under European legislation .
It is not a matter of good will : it is because general product safety exists in European legislation .
The lead paint in the Mattel case was detected first in the course of the tests carried out on behalf of the European distributor .
So we should never underestimate the efficiency of our RAPEX .
We are also extending RAPEX-China , which is very important .
Just before I finish , I would like to inform you that I asked Mattel what it has done with the recalled toys .
I was thinking about the internet in particular and how those goods could be reached through the internet .
I would like to tell you that all the toys have been destroyed , and this has been confirmed by Mattel .
I think that all of us should assume our obligations , and this is the only way the Community can proceed .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , two more factual clarifications .
Firstly , the European rules on product quality and product safety apply to every product , irrespective of where it is produced .
Regardless of whether a product is produced in China or Europe , if it is brought onto the European market , the same regulations apply 100 % , since there is no distinction at all .
This goes without saying .
Secondly , I will say it once more : obviously , even the old existing Toy Safety Directive bans the importation of dangerous toys .
Toys that Mattel has recalled did not comply with European rules and could not be marketed in Europe .
I now come to the two major complex issues that have played a crucial role in this debate .
First of all , the Toy Safety Directive .
The Commission , of which I am a part , announced the revision of the directive at the beginning of 2005 .
The beginning of 2005 !
Since then it has been part of the Commission 's legislative programme .
This legislative programme has been discussed in this Parliament .
I have not heard that any Member of Parliament has demanded that the new Toy Safety Directive must be in place any sooner .
Nor would this be possible .
This is such a complicated and enormously huge market , that you cannot come up with it just like that .
I guarantee once again : this new Toy Safety Directive will be in place by the end of the year .
The policy instruction to officials , on which they are working , is : the strictest possible regulations in relation to toy safety , the ' strictest possible ' .
This , for instance , expressly includes - because several people have said so here - the fact that I gave instructions , a long time ago and not just now , that carcinogenic , mutagenic and reprotoxic chemical substances should not be used in toys .
There are still more than 900 of them .
All this has already been decided .
Then there is the question of market surveillance and CE marking .
I should say , Mr Sturdy , that it is really not right to blame the Commission for the fact that we respect the legally enshrined division of labour between the European level and the Member States .
Market surveillance is the sole responsibility of the Member States .
What we can do - and this we are doing - is to strengthen and improve cooperation , but we cannot assume responsibility .
A series of requests has been made here as to how we could improve the system .
I am very happy about these requests because they pinpoint precisely what the Commission put to you at the beginning of this year on the reform of the internal market .
It demanded that the Member States should be obliged to carry out market surveillance internally and at external borders - and this is precisely what is stated in our proposals .
The Member States should be forced to make appropriate resources available - this is included in our proposal .
The Member States should be compelled to exchange important information immediately - this is included in our proposal .
And finally , it has been proposed that strict penalties and sanctions be applied to those who breach the rules - this , too , is included in our proposal .
Therefore , as a matter of urgency , I appeal to you , the European Parliament , and to the Council , which not present here , to discuss the Commission 's proposals from the beginning of the year without delay and to adopt them .
Then the greater part of what has rightly been demanded here today will already have been completed .
( Applause )
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 26 September 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the movement of goods is a self-regulating system .
Dangerous toys made in China are a problem for us all .
Many millions have made their way out of Asia and entered Europe and the USA .
Who is responsible for this ?
The manufacturer ?
The sub-contractor ?
The importer ?
Everyone ?
Or no one ?
In the present era of progressive globalisation , nothing could be more wrong than to think that the problems of others have no bearing on us .
The EU is trying to face up to these challenges and has therefore proposed a regulation on marketing of goods .
By the end of the year , a review of the Toy Safety Directive should also have been proposed .
In my opinion , the problem of product marketing is linked to several further questions , and these need to be emphasised :
information for the consumer on goods bought by him / her ; good information is the best consumer protection ,
market surveillance by Member States ,
enhanced cooperation between States ,
a new approach to the CE mark which symbolises a safe product that meets EU requirements .
These are just some of the many suggestions for improving the current situation with regard to product marketing and consumer protection .
We are just at the start of a long road which will end in a market that is free of uncontrolled and hazardous goods .
Much work still lies ahead , but EU legislation is the right way forward and gives us hope that the future will be free of hazards from everyday items and that neither we nor our children will be threatened by them .
in writing . - Consumer safety raises serious concerns among our citizens when threats can be identified endangering the most vulnerable ones , namely : our children .
We ought therefore to address rapidly and transparently these concerns as there cannot be compromises when consumer safety is at stake .
The European Union should indeed ensure thoroughly the respect of its high standards when importing goods from countries with lesser quality production standards like China .
In this respect , the role of RAPEX , the system for the rapid exchange of information on dangerous non-food consumer products ( including dangerous toys ) , is of the utmost importance as the flow of imports from countries like China is enormous .
We thus need detailed and regular reporting and to provide our partners with the necessary consumer safety requirements so that they can effectively track down potentially dangerous products .
Consumers ' trust is essential , we therefore have to further focus on prevention , rapid reaction mechanisms and the effective enforcement of the Union 's standards requirements .
in writing . - The recent recall of millions of toys by US manufacturer Mattel , over safety concerns , including lead content , has raised alarm bells world-wide . This issue is a concern to all , because public health and safety is at stake .
An updated directive is critical to protecting our domestic interests , and children 's health .
I call on the Commission to take action on the problem of dangerous products and consider an alternative regulatory approach .
Chinese authorities must take appropriate action to improve their standards of production , but equally important is the duty of toy companies , who order products from the Far East in order to benefit from lower costs , to ensure that safety standards are met .
Product safety is a matter of public health and this issue needs immediate attention .
1 .
EC-Panama Agreement on certain aspects of air services ( vote )
- Report : Costa
2 .
EC-Kyrgyzstan Agreement on certain aspects of air services ( vote )
- Report : Costa
3 .
EC-Jordan Agreement on certain aspects of air services ( vote )
- Report : Costa
4 .
EC-Israel Agreement on scientific and technical cooperation ( vote )
- Report : Niebler
5 .
Participation of Bulgaria and Romania in the EEC-San Marino Agreement on Cooperation and Customs Union ( vote )
- Report : Markov
6 .
National aid granted by Finland for seeds and cereal seed ( vote )
- Report : Parish
7 .
Excise duty on rum ( vote )
- Report : Galeote
8 .
Road safety : passenger hand-holds on two-wheel motor vehicles ( vote )
- Report : Mayer
9 .
Road safety : stands for two-wheel motor vehicles ( vote )
- Report : Mayer
10 .
Rear registration plate of two or three-wheel motor vehicles ( vote )
- Report : Mayer
11 .
Application of competition rules to transport by rail , road and inland waterway ( vote )
- Report : Mayer
12 .
Rear-view mirrors for wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( vote )
- Report : Mayer
13 .
Roll-over protection structures of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( vote )
- Report : Mayer
14 .
Statistics on education and lifelong learning ( vote )
- Report : Sifunakis
15 .
Development of the Community 's railways ( vote )
- Report : Jarzembowski
16 .
Certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community ( vote )
- Report : Savary
17 .
Rail passengers ' rights and obligations ( vote )
- Report : Sterckx
18 .
Restructuring of the sugar industry ( vote )
- Report : Batzeli
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 :
( DE ) Mr President , this proposal concerns the investment held by farmers in the restructuring fund and the Committee has approved the wording : ' ... 50 % of the relevant restructuring aid ... '
I should like to change it to 25 % .
This has been agreed with the other groups and I hope that this can be adopted .
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
- Before the vote on the legislative resolution :
( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of our Group I would like to request referral back to the Committee in accordance with Article 168 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The reason is that we have just agreed on a 25 % investment by the sugar beet growers in the restructuring fund , but the Commission is insisting on 10 % .
In the latest version the Member States were able to go beyond this .
This too has now been abolished .
We were already considering on the last occasion whether we ought to be asking for referral back to the Committee at this point and therefore allowed ourselves to be satisfied with 10 % .
We ought not to be doing so once again !
Our only opportunity - because we are in a consultation procedure - to get into discussion with the Commission , is to refer the report back now and to negotiate with the Commission and Council .
Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - Mr President , I do not believe it is right to take this back to committee .
I think we want to make the decision .
We need to get on with the restructuring , and so I would not want to bring this back to committee , and I am afraid I am against what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf wants to do .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , I do not agree with the proposal by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
I would like to make myself perfectly clear to the House : we have just voted for a proposal on the basis of which for the first time all producers are being given a lump sum of EUR 260 plus EUR 25 .
Thus the total subsidy is almost in the region of EUR 400 .
From a financial point of view , this is balanced , and I believe that it will help the sector as a whole .
( The request for referral back to committee was rejected . )
19 .
Common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector ( vote )
- Report : Batzeli
- Before the vote on Amendment 1 :
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , allow me to skip reading the technical text of the amendment - provided , of course , you do not agree with the policy issue which I put to you :

Article 10 ( 2 ) of Regulation No 318 / 2006 is about the institution of a possible additional reduction in sugar quotas for the post-2010 period .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposed the amendment in advance , before we could even know the results of the implementation of the new CMO in the Member States and in businesses .
The amendment suggests a linear reduction of 13.5 % in the rate for the post-2010 period .
If , for example , the Commission proposes a reduction of 10 % for the post-2010 period , there will be a problem .
My oral amendment is simply intended to send a message and provide a basic methodology to be adopted for the post-2013 period for a possible additional reduction .
The amendment will take into account the conduct of businesses , i.e. , to what extent businesses have adapted to the status quo and the situation of the Member States .
( The oral amendment was not accepted . )
20 .
Road Map for renewable energy in Europe ( vote )
- Report : Thomsen
- Before the vote on the legislative resolution :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I just want to say that I hope everyone will vote in favour of the resolution as it is very important that we stand together on this issue in the European Parliament .
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the report by my German colleague , Mrs Niebler , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion of the Agreement on Scientific and Technical Cooperation between the European Community and the State of Israel .
I wholeheartedly congratulate the European Commission , which negotiated this Agreement based on the principles of mutual benefit , reciprocal opportunities for participating in each party 's programmes and activities in the areas covered by the Agreement , non-discrimination , effective protection of intellectual property and equitable sharing of intellectual property rights .
I voted in favour of the report by my Spanish colleague , Mr Galeote , on the proposal for a Council decision authorising France to apply a reduced rate of excise duty on ' traditional ' rum produced in its overseas departments and repealing the Council Decision of 18 February 2002 .
The proposed decision authorises France to apply a reduced rate of excise duty on a significant quota of ' traditional ' rum produced in its overseas departments from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2012 .
It increases the volume and duration of the tax arrangements currently applied to traditional rum because the situation has worsened over the last few years .
This is excellent news for cane-sugar-rum sector production , which is crucial to the economic and social balance of these territories .
I am pleased that this vote at first reading without amendment is opening the way to a swift adoption of this text and I recognise the important work done by my French colleague , Mrs Sudre , who staunchly defended this matter in the Committee on Regional Development .
The new tax arrangements take account of the fact that the competitiveness of traditional rum from the overseas departments has deteriorated considerably since 2001 , and that support for the cane-sugar-rum sector is crucial to the economic and social balance of these regions .
The measure is proportional to the additional costs borne by the sector as a result of the handicaps associated with outermost region status , particularly remoteness , the small market and the difficult topography , which explains the high price of sugar cane .
The Commission opportunely took into account that 40 000 jobs depend directly or indirectly on sugar cane cultivation , across a total of 5 500 farms .
The new tax system should also contribute to the maintenance of ten distilleries in Guadeloupe , nine in Martinique , three in Réunion and one in French Guiana , as well as 22 000 jobs directly connected with rum production .
European aid will help ensure a trade outlet for rum from the overseas departments , resisting competition from ACP producers , and will benefit local producers who have been waiting for a positive sign , conscious of the extreme difficulties they face over the next few years , particularly following the devastation wrought by Cyclone Dean in the Antilles last month .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted against Gerardo Galeote 's report today .
France must not be allowed to favour rum producers in its overseas departments by lower taxes than permitted .
The best way to help agriculture in the less developed countries is through tariffs on agricultural products from all countries in the world and by scrapping the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
In addition , excise duties on alcohol serve the purpose of moderating alcohol consumption .
The damaging effects of alcohol are exactly the same when the alcohol is produced in Guadeloupe or Martinique as when it is produced somewhere else .
I voted in favour of the report by my German colleague Mr Mayer on the amended proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on passenger hand-holds on two-wheel motor vehicles ( codified version ) .
I am taking advantage of this explanation of vote to criticise the delay in the codification of European law .
With regard to this matter , the facts date back to 27 March 2003 , when the European Commission presented a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council codifying Council Directive 93 / 32 / EEC on passenger hand-holds on two-wheel motor vehicles .
In its opinion of 26 June 2003 the Consultative Working Party of the legal services set up under the Interinstitutional Agreement of 20 December 1994 on an accelerated working method for official codification of legislative texts stated that this proposal did indeed confine itself to straightforward codification , without any substantive changes to the acts covered by it .
Yet it is only in September 2007 that we are voting on this codification .
This is not right .
I call on the European Commission to accelerate the codification of European law .
I voted in favour of the report by my German colleague Mr Mayer on the amended proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on stands for two-wheel motor vehicles ( codified version ) .
I am taking advantage of this explanation of vote to criticise the delay in the codification of European law .
The facts date back to 28 March 2003 , when the European Commission presented a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council codifying Council Directive 93 / 31 / EEC on stands for two-wheel motor vehicles .
In its opinion of 26 June 2003 the Consultative Working Party of the legal services set up under the Interinstitutional Agreement of 20 December 1994 on an accelerated working method for official codification of legislative texts stated that this proposal did indeed confine itself to straightforward codification , without any substantive changes to the acts covered by it .
Yet it is only in September 2007 that we are voting on this codification .
This is not right .
I call on the European Commission to accelerate the codification of European law .
I voted in favour of the report by my German colleague Mr Mayer on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to the space for mounting the rear registration plate of two or three-wheel motor vehicles ( codified version ) .
I am taking advantage of this explanation of vote to criticise the delay in the codification of European law .
With regard to this matter , the facts date back to 5 September 2006 , when the Commission presented the proposal for the codification of Council Directive 93 / 94 / EEC of 29 October 1993 relating to the space for mounting the rear registration plate of two or three-wheel vehicles .
I do not know whether this was referred to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services set up under the Interinstitutional Agreement of 20 December 1994 on an accelerated working method for official codification of legislative texts .
In any case , it is only in September 2007 that we are voting on this codification .
This is not right .
I call on the European Commission to accelerate the codification of European law .
in writing . - ( PT ) We know that Community education and training statistics were developed in the past decade based on an informal agreement between the Member States as a response to the Council Resolution of 5 December 1994 on the promotion of education and training statistics in the European Union .
Those statistics are compiled by the Member States and forwarded to the Commission ( Eurostat ) annually on a voluntary basis through a joint action carried out with the OECD and the UNESCO Institute for Statistics , usually referred to as the ' UOE data collection ' .
Eurostat also collects data on education , training and lifelong learning through other sources in addition to data on vocational training in enterprises .
Now there is an attempt to have a new legal framework to regulate and formalise the production of Community statistics if there is to be a viable system for producing statistics in these sectors , but there were some gaps and some confusion which it was necessary to clarify during the Parliamentary debate .
The final text therefore appears to ensure greater transparency ; it is also hoped that implementation will not impose undue administrative or financial burdens .
in writing . - ( SK ) I congratulate Nikolaos Sifunakis on his well-prepared report .
I voted unequivocally for the document submitted .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Culture and Education in relation to a proposal to establish a European Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning , I welcome this legislative initiative from the Commission .
I consider it important , in the effort we are making to emphasise education , vocational training and lifelong learning in the context of the Lisbon strategy , to ensure that there is also feedback in response to that effort and concrete steps in the field of education in the European Union .
Comparable statistics will establish a viable system for collating statistical data on education and lifelong learning .
We will have available to us the most meaningful possible statistical information which will help us focus attention on shortcomings or misplaced objectives in implementing Community education policy .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List accepts the Commission 's proposals and the European Parliament 's amendments , provided the EU institutions respect the principle that education policy is a national matter .
However , in Amendment 7 the Committee on Culture and Education of the European Parliament proposes that a reference should also be included to the ' Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ' .
There is no such thing .
The EU Member States have not adopted any such charter .
There was a reference to such a document in the draft Constitutional Treaty , which was rejected through the democratic process in the summer of 2005 .
On the other hand , all the EU Member States have signed the Council of Europe European Convention on Human Rights .
This means that all EU citizens can assert their fundamental freedoms and rights in the European Court of Human Rights .
The EU charter represents the opposite of the ' leaner but keener ' EU which is often mentioned in solemn speeches about subsidiarity .
The EU should concentrate on cross-border matters , but stay away from matters on which the individual Member States can take their own decisions or which are already regulated in other international treaties .
It follows that the proposal for an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights should be rejected , of course along with the ' new ' Treaty for the EU .
in writing . - ( DE ) The statistics prove what we all know : a good education promises a higher income and protection against unemployment .
In this respect it is irresponsible of the EU constantly to allow in a vast number of unskilled migrants , who are then condemned to a life of unemployment and switch to moonlighting , as a result of which the low-wage sector comes under even greater pressure , who turn to crime or ' just ' put pressure on the welfare state .
And if there really is a shortage of skilled workers , we should be training our own people instead of enticing cheap replacements from abroad with Green or Blue Cards , pushing wages down .
On this note it is important to have statistical data in order to be able to respond to undesirable trends .
( DE ) Mr President , I abstained from voting on the Jarzembowski report since high-speed routes in Europe have been extended in recent years , mainly between major cities , and shorter routes have been most appallingly neglected , despite the fact that 90 % of journeys are made on shorter routes .
On the one hand , Brussels is demanding that people become more mobile , and is wanting to shift traffic from road to rail , but on the other hand it is trying to bring into play precisely the opposite development with the magic formula of privatisation .
The EU needs to ensure that common standards and systems facilitate cross-border rail travel and important projects are promoted within the arterial roads .
In the end , however , it must understand that private investors do not have the welfare of the country and its people in mind , but ultimately only their profits and returns on their investment .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Georg Jarzembowski , partly because I hope that our excellent rapporteur will listen to the pensioners in Rome who , when I was leaving for Strasbourg , and knowing that this report was to be voted on , said to me : ' But Mr Fatuzzo , you haven 't given an explanation of your vote for such a long time !
We would like you to tell the European Parliament , even if when you speak everyone is leaving , thinking about their own affairs and chatting , we would like you to tell the President , who is listening to you carefully , that passes should finally be produced for free movement throughout Europe , for the pensioners who want to see Europe with their own eyes after having spent so many years working to build it .
in writing . - ( PT ) The conclusion of the process of negotiation between the EP and the Council on what is euphemistically called ' the development of the Community 's railways ' establishes the beginning of the liberalisation of international passenger services from 1 January 2010 .
We would point out that in previous readings in the EP we tabled proposals for rejection of this European Commission initiative .
However , the majority of the EP voted in favour of speeding up the liberalisation ( and privatisation ) of rail passenger services and attempted to include national passenger services as from 2017 .
That attempt was not , however , successful and did not obtain the majority required for adoption .
The liberalisation of rail transport is an attempt to hand over the ( most profitable ) lines to large private interests by privatising the operation of those lines ( in particular by means of concessions ) , promoting the creation of monopolies at the expense of public funds .
Rail transport is a strategic sector for a country 's development because of its important role in the movement of goods and in the mobility of workers and of the population in general , and it has enormous benefits for the environment and for social and territorial cohesion .
What is required is the promotion and development of public rail transport systems in the various countries , not their privatisation .
That is why we voted against it .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting for liberalisation of international transport as from 2010 .
Two years after the law comes into force at the latest , the European Commission should examine the impact of the directive and discussion on opening it up further will then take place .
Competition will thus be allowed to a limited extent and national suppliers will not be at risk .
I am relieved that the European Parliament has argued against the automatic liberalisation of national rail transport in 2017 .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Georg Jarzembowski 's report on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 91 / 440 / EEC on the development of the Community 's railways and Directive 2001 / 14 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure .
The Third Railway Package constitutes a very important element of the regulations on transport .
International passenger transport networks need to be opened up , and the European Commission should analyse the situation in the international passenger transport market with a view to taking a decision on further liberalisation which also covers national transport .
in writing . - ( SV ) I welcome the possibility of cross-border train traffic , but for a market to function properly competition must be on equal terms .
It is therefore unfortunate that the EU is forcing through legislation under which countries that have not yet deregulated railway transport are to be given the right to compete with operators on a deregulated market where international train services are concerned .
In practice this proposal gives state-aided railway companies the possibility of competing on a market where there is free competition , which in the long term poses the risk of deactivating market mechanisms .
I have therefore chosen to vote against this report .
State-aided railway companies should not be allowed to compete on a market with free competition .
in writing . - ( PT ) The proposal for a directive on the ' forms part of the ' Third Railway Package ' , which aims principally to promote the liberalisation of international rail passenger services .
Here too , it should above all be stressed that the first objective of this directive will be , through harmonisation , to remove any obstacles to the liberalisation of international rail passenger services which might derive from different rules on professional requirements in the sector within each country .
The measure will also favour worker mobility in the sector .
In addition to the important set of questions which such a directive poses , it must be stressed that the adoption of harmonised rules at Community level on the certification of workers in the rail sector of each country must never jeopardise more progressive rights or standards already established at the level of each Member State , or deny the prerogative of each Member State to establish those rights and standards .
Here , too , reality shows that it is the liberalisation and privatisation of rail services which has jeopardised workers ' rights and reduced the number of workers in the rail sector , with serious consequences for the level of service provided .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting for a standard driving licence for train drivers .
The harmonisation of training for drivers will also ensure greater safety in future on the railways .
A minimum age of 20 and an appropriate school education and language training are now compulsory as conditions for being allowed to work as a train driver in international rail transport .
The standardisation of training is key to a European rail network .
The driving licence issued in a Member State will be recognised in future by all the other Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) The ' Third Railway Package ' , which aims principally to promote the liberalisation of international rail passenger services , contains a regulation on ' rail passengers ' rights and obligations ' .
Above all , we can state that the essential aim of this regulation is to remove any obstacles to the liberalisation of international rail passenger services which might derive from different rules on passengers ' rights and obligations in the various countries .
In addition to stressing this first point - which is the central issue - we certainly consider that it is essential to safeguard passengers ' rights , starting with the right to a public rail transport service provided by public undertakings in each country .

Reality shows that it is the liberalisation and privatisation of rail services that jeopardise passengers ' rights : they have led to a deterioration in the services offered to the public and in the conditions for passenger mobility as well as an increase in fares ; they have meant the loss of hundreds of kilometres of track , station closures , a reduction in the number of workers in the rail sector and a threat to their pay and to labour rights .
This is a disastrous policy opposed by workers and the public .
in writing . - I supported this report on the conciliation agreement on regulation of the rights and obligations of rail passengers .
This was originally intended to apply only to passengers on international journeys , and I am pleased that our views have been heeded , and that the rules will now include passengers on domestic journeys too .
From 2009 , a reasonable set of basic rights will apply , including the right to accessible transport for people with reduced mobility .
In addition , I welcome the fact that a scheme of compensation in the event of delays will be introduced .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting for a new passenger regulation as from 2009 .
Among other things , the regulation governs compensation for major delays , companies ' liability for passengers and their luggage , transport of disabled people and the information to be supplied by the rail companies .
In practical terms this means that , in the future , when there is a delay in cross-border transport of between 60 and 119 minutes , customers will be entitled to a refund of 25 % of the fare .
This rises to 50 % for delays of more than two hours .
This does means more legal claims , but also greater certainty for rail customers .
It is now also up to the Member States to extend these rules to their national transport networks as soon as possible and not just after 15 years .
in writing . - This report on rail passengers ' rights and obligations should be welcomed .
in writing . - ( SV ) Although the latest proposal does not impose such stringent requirements on train operators as previous ones , it still contains much too extensive provisions on everything from how tickets can be purchased ( by telephone , on the internet and from ticket machines ) to the liability of train operators for damage to passengers ' luggage .
There is also detailed regulation of various forms of compensation in the event of delays ( compensation levels , entitlement to meals etc . ) and minimum requirements for information on what may be the cause of any delays .
I chose to vote against the proposal because the operators must be allowed to develop their own services on the basis of the protection which passengers themselves demand ( and are prepared to pay for in the form of higher fares ) .
Furthermore the wide-ranging regulations are not proportionate to the value added which will be created by the replacement of regulations that already exist at Member State level in those countries which have opted for national legislation .
in writing . - ( DE ) Liberalisation of railways is not an end in itself ; it must serve users and improve efficiency .
Liberalisation in international transport is a natural thing because no one country should be able to close itself off from another .
In national transport there can be no sense and no purpose in exposing the profitable lines to competition during liberalisation , whilst at the same time leaving the unprofitable lines to the public sector , with no compensation .
With this in mind , I am anxiously awaiting the application of the recently adopted regulation on public passenger transport .
Parliament was able to stand up to the Member States and the rail companies for the rights of passengers , which is a huge success for the citizens of the EU .
Particularly in transit countries like Belgium , a difference between international and national passengers would make no sense and would be unfair .
In this sense , the third railways package represents a step in the right direction , even though it will certainly not be the last .
in writing . - I will be voting for the compromise agreed by our rapporteurs with the Council of Ministers because I believe it is a step forward for the railway industry throughout the European Union , and is the best deal available to Parliament at this time .
However , the slow pace with which the railway industry works is not only frustrating but also acts as a very effective brake on the kind of radical action that is required to galvanise railways in many of our Member States .
A wide gulf exists between the railways of say France and Germany with those of Bulgaria and Romania .
This gap needs to be closed if we are to be serious about developing a railway system that is clearly Europe-wide .
Finally , whilst I welcome the agreement that all railways should be fully accessible within 15 years , is it not a sad fact and an indictment on our railway industry that many people of reduced mobility do not have access to their railway in the 21st century ?
The railway industry is caught in a philosophy of ' can 't do ' rather than one of ' can do ' .
I hope this package of measures at least moves us away from negativity and starts a more positive era for our railways .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 )
( PL ) We have given our opinion on changes to the previous reform of the EU sugar market .
This reform was drawn up in 2005 and was supposed to restore equilibrium in this market .
Sadly I have the impression that all these proposals are considerably restricting sugar beet growing in order to carve out a place for cane sugar .
I am fundamentally opposed to this .
We cannot allow traditional sugar beet growing and sugar production in the European Union to be eliminated .
I think that the new proposal put forward by the European Commission in May 2007 , which is intended to provide incentives for the withdrawal of almost 3.8 million tonnes of sugar from the EU market , will again fail to bring about the anticipated results .
If it comes to the threatened mandatory reduction in quotas in 2010 , quota cuts cannot take into account changes in the size of quotas given up previously , voluntarily and for payment , to the restructuring fund , since in line with the aim of the reform , restrictions on production took place in less competitive regions , following receipt of appropriate financial compensation .
( CS ) Mr President , unfortunately the proposed sugar reform has no positive outcome .
This is due to the fact that , although the sugar reform seems to be based on economic factors , when the interested parties consider leaving the market they tend to take other factors into account .
Although the Czech Republic produces sugar on a profitable basis , we still renounced 22 % of the quota : this quota is in the hands of Western Europe .
Unfortunately , the measures proposed may have a negative impact on the Czech Republic .
The same factors that make sugar production in our country profitable and give us the edge , such as the fact that the holdings of individual sugar beet growers are higher on average , may , in the light of these proposals , become a disadvantage if the farmers have the right to leave the market .
A situation whereby those who need no subsidies to survive are leaving the market is hardly desirable .
In this regard , the reform is moving in the wrong direction .
That is why I voted against both reports by the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , when the vote was held today I voted , together with my colleagues in the Czech Civic Democratic Party , against the reports by the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli , on the reform of the sugar regime .
So far this reform has damaged the Czech Republic : many sugar factories have closed and machinery and technology have lost their value .
For many centuries my country had a tradition of sugar production and export .
Now , because of a poor European Union policy , we have become a net sugar importer ; that is the result of incompetent decision-making in Brussels .
The Czech Republic has already decreased its sugar production by more than 20 % .
Other Member States of the European Union should do the same now , particularly the states that have not yet decreased their production at all .
These are the reasons why I voted against the reform .
( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , the restructuring of the sugar industry and the changes in the organisation of the markets in the sugar sector are necessary .
However , it is possible that the Commission 's proposal will not solve problems but create even more in some countries ' sugar market .
If a country is not able to set the priority order of criteria for the acceptance of growers ' applications itself , taking into account farm productivity and the amount of production , it is possible that not only farms with the lowest productivity but also the competitive growers will stop producing sugar beet .
In Lithuania 's situation , sugar factories may face a shortage of raw sugar and this would have negative economic and social consequences .
Moreover , the Commission has not considered Lithuania 's proposal to reduce the quota until 2010 , taking into account not only whether a Member State voluntarily reduces its production quota , but also whether it has bought a supplementary production quota .
I would encourage the Commission to take account of the remarks made .
Incidentally , I abstained in the vote on this project .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted against Parliament 's report on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector .
Basically we are favourably disposed to a reform of the Community sugar sector .
However , we do not think that Parliament 's proposed amendments add anything positive to the Commission proposal .
We think that they pose the risk of cost increases in a sector of agriculture which is already far too large , something that we Swedish Social Democrats can never support .
In addition , we think that export subsidies for sugar must be completely removed in the long term .
Subsidies which continue to be paid to agriculture should be given in the form of direct aid entirely decoupled from production .
As part of the reform of the common market organisation for sugar , the European Union wanted to help refineries adapt to the restructuring of the European sugar industry by granting EUR 150 million in ' transitional aid ' .
I was delighted with this initiative , which among other things should help the Saint-Louis Sucre refinery in Marseille meet the new conditions on the sugar market without resorting to job cuts .
However , I also alerted the competent French and European authorities to the lack of transparency in the criteria for allocating this aid , which is the responsibility of the Member States .
Currently , this aid is not granted with the intention of maintaining the refining industry or preserving jobs .
Neither is there any guarantee that this aid will not be used as an ' incentive to relocate ' to countries outside the EU .
The new reform should have been an opportunity to clarify this point .
Regrettably , this has not been the case .
The matter is now in the hands of the Council .
I am calling for greater vigilance from the Council , particularly of the French authorities , so that this issue , which affects the jobs of our fellow citizens can finally be clarified .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List supports a radical reform of the sugar markets in the EU with a view to liberalising them as quickly as possible and giving sugar-producing countries outside the EU the chance to compete on fair terms .
The amendments proposed by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Affairs in this report are nothing more than a further attempt to impede the rate of reform as much as possible so that a protectionist trade policy can continue .
The amendments would also mean an increase in the cost of the industrial restructuring of existing refineries which the reform would involve , at the same time as more generous direct compensation to players on the sugar market .
The June List can never give its backing to a report which frustrates the purposes of reforms to the sugar market in the EU and which would inevitably dilute those reforms as well as jeopardise their completion .
We oppose blatant attempts to renege on commitments which have been made to less developed countries .
For the above-mentioned reasons , therefore , we vote against this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Reality has shown that in this as in other sectors , persuading small growers to renounce quotas and abandon production - as proposed for sugar beet and sugar production - with a view to promoting competition , has adverse effects ; it accentuates development inequalities and will increase poverty and the exodus from the countryside .
We therefore object to the European Commission 's proposals and stress the need to reverse this policy and take account of the specific reality of the Member States and their production needs .
We therefore support food sovereignty and hence consider it unacceptable that a country such as Portugal , with only very limited sugar production , scarcely able to supply half the country 's consumption need should be confronted with the obligation to reduce its quota for sugar produced from sugar beet .
We consider it essential for the liberalising trend seen in successive CAP reforms to be reversed and measures to be taken to maintain national sugar beet production , supporting agriculture that is essentially focused upon food production and thus helping to safeguard the two factories ' production as well as employment .
in writing . - ( CS ) The European Union is often justifiably criticised for interfering in a range of industrial sectors .
Particularly controversial is its interference in the affairs of the food processing industry .
It is true that some Member States create their own problems .
A classical example is the strenuous effort by a number of countries in Central and Eastern Europe to liquidate cooperative farms even though they are prosperous .
In the Czech Republic several amended laws governing cooperative farming have been trying to achieve exactly this .
Many cooperative farms have fallen apart and others have transformed into different legal entities .
At the same time production has decreased in a range of industries , for example in the sugar beet growing industry .
Furthermore , processing has unfortunately become detached from production as a result of privatisation .
Most sugar factories have been acquired by foreign parties .
This has resulted led to a disastrous situation in the sugar industry in the Czech Republic : the profits end up in the pockets of the foreigners while the losses hit the people of the Czech Republic .
There has been more than a 20 % decrease in sugar production in a country that had been exporting sugar for 150 years .
Now the country must begin to import sugar and at the same time look for new opportunities for the farms that have been growing sugar beet until now .
This untenable situation is not solved by Mrs Katerina Batzeli 's reports ; however , we voted in favour of them because they at least draw attention to the unsatisfactory situation .
I would add a word of warning to those who see today 's texts as a solution to the problem .
I trust that we will return to the sugar issue and that the next time we will be able to respond more successfully to our farmers ' needs .
in writing . - I support the report on reform of the sugar sector , although there are some areas of concern with this report .
I do not agree with the report in its intent to apply the process of withdrawal of sugar surplus to cane refiners .
This is in contrast to the Commission proposal to exclude cane refining from the withdrawal process .
As the refiners are not directly part of the restructuring scheme , to reduce by withdrawal the refiners ' traditional supply needs ( TSNs ) would have no effect on reducing the surplus of sugar on the EU market , because the EU would still have to meet its international obligation to import specified quantities of raw sugar from ACP countries .
The amendment would , however , tend to weaken the impact of the measure in providing incentives to beet processors to dismantle their plant .
in writing . - I shall be voting in favour of the report that has been prepared by Ms Batzeli , because it is quite obvious that a restructuring of the sugar industry is required .
My only concern relates to Amendment 31 , which , if passed , would still commit the European Commission to keeping the existing fund open up to 2011 , and would be a negative aspect of this restructuring process .
This report , whilst not perfect , nevertheless strikes a balance between the needs of the producers and the obvious need to reform this sector .
My only concern regards the effect any restructuring could have on sugar cane producers from developing countries .
At all costs we must avoid a restructuring that protects beet producers at the expense of cane producers and I would hope that the Commission will ensure that this does not happen , whilst still being fair to our own farmers .
in writing . - When voting on agriculture reports such as this report on sugar , Members with a financial interest should declare it or decline from voting .
We should support the EU 's commitment to achieving the ambitious goal of generating 20 % of total energy consumed in Europe from renewable sources by 2020 .
Renewable energy offers numerous advantages for Europe : lower CO2 emissions , reduced European dependency and a contribution to job creation and growth .
However , we need to monitor the development of all renewable energy from the point of view of sustainability , depending of course on the capacities of the Member States , as well as saving energy through lower consumption and increased energy efficiency .
I regret that the Directive on electricity from renewable energy sources does not make cogeneration compulsory and will lead to the building of large-scale biomass power stations without cogeneration , which are not energy efficient and destabilise the market in timber for both industrial and energy generation purposes .
There are examples of this in my own region , Limousin .
I am pleased therefore that the European Parliament is asking for a proposal on the heating and cooling sectors to be central to the future Framework Directive on renewable energies and I therefore voted in favour of the Thomsen Report .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Thomsen report on the Roadmap for Renewable Energy in Europe , since I believe that increasing investment in renewable energy is essential to reduce the European Union 's external energy dependence , cut CO2 emissions , and therefore help to combat climate change .
This report underscores the importance of the sustainable use of biofuels in the transport sector in order to reduce oil dependency and greenhouse gas emissions , thus lessening the environmental impact .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is a very unbalanced report , despite some positive changes compared with previous reports , in particular in that it admits that fossil energy sources will inevitably run out in the near future - although it makes no mention of high oil prices - and in that it recognises the environmental and social harm associated with the recently deified agrofuels .
However , it then forgets the need for a different set of energy policy priorities geared towards reducing costs for consumers , rationalising consumption in order to reduce it ( and not merely through energy efficiency ) , less polluting public transport and a public policy that is genuinely in the peoples ' interest .
The idea of setting up a Common European Energy Policy is an attempt to find ways of providing greater support for the sector 's private financial groups , overriding the sovereign right of every Member State to set its own energy policies .
It also omits to analyse gaseous biofuels ; it fails to stress the need to encourage research into and development of biogas and does not mention the Target 2020 Programme .
That is because the main objective of the report is to guarantee ever greater profits , specifically by using the market in greenhouse gas emissions trading .
I voted in favour of this report , which encourages Member States to take the necessary measures to increase the share of renewables in their energy mix .
Renewables must become the ' stepping stone ' to reaching the dual objective of increased security of supply and reduced greenhouse gas emissions .
The energy efficiency objective should not be seen as a precondition for achieving the 20 % renewables target by 2020 , but as a condition in its own right .
This will create new jobs and encourage research and innovation in the energy sector .
I am thinking for example of research into increasing access to environmentally-friendly housebuilding materials .
Renewable energy is one of the best ways of protecting consumers and industry from the dual effects of increased energy imports and rising fuel costs .
Finally , I am pleased about freedom to choose the most appropriate renewable energy sources given that the potential to develop certain renewable energies varies because of the particular geological , hydrological and climatic conditions in each Member State .
in writing . - I supported the Thomsen report and strongly believe that more effort should be directed towards the promotion of renewable energy .
My own country , Scotland , has immense potential in the field of renewable energy and the Scottish government has recently signalled its intention to promote as diverse a range of renewable technologies as possible .
I believe that Scotland 's efforts have a vital role to play in the EU 's targets for renewable technology .
I voted against setting a 10 % target for plant fuels , and in favour of calls for a full impact assessment before considering any possible biofuels target .
Biofuel production can accelerate global warming by speeding up the destruction of forests , peatlands , healthy soils and other ecosystems which are carbon sinks and which help to regulate the climate .
in writing . - ( CS ) I adore amateur performances .
It does not matter much what subject the amateur covers , with his ideological blinders on : the result is always the same .
A black and white description of reality ; ecstatic conclusions divorced from the world of facts .
In addition , in the course of practical application sometimes there are high costs and ' unexpected problems ' .
Especially charming are the speeches by some of my fellow Members on such attractive topics as biomass and biofuels , which consume high levels of energy during the transportation of raw materials , processing and product distribution : as experience shows , this is a basic fact .
In order to reduce costs we should build small production units supplying local neighbourhoods with alternative fuels .
I must stress that these sources cannot provide the solution to our power supply situation .
They only offer a relatively slight improvement on the current situation .
The same is true of the rainwater harvesting systems that are becoming very popular and a number of other renewable energy resources .
In the next 10 years large cities and industry will depend on large-scale energy production and on natural gas .
If we want to meet the Kyoto Protocol commitments , the countries with a rapidly growing gross domestic product will also have to build large power plants .
This can mean only one thing : more nuclear power plants .
Otherwise the European Union will soon become highly dependent on energy imports .
The daydreams of romantic amateurs will not change this fact .
in writing . - ( IT ) I supported the Thomsen report , which confirms the need to obtain 20 % of energy from renewable energy sources by 2020 .
This will be a major challenge for every European country , and we must no longer seek to evade the challenge or require only the most virtuous and far-seeing Member States to meet it .
I think differentiated national objectives need to be set , allocated fairly with regard to the existing levels of renewable energies , the energy mix and the differing development potentials that result from varied climate , geological and territorial conditions in the Member States .
Renewable sources represent the future .
Investment in innovation and technology will need to be huge in order to allow Europe to resolve the problem of energy dependency within a reasonable time-frame , guaranteeing affordable prices for users .
I believe , however , that we ought to be pragmatic , and avoid succumbing to hypocrisy .
Imagining that the production of renewable energy will by itself allow us to meet such ambitious targets is unrealistic , although the preconceptions and often ideological ideas of certain left-wing and Green politicians may convince us otherwise .
What can save Europe in the medium term is an energy mix which also includes energy sources that are not wholly renewable , such as nuclear power , which , like it or not , accounts for one third of Europe 's electricity production .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( NL ) In view of the fact that our party , the Dutch Socialist Party , attaches great importance to renewable energy sources and feels that action must be taken on a much wider scale in this respect , we have not voted against this report .
However , it contains a few very negative issues .
We strongly reject nuclear energy as a sustainable , renewable source of energy .
In addition , we are opposed to the idea that energy markets must be liberalised at European level .
Finally , we are of the opinion that solar energy , wind energy and water energy are better alternatives to biofuels .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Commission 's proposal to set a production target of 20 % of total energy from renewable sources , which must be achieved by each Member State and must be included in national action plans , would have been acceptable were it aiming to meet people 's needs , reduce energy dependency , save energy , protect the environment and confirm that energy products are a public asset and not a commodity .
The EU guidelines , however , are aimed at profitability for investors and using renewable energy to pave the way for private capital , while guaranteeing the profitability of renewable energy .
Although renewable sources of energy are natural and inexhaustible , and they contribute to reducing the use of pollutants , the environment continues to be ruined in the name of profit .
An example is the uncontrolled promotion of wind farms for private profit , even in areas protected by NATURA .
As a result , the environment is a hypocritical pretext concealing the liberalisation of the energy sector and its effects on the people 's interests .
Energy is being dealt with as a commodity rather than as a common asset .
As for biofuels , it is a provocation to use food products for energy and not to feed the hungry when millions of people are starving to death .
in writing . - ( DE ) Even though the promotion of renewable energy is important , this should not be a pretext in relation to the EU Constitution for reducing even further the sovereign rights of Member States by the back door .
Since this point has unfortunately not found its way into the present report , and no clarification has been made , I must therefore reject the present report .
Concentration on expensive nuclear power plants has obstructed the development of other energy technologies for far too long .
The nuclear research budget is still seven to eight times higher compared with funds for renewable energy sources and energy efficiency .
If the EU really is serious about renewable energy sources with its roadmap , it must provide a fairer distribution of subsidies here , but there is no indication of this in the report on which we are voting either .
in writing . - ( PT ) Increasing consumption is a sign of a generalised ( if not always balanced ) improvement in living conditions .
Measures aimed at combating the negative effects of increasing consumption should therefore bear in mind that one of the factors in the equation - that growth cannot be altered .
That then leaves the possibility of acting on two fronts : rationalising of consumption and improving the efficiency ( particularly energy efficiency ) of what we produce .
That means that much of what we need to try to achieve depends upon research and innovation .
The approved resolution quite rightly stresses that ' renewable sources of energy are a key element in a sustainable energy mix , contributing to : reduced import dependency and diversification of the fuel mix ; lower CO2 and other emissions ; the development of new innovative technologies ; and employment and regional development opportunities ' ; one of the conclusion 's drawn is that greater use should be made of the EU 's research and technology programmes to encourage the development of renewable energy technologies .
To sum up : I agree with the approach taken and am in favour of increasing investment to this end .
That is the main reason why I voted in favour of the report .
We fully support the promotion of renewable energy , whether for transport , heating or electricity generation .
Like all our fellow Members , we see it as a way of protecting the environment , but also of reducing our energy dependence .
However , we cannot support Mrs Thomsen 's report .
First of all , her real aim is not ecological or even economic , it is dogmatic : as indicated in the explanatory statement , the aim is to introduce a common European energy policy , and this must take precedence over everything else .
However , energy policy , a matter of sovereignty and independence , should fall solely under national competence . In no way does this prevent cooperation and solidarity .
In addition , the proposals in the report do not seem sufficient to guarantee that national circumstances will be properly taken into account : not only geographical characteristics , but also specific economic constraints .
The text is also silent on the ways of helping countries that are least advanced in this area to achieve a binding , universal target .
I say yes to renewables , but not as a pretext for extending the powers of the European Union .
in writing . - Renewable energy in Europe is an important issue , which , in my mind , does not get the recognition it fully deserves .
In this era of energy crisis , global warming and diminishing stocks of the most traditional fossil fuels , it is right that Parliament should examine a better use of renewable energy .
However , I would also like to point out that we still have large reserves of coal throughout the EU and , with the development of clean coal technology , I pose the question whether or not our abandonment of coal , as a source of energy , was premature ?
I will support this report , but I think we must be realistic in what can be achieved with wind or wave energy , especially when matched up with the ever-increasing energy demands of the EU .
I think it is right to ask the Commission to draw up action plans involving renewable energy including wind , wave and solar power generation , as well as developing a strategy for biofuels .
Although in regard to this , we must ensure that we do not save the planet , environmentally , only to see its population starve to death , which is why the committee 's call for a fair balance between food and energy production is a correct stance to take .
in writing . - In my country , Ireland , residential energy accounted for about 25 % of the total final energy consumption .
A large proportion of this energy accounted for was connected to the consumption of energy for heat .
Energy consumption in the domestic sector is greater than necessary , as people living in inefficient dwellings must consume more energy to heat their homes .
Improving a household 's energy efficiency status can often be achieved by taking some relatively simple and inexpensive steps , such as fitting thermostatic valves onto radiators or using more energy efficient household appliances .
Other measures include installation of full central heating systems , or the provision of insulation in cavity walls or lofts .
These latter options can be more disruptive in the short term , but their impact is long lasting .
I would like to call on governments to promote insulation in housing and the other measures that I have mentioned .
In promoting these measures one can save in energy costs whilst helping the environment .
The VAT reduction on renovation should be promoted by governments .
Better insulation would cut the residential energy consumption down by up to 5 % .
in writing . - I can vote for this report and believe that its overall objectives are balanced against the back-drop of continued concern over energy security .
Renewables are an important aspect of our future electricity generation but still we need to work with existing energy production .
If the EU can put its emphasis on the technology necessary to take it into the 21st century , it will also enjoy a competitive edge in this sector in the years to come .
in writing . - ( NL ) The report on the roadmap for renewable energy is a clever piece of work .
It clearly states that the coming years are crucial and that a legislative framework is needed to support the codecision procedure in order to raise the current share of 7 % renewable energy in the energy mix to 20 % in 2020 .
The report rightly emphasises the enormous potential of offshore wind energy : a possible contribution of 15 % of the total EU energy demand by 2020 , which could lead to the creation of 368 000 jobs .
The necessary question marks have rightly been placed alongside the development of biofuels , certainly in relation to the necessity for sustainable production methods and the reasonable balance between food and energy production .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would have put it somewhat more sharply and therefore request that a serious analysis be carried out into the effects of biofuels on the climate , the environment , the social structure and a secure food supply .
It is unfortunate that in the report , the target for biofuels remains unchanged at 10 % .
Another minus point in the report is Recital E , in which the nuclear lobby proposes nuclear energy as a ' bridge ' technology .
The Greens disagree with this and therefore submitted Amendment 2 .
Overall , this is a thorough report that merits our support .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.35 a.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Implementation of the Council decision on the moratorium against death penalty ( debate )
The next item is the Council statement on the implementation of the Council decision on the moratorium against the death penalty .
Madam President , I am very pleased to be here today speaking on an issue that is central to our common European values .
Opposition to the death penalty is an integral part of the EU 's human rights policy and was the subject of the first EU human rights guidelines .
Those guidelines , as you well know , ladies and gentlemen , have since 1998 set out the main aspects of the EU approach to that question , thus crystallising our well-known opposition to the death penalty .
We might recall the Union 's objectives on the death penalty , as enshrined in the guidelines .
The first objective is to work towards universal abolition of the death penalty as the policy view agreed and strongly held by all EU Member States .
The second objective is , for countries where the death penalty still exists , to call for its use to be progressively restricted and to insist that it be carried out according to minimum international standards .
I am very pleased to be in this Chamber today to tell you of the latest developments in our fight to abolish the death penalty .
As you know , we recently launched an important initiative to promote these EU objectives .
I am , of course , referring to the Council 's decision of 18 June this year in which the European Union committed itself to introducing a resolution against the death penalty at the 62nd UN General Assembly as part of a cross-regional alliance .
Parliament called for the European Union to take such an initiative in two resolutions adopted this year in February and in April .
Since the opening of the third session of the United Nations General Assembly is rapidly approaching , I realise that you will want to know how the Council has been preparing for that event .
I shall tell you a little more in a few moments about the preparations we have in hand .
Before that , let me look back briefly over the period of almost 10 years since the guidelines on the death penalty were adopted .
I should stress that we have achieved a great deal since 1998 .
We have developed a broad range of instruments in our campaign against the death penalty , from political action by means of demarches , declarations and multilateral diplomacy to financial support through the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights , an instrument created essentially thanks to the efforts of the European Parliament .
For example , between 1 July 2006 and 30 June 2007 , the European Union made general demarches on the death penalty in 28 countries , from Bahrain to Zambia ; we also made demarches on individual cases in various countries from Yemen to Iran ; furthermore , there are frequent EU declarations on this subject .

To give you an example which received fairly wide media coverage : in August this year the European Union issued a declaration on the 400th execution in Texas .
I should also like to point out that the death penalty is also on the agenda of the human rights dialogues and consultations which we hold with third countries and we do not shy away from raising the question with any of them .
Our confidence in effective multilateralism also takes the form of tireless action against the death penalty within the United Nations and other international bodies .
Every year from 1997 to 2005 , the European Union submitted a resolution on the death penalty to the UN Commission on Human Rights and , re-launching our action in December 2006 , the EU submitted a statement on the death penalty at the United Nations General Assembly initially bearing 85 signatures and later signed by 10 more countries .
The Presidency of the European Union reiterated that December 2006 declaration at the opening of the fourth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2007 .
Despite the continuing concern about the use of the death penalty , we are very pleased to note a global trend towards abolition or introducing a moratorium on the death penalty .
More than half the countries in the world have already abolished capital punishment either by law or in practice : 133 countries , according to Amnesty International .
I should like to believe that the European Union , including of course the European Parliament , has played a role , if only a modest one , in that trend towards abolition through our systematic and sustained action over the years .
This brief list of the European Union 's actions against the death penalty is proof of our commitment to this cause and let me stress that we acknowledge that the European Parliament has been a loyal ally in our work , which brings me back to our current agenda item , that is , the resolution for the UN General Assembly calling for a moratorium and the abolition of the death penalty .
This initiative confirms that the European Union is at the forefront of abolitionist efforts throughout the world and that it will continue to oppose the death penalty in all cases and under any circumstances , since it considers it to be a cruel and inhuman punishment .
There is a lot to be gained with this initiative , but also a lot to lose if we are not successful .
We must not forget that this is our third attempt , I repeat , our third attempt to obtain a resolution on the death penalty at the United Nations General Assembly following our two failures in 1994 and 1999 .
What is at stake is nothing more and nothing less than our credibility as leaders of the global efforts to abolish the death penalty .
That was why the Council considered it necessary to be well prepared and to have enough time to form a cross-regional alliance .
That would not have been possible at the time of the 61st General Assembly , as some of you would have preferred .
It was not only the Council 's experts who were of that opinion .
Several NGOs which lead the fight in this field , such as the Coalition Against the Death Penalty , asked us not to be too hasty in submitting the resolution but to wait long enough to guarantee its success .
That was exactly the path we followed .
The Council decision of 18 June to introduce a resolution at the 62nd session of the United Nations General Assembly marked the beginning of a new phase in the multilateral sphere .
The Council , the Presidency and the Member States have each played their role to put the Council 's decision into practice .
Even before the summer holiday the CFSP Working Party on Human Rights had decided on the approach to be taken - that is , for the EU Member States to agree on a draft text and , in a second phase , find other co-authors from various regions of the world ; that was done , so that at the end of August there was a first meeting with all the co-authors in New York .
Within the space of two weeks agreement was reached on the wording .
We are now launching a lobbying campaign to have co-sponsors of our draft resolution .
As I speak , our embassies throughout the world are sounding out possible supporters of our initiative .
We are doing everything possible to win maximum support in order to make this resolution a success .
In that spirit , ladies and gentlemen , I ask for your confidence and support to enable us to carry out that process .
You will certainly be aware how difficult political negotiations can be .
You will therefore understand that the Presidency needs a certain degree of flexibility and room for manoeuvre to manage and find the appropriate timetable for an initiative of such complexity , because this is a cross-regional initiative and the co-authors must also review the text and the strategy of this resolution ; moreover , we must quickly make contact with a large number of possible co-sponsors , so that the initiative gains weight .
We have embarked upon a campaign which is also a great challenge , but I am convinced that if we take concerted action we shall make this initiative a success .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( LT ) Madam President , Commissioner , Secretary of State , ladies and gentlemen , today here in the European Parliament we are returning to the issue of a moratorium on capital punishment .
We have already considered this issue twice over the last year , with two resolutions on the implementation of a global moratorium on capital punishment being adopted ( on 1 February and 26 April ) .
We can only regret that in the case of each of these resolutions the European Parliament addressed the Council , encouraging it to submit the resolution to the General Assembly of the United Nations , but the Council has not yet done so .
The Council could do this before the start of the session of the 62nd General Assembly and it would be possible to adopt the resolutions before the end of this year .
Capital punishment is a cruel and inhuman kind of punishment infringing one of the inherent human rights - the right to life - and we really cannot tolerate a situation where thousands of people face capital punishment every year in Iran and China and other countries .
Therefore , the implementation of a global moratorium on capital punishment seeking to fully abolish it remains one of our most important political aims and we therefore require not only the consensus of our parliamentary groups on this issue , but also the consensus of all EU Member States .
I am sure that in adopting this resolution the European Parliament could show extraordinary solidarity and consensus , despite a difference of opinion , for example regarding the declaration of 10 February as the European Day against the Death Penalty .
The European Parliament has a golden opportunity to demonstrate cohesion and solidarity to the Council , especially when taking a decision on a political issue that has clear added value .
Politics without value is just cheap politicking and populism , while human life is valuable to us all , irrespective of geographical or cultural divides .
I truly encourage my fellow members in all groups to support this important resolution .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , State Secretary Lobo Antunes has convincingly demonstrated the Council 's efforts here .
I have nothing to add to what the Minister has said .
Our Group supports you fully in your efforts to make it clear that the European Union wants to give strong backing not just to a moratorium , but to the aim of banning the death penalty throughout the world .
As the previous speaker has said , the European Parliament has already said twice this year : this Parliament is spearheading the battle to ban the death penalty .
For us as European Social Democrats , the death penalty is the lowest point in human ethics .
I come from a country in which human dignity is the first article of the constitution .
The duty of each and every government regulation is to preserve and protect it .
That is the message of my country 's constitution .
On the basis of that message we in the European Union have drawn up a Charter of Fundamental Rights , the prime message of which is as above : human dignity is the foremost guiding principle of the European Union .
Simply put , the death penalty is the opposite of human dignity .
It is the vilification of the human being down to the lowest point of his or her existence .
The duty of each and every morally-driven democrat is to ban it .
We are fighting for this moratorium to be supported by the European Union .
Why , then , is there no consensus in the Council ?
There is one Member State in the Council boycotting a joint resolution of the European Union .
I shall not hesitate in naming it publicly here .
It is the Polish government , which does not want us to make this fundamental decision .
It is linking the issue of the death penalty with other issues and saying : when the others link their opinion on this issue with that on abortion and euthanasia , then we too will be prepared to argue against the death penalty .
That is a pretextual argument !
Why ?
I 'll gladly tell you .
I should like to read a quotation to you , which comes from a radio interview of 28 July this year .
I quote : " I personally was , am and remain an advocate of the death penalty .
A return to this penalty is not possible at present , but I am counting on the fact that a more favourable climate will prevail in the EU in future . ”
Lech Kaczyński , President of the Republic of Poland .
That is the reason why there has been no European Council resolution to date on this moratorium .
The Polish President is an advocate of the death penalty and he hopes that there will be a better climate in the European Union for re-introducing it .
I therefore say : this Parliament is there to ensure that the climate in Europe remains against the death penalty .
That is the crucial point .
( Applause )
As long as we as European Socialists have influence , we shall do this .
I would ask the Council one question , however : Mr Lobo Antunes , not of you personally , but of the Heads of State and Government of the other 26 States .
How long will the other 26 Heads of State and Government put up with this and remain silent about the fact that an advocate of the death penalty , who states quite openly that he is so , is able to paralyse the European Council on this issue ?
We need an answer to this , too .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the statements that the Presidency has been making to this Parliament for a year would seem - if we were a parliament such as the British parliament or the United States parliament , for instance - like an offence not only against the truth but also against Parliament .
No , President-in-Office of the Council , I think that you have been misinformed by the apparatus and structure which is behind you at the moment , and which since 1994 has been adopting an unworthy and incomprehensible approach , for which the six-monthly Presidencies that follow one another are responsible , or manage to make themselves responsible !
In 1994 we were on the verge of winning .
We lost by 8 votes , because 20 European countries which are now members of the European Union collaborated with each other and abstained .
The universal moratorium could have been proclaimed throughout the world , had it not been for that disgrace , which we should not dismiss : 20 European abstentions , in 1994 , with a Council that was fully and hypocritically complicit .
You , President-in-Office of the Council , also had the impudence to say in 1999 - according to all the European ambassadors we had won because there was a very large absolute majority - on the morning of the vote , a telegram arrived from Brussels telling us to withdraw .
This was inexplicable !
In 2003 the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs , then occupying the Council Presidency , declared that because of a lack of agreement by the European Union , Italy was not taking forward the resolution on which we again had a majority .
Now , the state of affairs is more shocking .
Do you understand , though , Mr Antunes ?
In which country could we tell a tall story like this ?
You say that 173 of 192 UN Member States have abolished the death penalty in fact and in law .
All this is your immense exertion !
You ought to have tabled a resolution in the 61st Assembly , the previous one , you ought to have tabled one at the beginning of this one , that is , yesterday , and already the news we have today from New York is of further postponements .
You also told another small or serious untruth : it is true that 95 countries have signed a declaration , and that on 28 December we , as the Italian Government , already had 85 signatories and what you have achieved we actually achieved together , namely only 11 more .
So if you want to lose , go ahead , but it is a shame , we will do ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , seeking humanitarianism in the administration of justice is one of Europe 's important missions .
We need to stand up against public show executions in which the remains of the executed person become an unhealthy object of excitement for the crowds .
We must do everything we can to oppose executions carried out to political order from the authorities in China or Iran .
What we cannot agree to , however , is a narrow understanding of this whole problem .
In particular , we cannot agree to a termination of discussion on this subject .
We cannot agree to the kind of censorship proposed by Mr Schulz in his speech .
It is not up to him how long Lech Kaczyński remains President of Poland , no matter how much he wishes it were .
It depends on the Poles , who have their own doubts .
And it is not just the Poles who have doubts about the global moratorium , or about the propaganda and social campaigns proposed by the Commission .
I have one question - is it in fact possible , from a comfortable government seat in Paris or Lisbon , to dispatch an appeal for the suspension of capital punishment to regions that are rife with cruelty and violence ?
Is it not hypocrisy to expect capital punishment to be abolished today in Iraq or Afghanistan while doing nothing to restore security and justice in these countries ?
I do not share the conviction that abolition of capital punishment in other parts of the world will provide a solution to violence and brutality .
Anyway , Poland abolished the death penalty in 1988 , nearly twenty years ago now .
We did this in the face of our own public opinion .
We did it in the name of European unity .
We want to continue supporting that decision today .
It may be that in fact our part of the world can permit itself alternatives to capital punishment .
We wish to show solidarity by cooperating on this matter , in the UN forum too , but we cannot agree to European censorship on the death penalty as proposed by Mr Schulz .
The draft resolution makes unnecessary reference to the issue of the European Day against the Death Penalty .
May I remind you that the death penalty is not the only place where we run up against matters of life and death in politics and law .
If we are to conduct a dialogue in Europe on contemporary challenges to humanitarianism , we cannot restrict ourselves to the death penalty , on which we do , after all , have a common opinion .
We cannot avoid discussing abortion on request , which is also so keenly defended in Europe and around the world by this Parliament and Mr Schulz 's club .
We cannot avoid discussing euthanasia , guarantees for human dignity , or the burgeoning development of biomedical science .
If one of the days on the European calendar is to be a day for reflection on the humanitarian aspect of the legislator 's work , and also ours , we cannot just shut our eyes to all of this , or we shall descend into hypocrisy .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to continue along the lines already set out by Mr Pannella and I would ask the Presidency to give a reply , if possible .
I would like to know why the Presidency has withdrawn the request or the proposal to establish a European Day on the death penalty .
It is not written anywhere that this is a decision that must be taken unanimously .
If you can quote me a rule where this is stipulated , I would be grateful - although since we are talking about political cooperation , I am fully convinced that if you had wanted to , you would have been able to force a vote and obtain an overwhelming majority , minus one .
I believe that that would have been a great day for Europe .
Thus , an opportunity has been wasted .
Secondly , I too am very confused , Mr Antunes , about your reconstruction of the sad history of the various tablings and withdrawals of resolutions for a moratorium .
I would like you to answer a specific question : since you , as the Portuguese Presidency , have decided to act practically alone , excluding other countries such as my own from the United Nations negotiations - but that is not an issue for this forum - I would like to know when you are tabling the resolution .
This too is unclear , and if you table it too late it will be utterly useless .
Thirdly , you said two things that worried me slightly .
I was up in my room because I had a problem , but I listened to it in the original , in your marvellous language .
You said that it was necessary to have flexibility and to leave room for manoeuvre , and that is something that worried me greatly .
What do you mean ?
Also , you spoke of the so-called front that seeks abolition and does not have any great belief in a moratorium .
This is even more worrying because it is precisely because of this false dichotomy that we have lost so far .
Therefore , I would like you to give us some specific answers , and I hope that these answers will be forthcoming .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I was engrossed listening to Mrs Frassoni , whose questions and passion I completely share , and I also endorse what Mr Pannella said .

Today I am really sad ; listening to the speech by Mr Szymański truly distressed me .
To think that Europe - for which we have all battled , fought , and believed - is experiencing these obstacles - these positions - is truly a cause of sadness for us all .
Today , however , I am also sad because a great man , a historic Palestinian figure , died in Gaza of cancer , and it was not possible for him to be treated .
Gaza is under siege , but he would probably have died in any case because he was very old .
He was a man who believed deeply in peace , in democracy , in a democracy and a secular Palestine without violence .
His name was Haider Abdel Shafi and I would like to pay tribute to him here , because there are so many death penalties in the world against which we must fight .
I too support what the other Members were saying .
The session has opened and I hope that on 28 September , when the Portuguese Presidency and the Italian Government meet everyone , they will really decide to table the resolution in favour of a universal moratorium on the death penalty .
It is true that over the last 14 years the resolution has been compromised by mistakes and delays , if not outright obstructionism .
This time we can succeed , and we must do so .
Italy , together with Europe , will build a network of alliances spanning all the continents .
The vast majority of the international community is in favour of this resolution , while the countries backing the death penalty are few in number .
Certainly , the dichotomy between a moratorium and abolition of the death penalty ought not to be exploited .
We are in favour of abolition of the death penalty , but today it is the moratorium that can unite us and achieve a victory .
We know that it is difficult , we know that we cannot take it for granted and we can see this with the internal positions , not only that of Poland , but among citizens worldwide , and political leaders in Europe who call for the death penalty .
If , however , our view of international relations is founded on a moral framework of values in which human life and justice and rights prevail , then we must win .
Thus , the next few weeks will be crucial and a moratorium is truly a fundamental stage in the international community 's repudiation of a barbaric practice that substitutes vengeance for justice .
We truly must succeed and isolate the voices that say ' no ' .
Madam President , Members of the Council , in 1977 , under the Carter Administration , two probes , Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 , were launched into space .
You may think this has nothing to do with our debate . However , in these two probes , the late physicist Carl Sagan placed a message from President Waldheim , the drawing of a man and a woman , the principal mathematical formulas known on Earth , and a record with the sound of the wind , of a tractor , a baby , and extracts from Mozart , Beethoven and Chuck Berry .
Last year , these two probes left the solar system , or the ' heliosphere ' , as it is called , to travel 42 000 light years to the nearest star ; in other words , 200 000 kilometres multiplied by 3 600 , multiplied by 24 , multiplied by 365 , multiplied by 42 000 .
In 30 years , these two probes have not sent back any signals , since none have been picked up .
For the time being , the only known life is on Earth .
From that perspective , it is evident that the penal codes of Texas or China , which can allow something as extraordinarily rare as life to be ended , are a real aberration .
By contrast , the Portuguese proposal for a conference about life and human dignity reflects the perspective of this nation of explorers , because to be opposed to the death penalty is only one aspect of the challenge and of the political teleology .
The aim of any policy can only be rich and diverse life .
To be against the death penalty is all very well , but it is only one aspect , as is euthanasia , of a central political problem : what is the point of politics ?
To create the economic , social and physical conditions so that this mysterious thing called ' life ' can flourish , or the Malthusian policy of no future , austerity pacts , rationing , prohibition , grubbing-up , Herod premiums , and the British foot-and-mouth slaughters and pyres ?
This is the crux of the matter and the real scale of the death penalty : it is this political choice between no future and life .
( SK ) I unequivocally support the initiative to introduce a European day against the death penalty , even if there is not a unanimous decision by the 27 Member States .
I welcome the introduction of this prohibition that was brought in recently , partially under pressure from the European Union , by certain African countries .
The death penalty has been abolished by Rwanda and Gabon , for example .
These countries , too , have come to the realisation that the death penalty has no place in a democratic society .
I believe that it is necessary to put pressure also on other countries , such as America and China , to consign this action to history .
On the other hand , it is also necessary to highlight certain European countries that have consistently failed to ratify the protocols prohibiting use of the death penalty .
Protocol No 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which unconditionally prohibits the death penalty in peacetime , has been ratified by all 27 Member States .
Protocol No 13 , however , which prohibits the death penalty in all circumstances , has been signed by all 27 Member States but still not ratified by five , namely France , Italy , Poland , Spain and Latvia .
Therefore , even though today the main criticism regarding the introduction of a European day against the death penalty has been levelled at Poland , I fully agree with and support the view of Mr Schulze , Mrs Frassoni and Mrs Morgantini that the finger should also be pointed at those countries .
I would like to stress that there is no evidence to show that the death penalty has a deterrent effect on violent crime .
Its irreversible nature means that miscarriages of justice , which are unavoidable in any legal system , cannot be rectified .
( PT ) I would remind you of what Victor Hugo said about blood being washed away with tears , not with blood .
When Europe set its values and made abolition of the death penalty one of the conditions for arriving and being here , it laid down a code of principles which mark it out as the home of enlightenment and as the area where no law exists without the moral basis of sublime human dignity .
The fight against the death penalty is the fight of civilisation against barbarity .
The fight against official , organised , calculated and cold-blooded death .
Death by rule , not by the rule of law , because the death penalty falls outside the limits of any law worthy of the name .
Death by means of a brutal and illegal rule .
The fight against the death penalty is a question of universal justice because it touches on the essence of mankind 's humanity and determines our relations with the world .
This is why Europe cannot overlook the fact that countries such as China , Iran , Pakistan , Iraq , Sudan and the United States tragically share that barbarous mechanism of the death penalty .
Europe does not have the right to complicit silence about all this .
Neither can it remain silent as regards its own internal dynamics .
Europe must remind Poland that the fight against the death penalty is laid down in the a priori principles of justice which are the sine qua non of being European .
As regards the European Day against the Death Penalty , it would be appropriate to ask , and I am asking the Portuguese Presidency , under what circumstances is a country entitled to decide against the consensus values in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union ?
I would also ask the Portuguese Presidency whether unanimity could be used for areas of consensus concerning the rules on which the Union is founded .
Is unanimity intended only for issues which divide us rather than for the fundamental consensus on which Europe is based ?
Those are my questions for the Presidency and my thoughts about the European Day against the Death Penalty .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the third time this year the European Parliament is returning to the subject of a moratorium .
We believe that it is possible to achieve this objective by the end of the year , and that is why we are urgently asking the Portuguese Presidency to table the text in the next few hours with the relevant United Nations committee .
We ask it to do so in close collaboration with Italy , the country which initiated the campaign , and to associate with it not only the countries of the European Union but also all those that have shown willingness to be co-sponsors and co-authors .
I would also like once again to make it clear that the aim of the moratorium does not conflict with the more general aim of abolition and in any case it is a moratorium that we wish to obtain today , partly as a first concrete step towards abolition .
None of this must be allowed to muddy the waters !
Finally , I join with my fellow Members in disbelief that a European country as significant as Poland should have dissociated itself from declaring 10 October European Day against the death penalty and that as a result of this the Day has been put on hold .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , we ask you not to abandon this objective .
Please do not dissipate that little spirit that we have succeeded in introducing into a Europe that is still swayed too strongly by questions of economic policy , trade policy and monetarism .
( FR ) Madam President , the number of abolitionist countries , or countries where a moratorium has been introduced , is growing each year .
People are wavering , even in States that still maintain the death penalty , such as the US , and coalitions are forming in Muslim countries .
Every day , steps are taken to avoid executions .
Homosexuality is still punishable by death in several countries and , unfortunately , the current European climate is a reminder that this remains a very difficult battle .
On the moratorium and the UN General Assembly , Parliament asks you , President-in-Office of the Council , for the third time this year , and in the most solemn way : we must do our utmost to obtain a resolution from the UN General Assembly as soon as possible and by the end of the year , with a view to a moratorium and a strategy for abolition .
I think we are all saying the same thing here : it is your move .
On the European Day against the Death Penalty , how do we explain why we have not said a word about the situation in Europe today ?
How is it conceivable that a country can use this issue for political purposes , remaining out of step with the rest of Europe , with Article 2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and out of step with perhaps the most longstanding common objectives of its external policy ?
The institutions of the European Union , and you , as President-in-Office of the Council , cannot tolerate this situation .
The World Day against the Death Penalty is on 10 October .
The European Parliament will be meeting in a part-session in Brussels .
It is vital for Parliament to mark this event as solemnly and as resolutely as possible .
Madam President , I was very pleased to hear about the Commission initiative to establish a European Day against the Death Penalty on 10 October , and I fully support that initiative and urge all colleagues to support it , as many in this debate have done already .
It was shocking for me to realise that not all EU countries were in favour of this initiative .
Poland 's position puts the credibility of the EU as a primary force for abolition in jeopardy and I sincerely hope that the Government of Poland will reconsider its position .
The death penalty is a cruel and inhuman punishment .
It is detrimental to human dignity and there is absolutely no evidence to suggest that the use of the death penalty serves as a deterrent against crimes .
Fortunately , the trend in the world is now towards abolition .
The whole of Europe , except for Belarus , is already on board , and more and more states from all continents are joining an ever-growing list of abolitionist countries .
I also think that we should continue to urge our American colleagues to abolish the death penalty once and for all .
A moratorium on executions is the first step towards abolition .
The EU must continue to urge all states that still maintain the death penalty to introduce a moratorium .
A resolution at the UN General Assembly against the death penalty will hopefully play an important role in this respect .
However , we should take care that the situation does not develop in the same way as in 1999 , when Finland , my home country , tried to get the UN General Assembly to adopt the death penalty resolution .
It was watered down so much that it would have done more harm to the cause than good .
Now that Italy has put the issue back on the UN agenda I hope that the EU as a whole will back the proposal and we shall get a UN General Assembly resolution on this .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , I am obliged to commence this address with a personal reflection .
When I was listening , a moment ago , to the speech delivered in this Parliament by Konrad Szymański , representing the Polish right wing , I was reminded of a scene from yesterday 's speech by President Ahmadinejad at New York 's Columbia University .
Mr Szymański , your Law and Justice government , the Polish right wing , has placed my country , my homeland , in the company of such countries as Iran and Belarus .
President Ahmadinejad yesterday referred with pride to the example of America as a country which is still carrying out the death penalty .
Polish public opinion is outraged that the government in Warsaw has succeeded in blocking the European Union 's Day against the Death Penalty .
After all , this is a matter that has united the European Union , it unites European public opinion , it unites European political parties , and it creates a democratic-liberal consensus , regardless of ideological divisions in Europe .
I believe that the forthcoming elections in Poland will reveal a Polish society which is determined that the European Union will be able to act together on this issue in the forum of the United Nations with an initiative against the death penalty .

( PT ) My country , Portugal , was a forerunner in the abolition of the death penalty in 1867 and I therefore take the greatest pride in this initiative by the Portuguese Presidency to institute a European Day against the Death Penalty in line with all Portugal 's actions at international level , within the framework of Europe and the United Nations , for the abolition of the death penalty and in protest against the governments who are the main perpetrators of that inhuman practice , in particular China , the United States and Iran .
I find it absolutely shocking that the Polish Government should have tried to block this initiative with such opportunistic and contradictory arguments .
The Polish people must be made aware that the Kaczynski Government is not only doing a disservice to the European Union and its fundamental values , but is also doing dreadful harm to the good name and prestige of Poland .
At stake are the most essential values which distinguish civilisation from barbarism .
The Portuguese Presidency cannot be stopped , must not allow itself to be intimidated by opposition from the Polish Government .
It must keep the proposal , put it swiftly to the vote within the General Affairs and External Relations Council , leave the Polish Government to its chosen isolation and go ahead with celebrating the European Day against the Death Penalty on 10 October .
( PL ) Madam President , I am distancing myself from the utterances of my fellow Member , Konrad Szymański , and associating myself fully with those of Mr Pinior .
Poland signed the Sixth Protocol abolishing the death penalty and took upon itself the legal obligation of eradicating this form of punishment from our land .
On 17-18 June last year in Luxembourg , European Foreign Ministers , all European Foreign Ministers , including the Polish Foreign Minister , agreed that the European Union should submit a joint draft resolution against the death penalty .
What has happened since 17 June to make Poland change its view in September ?
Obviously it must be the domestic situation , and obviously it must be the elections .
But can we say in fact that Poland has changed its view ?
It is not Poland , it is the Polish government .
Poles are not barbarians , they do not accept the death penalty .
Poles have stood against the death penalty on many occasions .
And I have to say to you , and especially to Mr Szymański , that public opinion polls indicate that 57 % of Poles do not want the death penalty .
Please remember this when representing Poland , and convey what Polish society thinks , with this trend in mind .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Thank you very much , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for your thoughts , comments and questions .
That was , and I knew it would be , an easy debate for the Council .
Easy because the Council and the European Parliament are agreed on what is fundamental and that is obtaining , at the next session of the UN General Assembly , a resolution on a moratorium and the abolition of the death penalty ; I am of course pleased to see that we are united on the central objective of the debate we have had and that we shall be working together to make it possible .
As was mentioned by a Portuguese MEP , I too am very proud , to be taking part in this debate as a representative of Portugal , because we were the first country in Europe to abolish the death penalty .
It is a theme , an issue , a problem on which the Portuguese are especially sensitive and I am proud to be able to say so here and to have the opportunity to be leading the Council 's efforts at the United Nations at this moment with a view to achieving the objective we have set ourselves .
I am not here to talk about the past .
We must learn from the lessons of the past , of course , and that is why we must naturally avoid any errors we might have committed and which did not in the past make it possible for us to achieve the objectives we had set ourselves .
The past is past ; let us now focus on the future .
Let us focus with determination , with resolve , in the knowledge that the task is not , politically speaking , an easy one , but that it is possible .
When we speak of flexibility we are talking about confidence in the work of the Presidency .
What we are seeking and specifically requesting - and we are sure that the European Parliament will grant us this since it understands that this is a politically complex and at times even difficult issue - is naturally the European Parliament 's confidence in the Presidency and the Presidency 's efforts , so that we can finally bring this objective to a successful conclusion .
We shall be submitting the draft resolution at the beginning of October - early to mid-October .
That is our intention and I can tell you that the many demarches and contacts we have made give us some confidence .
We hope that our confidence will grow with the passage of time because our cause is a just cause .
I should also like to say , finally , that the European Union already has co-authors who are going to sign this draft resolution with us ; I must also tell you here that I am very proud that those co-authors include Portuguese-speaking countries representing Africa , representing Asia and representing Latin America too - countries which like us , like the Portuguese , are also underwriting respect for the total value of life .
We are confident , I repeat , that with your support and your confidence , the Portuguese Presidency will bring to fruition this objective we have set ourselves at the 62nd session of the UN General Assembly and that we shall in fact have a resolution approved in the terms in which the European Parliament and the Council wish to see it approved .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to make a personal comment on the basis of Article 145 .
The Polish Member , who has spoken as a representative of the UEN Group , has completely misquoted me in a comment on my speech and I would like to put it straight .
I asked the Council how long it would continue to put up with this attitude of the Polish President , Mr Kaczyński .
I had quoted Mr Kaczyński , who very much wants a better atmosphere to make the re-introduction of the death penalty in Europe possible .
My question to the Council was therefore : how long will the Council continue to put up with this ?
How long will the 26 other governments continue to remain silent on this ?
I have not presumed in any of what I have said to decide ( how could I ? ) how long Mr Kaczyński will continue as President of Poland .
It is an absolute sovereign right of the Polish people to elect their government and President .
I do , however , implore the Polish people to be so wise as to put this government out of office as quickly as possible !
Thank you for clarifying that .
( PT ) I asked a very specific question .
I should like to know on which article the Presidency was relying in saying that unanimity was required for this type of question on , for example , taking a decision on the Day against the Death Penalty and why it did not insist upon a vote in the Council .
I should like to know why the President did not say anything about that point , which all the speakers mentioned .
It is the Council 's interpretation that decisions of that nature do require unanimity .
I have received five motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 27 September 2007 .
Negotiations on an Interregional Association Agreement with Mercosur and the new bilateral strategic partnership with Brazil ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on negotiations on an Interregional Association Agreement with Mercosur and the new bilateral strategic partnership with Brazil .
We understand that the association agreement between the European Union and Mercosur must be comprehensive in all its aspects , that is , political and economic association and cooperation , aiming not only to promote trade and investment , but also to strengthen , in a decisive manner , the strategic relationship between the European Union and that region .
This agreement will create the largest free trade area between two regional blocs , nearly 700 million inhabitants , enhancing economic and social integration , facilitating investment and bringing significant economic growth for both regions .
It is true that the results of the negotiations on the Doha Development Agenda influenced the negotiating process .
We cannot , however , view the association agreement from a purely economic perspective ; the importance of the political dimension of the agreement needs to be stressed .
In order to make the qualitative leap which we all want in the relationship between the European Union and Mercosur , it is fundamental to take account of the balance between the political and economic components .
We must , however , acknowledge that after seven years of negotiations we are at an impasse .
That impasse is the result of the discrepancy or difference between the offers presented .
On the one hand , the offer made by the European Union covered all sectors and , on the other hand , Mercosur 's offer omitted sectors that are very important to the European Union .
The Portuguese Presidency is waiting for the political commitment demonstrated by Mercosur to take the form of an improved offer , so that the Commission might resume the negotiations with a view to the speedy conclusion of an agreement which is fair and balanced for both parties .
The strategic partnership between the European Union and Brazil established at the Summit in Lisbon on 4 July , must be regarded not only as a vehicle for strengthening relations with Brazil , but also as a way of enhancing strategic biregional relations between the European Union and Latin America and , in particular , the EU 's negotiations with Mercosur .
The joint statement issued following the Summit with Brazil unequivocally demonstrates the commitment to concluding negotiations on the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement .
With regard specifically to Brazil and , bearing in mind the growing strategic significance of that country on the international scene , the partnership established within the scope of the work of the Portuguese Presidency , constituted the beginning of a new relationship between the European Union and Brazil , similar to what we are seeing now with Russia , India and China .
The partnership will develop on the basis of an action plan that will include strengthening dialogue and cooperation in the areas of mutual interest presented in the communication from the Commission to the Council on the EU-Brazil strategic partnership , which naturally include the Mercosur agenda .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am grateful for the opportunity to discuss this very important topic .
As has rightly been pointed out , the decision to establish a strategic partnership with Brazil goes back to the Commission 's first communication on Brazil , where we proposed a way forward in our relations with Brazil , and the first EU-Brazil summit in Lisbon has confirmed and cemented this new relationship .
Why a closer relationship with Brazil ?
The EU-Brazil strategic partnership is a natural reaction to geopolitical realities .
Today , Brazil is becoming an international player with a strong weight on important global issues like climate change , the fight against poverty , peace , security and multilateralism .
It is a respected voice in the developing world , as shown by its chairmanship of the G20 within the WTO or as an active promoter of the South-South dialogue .
It has forged new partnerships with all key players : China , Russia and the United States .
The European Union has a lot to gain from a closer partnership with Brazil in order to progress on global issues of common concern .
The strategic partnership provides the appropriate framework , as experience has shown with all other members of the BRICS group .
What effects will this partnership have on Latin America and , more specifically , on the Mercosur region ?
The promotion of regional integration is one of the cornerstones of the partnership .
This is clearly stated in the Commission 's communication , and it is also how Brazil perceives it .
President Lula made this point very strongly at the first EU-Brazil summit in July .
I cannot stress enough the importance of the Southern Cone for the European Union .
Besides sharing cultural and political values like democracy , human rights and social justice , there is a huge economic potential to explore between the two economically complementary regions .
The EU is Mercosur 's number one trade and investment partner .
We have goods and services worth EUR 50 billion crossing the ocean annually .
In addition , the aggregate value of EU investments in the Mercosur countries in 2005 was around EUR 100 billion .
Also , and most importantly , we genuinely believe in the potential of an economically and politically integrated Mercosur .
The recent creation of the Structural Convergence Fund and Mercosur Parliament are most encouraging signals .
The EU is a firm supporter of this integration process , not just in words but also in concrete deeds .
The European Union has been and will continue to be the quasi-exclusive donor to Mercosur integration .
A sum of EUR 50 million has been committed over the last five years and the same amount is available for the current Financial Perspective ( 2007-2013 ) to help build Mercosur 's institutions , strengthen civil society and take economic integration forward .
The conclusion of the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement would be a colossal step forward in the integration process of the region .
That is why the European Union remains firmly committed to concluding the negotiations and is keen to advance in negotiations once there is more clarity in the Doha Development Round .
The strategic partnership with Brazil is a decision in favour of Brazil and in favour of Mercosur .
The two levels of relations - national and regional - will complement and mutually support each other .
In no way does the partnership replace the biregional EU-Mercosur negotiations .
We are in full agreement with Brazil that Mercosur is and will remain the only platform for our bilateral economic and trade relations .
I am convinced that by engaging with Brazil , Mercosur 's largest member , we can bring a real added value to the regional integration process .
Shared experience in a joint agenda with the EU will encourage Brazil to better support Mercosur efforts to build a common market and a political union .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the Portuguese Presidency and the Commissioner for their necessary and relevant comments in the light of the text of the clear question put by the Committee on International Trade .
Brazil , as we all know , is a large and admirable country with enormous potential which is at a crucial point in its political and economic development .
Our mutual relationship is strong and we can and should strengthen it further .
Brazil 's special links with Portugal , and Portugal 's links with Brazil , are also known , recognised and respected by all .
- ( PT ) We well understand the position of our good and esteemed Portuguese friends , their interests and their concerns , because we share them .
( ES ) However , the European Union , the Commission , the Council and Parliament have always expressed support for consolidating the regional integration of Mercosur , negotiating with the block and , as far as possible , supporting regional consolidation .
As has been said here , Brazil undoubtedly has a key role in this .
If the Communication from the Commission and the strategic relationship proposed with Brazil go in this direction , so much the better .
This would still be supporting the European Parliament , which expressed itself here in the debate and in the vote that took place on the report , for which I had the honour to be the rapporteur , on the EU 's negotiations with Mercosur , which was adopted a year ago , and to which I refer .
Therefore , given the confusion that had arisen from this Communication , Parliament needed to ensure that this point would be clarified and that we would be kept informed .
We are also aware that the expectations of concluding an ambitious agreement between the European Union and Mercosur cannot go on forever , and if Mercosur itself does not make progress with its integration , and the European Union 's negotiations with Mercosur remain stagnated , with or without a Doha agreement , a decision would have to be taken on them , and once again the most important thing would be effectiveness : a bilateral agreement with Brazil .
But unless this happens , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim is to reach an agreement with Mercosur .
In short , yes to Brazil , but without damaging the negotiations with the whole of Mercosur .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we on the INTA Committee requested this debate because we are very concerned as we see that we are concluding more and more agreements of different kinds which affect all our work in the external economic sector and which also , of course , always have a foreign policy component .
We have bilateral free trade agreements , regional free trade agreements , partnership agreements and strategic agreements and we worry about how these can be brought together so that we have a consistent European approach for responding to the challenges of globalisation in the foreign policy and external economic sector .
Commissioner , you have rightly said that Brazil is an important country for us .
I am also very grateful that the President-in-Office of the Council is present , and we all , of course , share this opinion .
It is not just an important country ; it is in many respects also a fantastic country .
The question simply is : how can we sensibly combine this strategic agreement with , at the same time , the idea of concluding a regional agreement with Mercosur , which has got itself into very troubled waters ?
It is simply not true that we get along wonderfully in the negotiations .
It is very complicated .
Alongside this we want to conclude a multilateral agreement in the Doha Round .
It does not seem at all likely that we will be able to bring this agreement off as a crowning achievement , if we can bring it off at all .
So how do you want to bring all this together at the same time ?
That is our question .
Of course , it is also a strategic agreement .
What is the nature of a strategic agreement ?
It contains a great deal if you look at it .
There are very many political declarations of intent on Brazil and all of them very sensible .
Again , in my Group we are very happy that they are also included , but how do you want to link this to the other members , e.g. in Latin America , with whom we have free trade agreements ?
Or how do you want to feed this back again so that our trade policy is imbued with a uniform European policy in such a way that all partners can understand this too ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Mercosur is a reality that owes a lot to the European Union .
Undoubtedly Mercosur is essentially the fruit of the free and sovereign decision of its members , there is no doubt , of its four full members , soon five if , as we hope , there are no obstacles to the pending ratification of Venezuela 's application for membership .
It is obvious that it is therefore the fruit of its members .
However , it is also obvious that , since its origins in 1985 , with the Foz de Iguazú declaration and the Treaty of Asunción in 1991 , the European Union has been very close to what was then in its infancy and is now a reality .
It has been very close , supporting , sharing and defending the very existence of Mercosur and what Mercosur was aiming to do , because we knew that the regional relationship , between regional framework and regional framework , had many benefits for them and also for us .
For this reason the European Parliament has always supported giving maximum impetus to the association agreement between the European Union and Mercosur .
An agreement that can stand up , which is ambitious as well as balanced .
An agreement which , alongside the trade dimension , the strictly trade dimension , also has a political and institutional chapter , as well as a chapter aimed at promoting sustainable economic and social development .
These are values that have been defended by the European Parliament throughout its relationship with Mercosur .
This is why Members of this Parliament that are dedicated to external trade issues in the Committee on International Trade are surprised , as reflected in various speeches , at the announcement of a strategic bilateral agreement with Brazil .
We have all always felt that the regional framework is the most effective way to achieve these objectives , and the real pillar on which to base our relations .
It is obvious that the growing role of Brazil deserves not only respect , but real congratulations .
President Lula and his Government are consolidating a role of leadership for the country that is contributing a great deal to the stability of the area and progress for millions of people .
Everyone is aware , if we look at the figures , of how important Brazil 's influence is in our trade relations with this dear part of the world and how increasingly important it will be .
However , a specific , strategic relationship between the European Union and Brazil , as announced on 30 May , runs the risk of damaging the regional relationship between the European Union and Mercosur .
We heard the Secretary of State and the Commissioner trying to put our minds at rest on this , and we received those explanations .
However , we ask that in these negotiations Parliament should continue to be kept informed , because we all understand that , in theory , a specific strategic agreement with Brazil is possible , but that we would not want and would not support anything that weakened the regional relationship .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , the issue of Brazilian beef continues to dominate the headlines , as it is a problem that affects the farmers and consumers of Europe .
As an Irish Government MEP , I met with the Brazilian Ambassador to the European Union in May of this year and again at the end of August to highlight my concerns regarding Brazilian beef exports to the EU .
These include illegal removal of tags , smuggling of cattle across borders from foot-and-mouth-affected areas , and the proper testing of cattle .
The EU has rightly adopted the policy of regionalisation whereby , if there is an outbreak of foot-and-mouth in a country , only the affected area is excluded from exporting beef .
This policy worked well in Ireland in 2001 and in the UK this summer , as strict traceability policies were implemented immediately .
This level of traceability does not exist in Brazil and this is unacceptable from an EU point of view .
In the EU , beef farmers have to comply with stringent standards imposed by the Commission .
I would urge the Commission to ensure that the same standards and regulations are applied in Brazil as currently exist in Europe to ensure a level playing field for all .
I am delighted that Commissioner Fischer Boel is visiting Brazil next month and I hope that after her visit she will be able to answer the justifiable concerns of the farmers and consumers of Europe .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I think we should not beat about the bush .
The problem is not the respect that we owe this great country , Brazil , the problem is the turn that international relations are now taking .
Mr Mandelson and , it seems , the Directorate-General for Trade have abandoned the ideal of multilateralism and are embracing the bilateralist approach of the United States .
What used to be the trademark European position in international trade was that we at least wanted bi-regionalism ; in other words , to discuss things region to region .
Well , we were told , we are in talks with Brazil , and we are in talks with India : as if we needed to compensate in some way for the memory of British imperialism by the memory of Portuguese or Spanish imperialism !
India is two and a half times the size of Europe , including Turkey .
India is three times the size of Latin America .
Our aim is to help create a multipolar world .
This means that first of all , we must help with the unification of Mercosur and the Andean Community , and then the unification of the entire South American Community of Nations .
In this respect , we have nothing against discussions , whether with Bolivia or Brazil , but we must bear in mind that we should be seeking to unite and not divide .
We must put Mercosur before Brazil in our list of priorities and , when we hold talks with Brazil , we must consider the consequences that this could have , including for our discussions with ASEAN on sugar .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , even though negotiations with Mercosur are only making slow progress , the EU should send the clear signal to the government of Brazil and our other partners that it will not be concluding any bilateral agreements with individual governments that oppose the processes of integration in the respective regions : not with Brazil , which is a member of Mercosur and potentially a future member of Unasur , not with Columbia or Peru , which are members of the Andean Community and also potential members of Unasur .
The difficulties in the negotiations with Mercosur are not trifling matters .
The future of farming , not just the future of agribusiness and the service sector , industrialisation , technology transfer , access to medication , these are all questions to which we must find answers together with our Latin American partners if we want real cooperation with this region .
Our aim should be a process of cooperation in which the interests of the citizens are central .
Cooperation should not be limited simply to dividing up market shares and access to energy and water or to distributing patents on intellectual property .
My Group has warmly welcomed the fact that Brazil , like Thailand , has been taking significant steps , despite objections from the pharmaceutical industry , to improve access to medication .
These steps should be supported by the Commission and Council .
We also welcome the fact that Brazil has already declared itself willing to discuss the problem of the destruction of the rainforest in the Amazon , because this is essential for stabilising the climate .
Even though destruction has slowed down in the last two years , it has not stopped .
Pressure from both the European Union and the USA and other players for access to biofuels , particularly ethanol , instead of better controls on their consumers ' behaviour , is another danger for the rainforest and food security .
Every so often we hear from the Brazilian authorities that the country has to expand its agricultural industry in order to improve its financial situation in the face of its problem with foreign debt .
As you know , new governments in the region are trying to follow new paths to resolve this problem .
Bolivia , Ecuador , Nicaragua , Venezuela , Paraguay and Argentina have joined forces to create a Bank of the South and thereby to become independent of the World Bank and the IMF .
This is also good news , even if we as the European Union are shareholders in other banks and therefore suffer the loss of credit allocations .
However , we then must abandon our kind of conditionality .
The European Union should not look on passively here , but be pro-active and develop and extend these approaches that are completely in line with our own aims of cooperation and environmental protection .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , it says a great deal that the new bilateral strategic partnership with Brazil has been brought about under the Portuguese Presidency .
I value the fact that each Member State is given the space to leave its own mark on the EU policy during its presidency .
I would add , however , that Member States should use this elbow room only whilst taking into consideration the continuity of the current EU policy agenda .
It is precisely for this reason that I share the concern that I sense in the issue that we are debating here .
For some time now , the European Union has had the objective of entering into an interregional association agreement with Mercosur .
This objective is thwarted by the bilateral strategic partnership with Brazil .
Firstly , the other Mercosur countries feel cheated by the European Union .
Instead of an interregional agreement , the Union evidently prefers a bilateral agreement .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission what initiatives it is taking to dispel these concerns in countries such as Argentina , Uruguay and Paraguay .
Trade relations with these countries are just as important for the Union .
A second reason for my concern with regard to Mercosur lies in the stability and political course of this collaboration .
Over the past few years it has been clear that Brazil wishes to profile itself more forcefully on a global level as the continent 's natural leader .
This manifests itself not only in an assertive role within the WTO , but also for example in the desire to acquire a seat in the Security Council .
As a result , Brazil has less of an interest in its own role on the continent .
After all , Mercosur consumes just 10 % of Brazil 's export .
The country therefore seems less prepared to invest in other Mercosur countries .
With its entry into the global arena , Brazil is indicating that it feels it has outgrown its role within the region .
The reverse side to this Brazilian policy is the threat to the stability and political course of Mercosur .
Following the withdrawal of Brazil , Venezuela is endeavouring to assume the leading role within Mercosur and therefore within the entire continent .
Chávez is attempting to enhance its role within the region with the aid of oil funds and anti-western rhetoric .
Venezuela operates a protectionist , internally oriented economic policy , in which major economic sectors are threatened with renationalisation .
In the meantime , there is no more room for free trade and the opening up of new markets .
I assume that the Council and the Commission are aware of the fact that these developments have consequences for the countries of South America , but certainly also for the economic and trade interests of the Union in this area .
I call upon the Council and Commission to exploit the fact that a bilateral partnership exists with Brazil in order to turn around the trend that I have just described .
The Union must urge Brazil to use the new political weight of the bilateral partnership with the EU in order to display new political leadership within Mercosur and on the continent .
This must serve to prevent the isolationist policies of countries such as Venezuela and Bolivia from extending further across the continent .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to comment on the content of the partnership .
I am of the opinion that the content of the EU partnership with Brazil must not focus solely on topics such as bio-ethanol , but equally upon getting the Doha Round off the ground .
After all , the role of Brazil has until now predominantly been the achievement of individual successes in relation to agriculture , whilst the country is not truly prepared to compromise with regard to NAMA and services .
( PL ) Mr President , it is my conviction that negotiations between the European Union and Mercosur should be a priority for our work in the forthcoming months .
Despite the many problems we are currently encountering , multilateral cooperation in the context of this region is far more advantageous , as it will enable cooperation within the framework of all the states associated together in Mercosur to be maintained and at the same time deepened , regardless of their economic position in the region .
A successful conclusion to the negotiations between the European Union and Mercosur has a chance of leading to the creation of the largest free trade zone in the world , which will translate into a significant increase in trading volumes and a strengthened position for both partners , the European Union and the Mercosur countries , in the world economy .
It is evident that the greatest beneficiaries of this agreement will be small and medium-sized enterprises , in both the EU and Latin America , and we are all aware that small and medium-sized enterprises that are growing in strength mean new jobs , better quality of services and social wellbeing .
I think that partnership with Brazil , as our largest partner in this region , is very important , and we should develop it , but under the aegis of cooperation with Mercosur , and this means that first we must put together an association under the Mercosur framework , and only then , with this as a basis , should we build up any bilateral cooperation with individual Latin American countries .
Building up cooperation with just one country in the region may undermine understandings that have been arrived at previously and become a factor that holds back work on an association agreement with Mercosur .
This is why I think , and I would like to stress this once again , that concluding an ambitious arrangement with Mercosur that is advantageous to all - the EU and the Latin American states that have joined to form Mercosur - should be a priority for us , and Brazil , as the strongest country in this region , should be the motor for this negotiation process .
( PT ) Mr President , Secretary of State , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the EU-Brazil strategic partnership is not a threat to regional balance nor to the EU 's economic and trade relations with other Latin American partners .
On the contrary , it favours those relations , as mentioned in the joint statement from the EU-Brazil Summit on 4 July .
Today 's question has the benefit of provoking a debate on EU-Latin America and EU-Brazil relations , both of which are extremely important .
As already mentioned here , I see the EU-Brazil partnership as filling a gap .
It was not acceptable that the European Union 's strategic partnerships with the BRIC countries should leave out the ' B ' for Brazil .
The Portuguese Presidency was right , then , to promote the EU-Brazil Summit , in line with what it did in 2000 when it held the first EU-India Summit , which did not harm relations with the other countries in that region .
There are therefore now better conditions for Europe to give a fresh impulse to relations with Mercosur and to the Doha negotiations .
Strengthening the EU-Brazil dialogue makes complete sense because it will enable cooperation to be enhanced in key areas such as energy security and sustainable development , biodiversity , climate change , the fight against poverty and exclusion , promotion of democracy and human rights , etc .
Brazil 's demographic weight , economic development and political stability inevitably make it a key player on the international stage .
Europe can only gain from regarding Brazil as a strategic partner .
As the Secretary of State has already said here , relations between the European Union and Brazil cannot be analysed solely in an economic context .
That is too narrow a view that overlooks historical links , cultural and linguistic affinities , cooperation between universities and many common interests in various areas .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , do the South Americans still believe in an interregional agreement between the EU and Mercosur ?
This , I believe , is the question that we must ask ourselves .
The trade strategy of the Mercosur countries follows two different paths , on the one hand allowing Mercosur to develop further , but on the other hand , as in the case of Brazil , concluding as many bilateral trade agreements as possible in order to secure a market position for the individual country , if necessary at the expense of the other Members of Mercosur .
It sometimes resembles the combination of an Argentine tango with a Brazilian samba .
Nevertheless , provided that both the EU and Mercosur continue to believe in the value of a broad-based collaboration between the two continents , then hope remains , despite the pressure of US President Bush to establish a free trade area of the Americas .
With 34 countries , the enthusiasm of the Mercosur members is not tremendously great .
They are disappointed with the lack of support offered by the United States during the recent heavy economic crisis .
Europe is now already Mercosur 's most important trading partner , yet there is still huge potential for growth between both trade blocs .
If , therefore , we can do something to resolve the mutual discord between the Mercosur countries , for example by means of collaboration in multilateral trade negotiations such as the WTO , in which the EU and Mercosur frequently have common interests , perhaps we may once again come a little closer to achieving an interregional agreement .
( GA ) Mr President , there is one point which I want to make about trade between Europe and Brazil , and that is the standard that we observe here in Europe , as far as meat production is concerned , and the strict rules that we lay down for the European meat trade .
That notwithstanding , we accept meat imported from Brazil , a place where no such rules apply .
I think that it is time for the Commission to address itself to this matter and ask questions of its own .
Why is there a big difference between the stringent standard observed here in Europe and the standard permitted in Brazil as regards the traceability of meat , stock tags , and foot and mouth disease ?
It is time for the Commission to raise these matters , as the great discrepancy in terms of standards is seriously disquieting for customers .
Trade is one thing ; health for life is quite another .
( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I think that it is clear that Brazil , due to its size , its population , its natural resources and , above all , its role on the international stage - I am thinking about the role that it is playing in the reform of the United Nations system , the role that it is playing in relation to the whole subject of climate change and the debate on energy resources - fully justifies the Communication presented by the Commission in terms of being able to benefit from a strategic partnership between the European Union and the great country that is Brazil .
And this strategic partnership , in my opinion , needs to be on three levels : from a global perspective , a regional perspective and a bilateral perspective .
However , it is one thing to give Brazil the treatment it deserves as the great country that it is , and another for the European Union not to continue with its commitment to the work that it has been doing to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and Mercosur .
I do not think that this was the Commission 's intention in its Communication ; I think that we can clearly gather from this Communication that the two hypotheses are perfectly compatible : on the one hand , the strategic dimension with Brazil , and , on the other hand , determined support for integration processes , of which the European Union is the most complete and obvious example .
Another thing is the Association Agreement between the European Union and Mercosur not being concluded on the terms that we would all like , and it is an agreement that has been delayed for too long now .
The question is a legitimate one : How long is the European Union going to keep waiting to conclude this agreement ?
I think that we need to support regional integration processes , and it is only with this perspective , only in this dimension , that we will understand the advantages of union and integration .
Mr President , the priorities of this House in trade negotiations are clear .
Firstly , we want a successful multilateral round .
Secondly , we want successful biregional arrangements and as a fall-back - but only as a fall-back - we look to improve bilateral arrangements .
I have to confess that when I first heard about the priority given to the Brazil strategic partnership agreement , I felt we were rewarding a country that has been one of our more awkward partners in the multilateral negotiations in the Doha Round .
I also felt it would undermine Mercosur , where , without Brazil , there is no Mercosur .
However , having heard the Council this morning , having spoken to my Portuguese colleagues , I am convinced that there is a possibility that a successful strategic partnership agreement with Brazil can make it easier in the Doha Round if we develop understanding between ourselves and a key Doha player .
It can make it easier to get a Mercosur agreement if we find solutions to some of our more intricate economic challenges and of course a good agreement with Brazil would signal to them that we support their domestic priority of tackling social exclusion and poverty .
So I am not entirely convinced , but I am more convinced that an agreement between the EU and Brazil is now a more desirable objective than it was a few weeks ago .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in such a changing global geopolitical context , our Parliament , on several occasions , has expressed its unwavering determination to strengthen the partnership between our two continents .
As I see it , this new entity must be Mercosur . It can help us find ambitious , balanced and political solutions to the issues of energy supply , reducing the greenhouse effect or even the quality of our agricultural products .
The regional integration of South America cannot be furthered and cannot be effective if we choose to negotiate with one of the members of Mercosur , rather than working in partnership with the new entity as a whole .
For my part , I am campaigning for regional integration , which as I see it is a vehicle of stability and prosperity for this part of the world , and for us , and should be supported and monitored . I also think it would be a shame if Mercosur countries were to move away from this major project because of our lack of political ambition , and thus fail to seize this opportunity for both continents , Latin America and Europe .
This would clearly set us apart from the US policy of creating a vast economic free trade area for the entire American continent .
( PT ) When we ask what contribution a strategic partnership between the European Union and Brazil can make to developing the relationship between the EU and Mercosur , with a view , amongst other things , to concluding the much-wanted , long-delayed agreement , I think there can only be one answer : that contribution is of major importance .
At the same time , it must be said that a strategic partnership between the EU and Brazil would always be justified and that in this matter the only flaw is the time that has already been lost .
Of the four ' BRIC ' countries - Brazil , Russia , India and China - Brazil was the only one that the EU had not held any high-level meetings with until the Summit on 4 July .
That is even more of an anomaly given that Brazil is the major regional power in South America .
It is a democracy , with the imperfections which new democracies tend to have , which shares our own framework of values .
It is a traditional and reliable ally and an economic partner of major importance both at regional level and in terms of the global economy .
For all these reasons a strategic partnership with Brazil is justified , because this country is a strategic partner of the European Union in its own right .
However , there are also other reasons for strengthening the relationship and developing a strategic partnership with Brazil .
As stated in the communication from the Commission , this relationship can and must be a driving force for developing dialogue with Mercosur .
The two partnerships are not in opposition to one another ; they are complementary .
The relationship can and must also be a factor favourable to the quest for solutions in the context of the World Trade Organization .
Just as , finally , the relationship can and must be a sign that the European Union recognises the special importance of this country in international relations and is intending to take that fact into account in the context of the discussion on UN reform .
Mr President , it is increasingly necessary for the European Union to act as a global-scale economic partner and a strategic partnership with Brazil is a sign that we want to follow that path .
That is the way we must go if we want to obtain an agreement with Mercosur .
To exclude Brazil from privileged bilateral relations would be unfair and , above all , a serious political mistake .
( RO ) Mr. President , I would like to emphasize the importance of this document and , as a member of the EU - Mercosur Delegation , I would like to emphasize the importance of the region .
It is a large region , with a high population , which is promising and must be helped towards economic growth .
This is a region with many natural resources and , in fact , the European Union absorbs 25 % of the Mercosur region 's exports .
It is important to assist this region for economic development , for industrial development ; its role in climate changes will be extremely important and , for this reason , we must support regional integration .
For the 2007-2013 strategy , one fifth of the budget allocated for the relationship with Mercosur will finance education and development of the information society and this is extremely important , taking into consideration that , in Brazil , the illiteracy rate is approximately 90 % .
Also , I believe that Brazil plays an important role due to the fact that almost half of the Mercosur region 's population is located in this country .
I repeat , climate changes are extremely important and this region plays an important role .
( EL ) Mr President , there is no doubt that Brazil plays a significant commercial role on the world stage .
Further strengthening of economic ties between the EU and Brazil is therefore desirable .
The EU is Brazil 's main trading partner , whilst Brazil is ranked just our twelfth most important trading partner in the EU .
The strategic partnership between the EU and Brazil should not , in my view , cause divisions in the en bloc approach of the Mercosur region .
Nevertheless , this relationship can play a complementary role in two spheres : in the multilateral negotiations at the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , and in the free trade area between the EU and Mercosur .
This area will be the largest area of inter-regional cooperation ; it will highlight the lack of progress in the multilateral negotiations in question and in inter-regional negotiations .
The progress of both areas of negotiation is to a large extent interlinked .
The free trade area between the EU and Mercosur , like the Doha Round at the WTO , has become caught up in issues of trade in agricultural goods .
The role of Brazil is particularly important here : given its influence on economic stability and integration in the wider region , Brazil ought to contribute creatively to bring about a balanced and ambitious agreement between the EU and Mercosur .
At the WTO level , Brazil cannot expect only the markets in agricultural goods of developed Member States to open up further .
Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , like the other emerging economies , Brazil must take its due share of responsibility in the current Doha Round negotiations , through genuine commitments to opening up particularly protectionist markets and complying with the rules and disciplines of the WTO .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , to begin with I would like to express my conviction that the Portuguese Presidency is following a correct strategy as regards achieving a strategic partnership between the European Union and Brazil .
I feel that the European Union should initiate and finalise this partnership as quickly as possible .
The role of Brazil in the modern globalised world is clear , economic and cultural , as is the role played by Brazil in the United Nations .
A strategic partnership between the European Union and Brazil will enable mutual relations to be energised , and will be of good service to today 's political , cultural and economic order on a world scale .
I repeat , it will be of service in improving political harmony in the global sphere .
I do not think this strategic partnership will prove any kind of hindrance to the development of a strategic partnership with Mercosur .
Partnership with Mercosur requires a strategic partnership with Brazil .
( PT ) From the outset the Portuguese Presidency 's programme included holding a summit meeting with Brazil .
It became clear that the parties would propose laying the foundations for establishing a strategic partnership .
It does not therefore make much sense to express any surprise or concern now about disregard for Mercosur and undue or premature favouring of Brazil .
The scale of the Brazilian trade market for European exporters must not be underestimated .
The European Union cannot lose the opportunity of obtaining a strategic partnership with Brazil .
The facts show that the European Union 's relations with Mercosur and Brazil respectively are already condemned to go at different speeds .
It is not ideal , but there is no evidence that one going faster does any harm to the other .
On the contrary , it might even be a strong incentive to speed things up .
Brazil today is an emerging world power , the only one among the Mercosur member states , with a market representing 85 % of the Mercosur market .
It is a representative democracy .
It is one of the European Union 's principal trade partners and a country whose 200 million inhabitants speak one of the most widespread European languages in the world - Portuguese - and whose values of civilisation and culture are closely related to those of Europe .
Without prejudice to the advantages which real progress in relations with Mercosur would mean for the EU , I do not think there is or ever has been any weighty argument in favour of delaying advancement and enhancement of our relationship with Brazil .
Nor is it up to the European Union to oversee the internal ups and downs between Mercosur members .
To think otherwise and to put off indefinitely the achievement of the Union 's very important objectives , with respect , is to indulge in wishful thinking that is incompatible with the present day situation , acting as though our plans and wishes had come true , when they have not and we do not know when they will .
( PT ) The experiment at regional integration in Mercosur has essentially been a success both at the economic and the political level .
Mercosur 's contribution to democratic consolidation in the region and growth in the volume of trade within that bloc are unquestionable facts .
It is true that at the moment the negotiations between the EU and Mercosur are at an impasse because of the wait for commitments and agreements to emerge from the Doha Round that may serve as a new starting point for our bilateral trade negotiations .
Although I do not wish to appear too pessimistic , we run the risk that the Doha Round will merely result in our losing precious time .
The EU should contribute to the success of South American regional integration by putting all its efforts into the success of the negotiations between the two blocs .
Our relationship must be much more extensive than a mere free trade agreement .
Under discussion here is a global agreement that goes much further than figures and quantities of goods to be traded .
The association agreement includes cooperation and political dialogue , which are fundamental pillars for our future relationship .
No one doubts nowadays that the European Union needs Ibero-America and its great instrument , Mercosur , in order to achieve its objective of building a more balanced and multilateral international order .
The joint statement by the President of the European Commission and the President-in-Office of Mercosur , the President of Uruguay , Tabaré Vásquez , following the meeting on 19 September promising a joint public statement by the two blocs by the end of the year on the environment and climate change is an important example of that political collaboration .
Mercosur offers great promise as far as economic integration and making South America politically stronger on the international stage are concerned , but that does not mean we can overlook or pretend not to see what is before us - the incontrovertible political presence of Brazil , by sheer force of the facts , as the leading power in South America .
Brazil is the soul and driving force of Mercosur .
With its 190 million inhabitants and an economy representing approximately 75 % of Mercosur 's GDP , Brazil is the only BRIC country with which the Union had not held a summit until now .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is absurd to think that the European Union can teach Brazil anything about the importance of Mercosur or appoint itself Mercosur 's champion before Brazil .
That is absolutely ridiculous .
Similarly , Brazil is the only Mercosur member country aspiring for a place on the UN Security Council , which it merits and which will give the whole of Latin America a voice within that important body .
Mr President , in the past I was a champion of EU-driven regional integration in Latin America through preferential support for regional multilateral blocs , such as Mercosur .
But , regrettably , in spite of the closeness of its constituent countries ( Argentina , Brazil , Paraguay and Uruguay ) culturally , Mercosur remains too weak politically compared to national interests , therefore impeding an EU-style single market in the region - although this , of course , should be our long-term objective .
Mercosur 's functioning is worsened by the recent decision by Venezuela to join , with Chávez 's anti-free-market rhetoric leading to even more protectionism in Mercosur , whose talks with the EU have for some time now been stalled .
Therefore , I welcome the fact that the EU is instead championing a strategic bilateral partnership - as agreed this July - with Brazil , which is an economic giant , but one whose share of global trade is still small in comparison to other developing countries , precisely because Brazil has failed to sign profitable bilateral free-trade agreements , placing too much faith in Mercosur .
Unlike Mexico , which already has a deal with the EU and is the other dominant player in Latin America today , Chávez 's petrodollar generosity towards Argentina has forced President Lula of Brazil to ignore Mercosur issues and allowed President Kirchner of Argentina to further his protectionist stance .
Populist Ecuador is also making noises now , joining Mercosur in spite of joining the anti-US , Venezuelan-led Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas ( ALBA ) trade initiative .
One recent spat between Argentina and Uruguay clearly demonstrates the lack of effectiveness of Mercosur in resolving its partners ' differences over the pulp mill being constructed by an EU Finnish company , Botnia , on the banks of the River Uruguay .
President Kirchner failed to stop the project , and at the same time antagonised his neighbouring country - and Mercosur partner - Uruguay by refusing to allow Mercosur 's supranational institutions to arbitrate this dispute .
Instead , what did he do ?
He called in the King of Spain to arbitrate .
( MT ) Mr President , we have before us today an agreement that reaffirms and consolidates the important role of the European Union in the global political sphere - a role to which we should attach great importance because it is part of the success of this union of states .
This agreement emphasises the strengthening of the relationship not only with our neighbouring countries , but also with countries from other continents , especially countries that are home to thousands of millions of people of European origin such as those of Latin America and Central America .
It is in the interest of both sides that these relations continue to be strengthened by means of dialogue and the exchange of ideas .
However , we have to ensure that democracy in the countries that benefit from any assistance that we give is safeguarded .
We should also ensure that all assistance , both direct and indirect , is targeted at reducing poverty , increasing equality and , last but not least , reducing the imbalance between the two regions of the world .
This should always be within the bounds of transparency and accountability .
Protection of freedom of expression and of fundamental rights should also be a priority in all negotiations .
Whilst the European Union should provide assistance to each country in particular periods , but requires special help , we must ensure that this is done within a structured framework so that no one is left behind and so that wealth is distributed fairly .
As Members of this Parliament we must as far as possible promote relations between the European Union and Mercosur and determine how to strengthen any weak points so that in these relations we can ensure efficacy and success as far as possible .
With new challenges such as climate change being given increasing importance on our agenda , we should view these relations as the beginning of a strategic partnership that leads to an environmental dimension and sustainable development that produce reciprocal wealth .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for your contributions .
I have already had the opportunity on previous occasions to explain , justify and inform the European Parliament about the first EU-Brazil Summit , its results and objectives .
Moreover , the importance of this strategic partnership with Brazil has been amply highlighted by many Members here today and I cannot but welcome the fact that those Members who at first seemed doubtful or more hesitant about the intention of the Portuguese initiative , now in fact seem more favourable towards the strategic choice which Portugal , as the country holding the Presidency , but also the European Union as a whole , made with regard to Brazil .
Naturally we are speaking and have spoken here about Brazil 's importance politically and economically , and as regards the environment and energy , which are fundamental realities in the contemporary world which we cannot ignore .
It would be odd , as pointed out here , if the European Union were to have strategic relationships , strategic partnerships with Russia , India and China , but not with Brazil .
We believe that we have bridged that gap and we also believe that in a few years ' time everyone will unequivocally applaud this initiative by the Portuguese Presidency .
However , we also always made it absolutely clear that this strategic partnership which we believe the European Union should establish with Brazil in no way excluded or limited other relations which we also wished to extend on the economic and political levels with Mercosur .
I must say , ladies and gentlemen , that I am fairly at ease about that because Portugal was always amongst those EU countries that always fought for a close and deep relationship of solidarity with the Mercosur countries in all aspects of that relationship .
We therefore have no hesitation and do not wish to allow the impression to be created here that a partnership with Brazil excludes or could exclude a close partnership with the Mercosur countries .
Such a vision , which instead of being a vision of complementarity could be a vision of exclusion , does not seem helpful to us and , above all , does not seem to correspond to reality - quite the reverse .
Furthermore , as has been pointed out here , it is the final statement from the EU-Brazil Summit itself which explicitly and completely unequivocally states that the European Union and Brazil will work together so that the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement might finally become a reality .
We are all aware of the ups and downs which the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement has gone through .
We really are at an impasse due largely , as we know , to issues of trade between the European Union and Mercosur .
The Doha Round began in the meantime and what happened there obviously also influenced the trade dimension of the EU-Mercosur negotiations .
I want to make it quite clear to you , however , that once the Portuguese Presidency considers that the minimum conditions are established to relaunch that debate and that relationship , we shall not hesitate ; we also assure you that , if that is not during the Portuguese Presidency then Portugal as a Member State - as it has always done and as has always been its aim - will not fail to call the attention of its partners to the real need to relaunch the negotiations on the Association Agreement with Mercosur in all its dimensions .
In conclusion , I must tell you that we are considering holding , if possible still within the Portuguese Presidency , a high-level troika meeting with the Mercosur countries .
We are studying that possibility and , as I say , as a possibility for the Portuguese Presidency 's agenda , which is , as you all know , a very full and very complex agenda , but we shall do what we can to be able to relaunch - at the political level too - this debate with the Mercosur countries .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am also very grateful for the atmosphere , the debate and the real openness on this issue .
I think we have to be responsive to the realities of the time and , fortunately , we now have many more important partners for multilateral cooperation than maybe 10 or 20 years ago .
The reality is that Brazil is the only country missing from the BRICS group , one of the five which are regularly invited by the G8 to its summits and a country which represents EU investment equalling the level of investment in Russia , China and India cumulatively from EU countries , so it is a really important partner .
It is even more important to add that the strategic partnership is complementary to overall broader priorities , including cooperation with Latin America and with Mercosur : in the partnership itself , one of the strategic common issues is the promotion of regional integration and an EU-Mercosur Association Agreement .
A lot has been said about the content and some concerns voiced .
We addressed them .
For example , in the food safety area in the first half of this year , an intensive programme of inspections was carried out , especially regarding beef , fishery products and poultry .
We have witnessed significant improvements in food safety , and many deficiencies have been largely rectified , but of course the work will continue , as some of you said , even at political level .
The Commissioner will visit Brazil next month to discuss this area , and that is a very important area of closer cooperation .
It is our common cause , our common interest , that the Doha Development Round is concluded successfully .
We are doing all we can in this regard on all sides in order to reach the end , hopefully this year .
I shall make a small remark on what could be done in promotion of cooperation with other countries .
There is , for example , one area which I wanted to raise as a good case .
Brazil is the first country from Latin America to cooperate in our research programme and , via this experience and bridge , I think we can gradually do more in other countries .
So it is not against the others ; it is one of the leading economies and partners in the area and cooperation is growing overall .
It is very complementary to our ambitions to bring more integration to the Latin American continent .
The Commission will keep you duly informed about the process , as requested .
We are now awaiting the political response to the communication from the Brazilian side .
On the basis of this response , we will try mutually to draft an action plan proposal and then hopefully get this action plan agreed and implemented .
Last but not least , I want to express my gratitude to the Presidency for its commitment and very positive input , regarding not only the first historical summit , but also the development of cooperation between the EU and Brazil and between the EU and Mercosur as a broader area .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Green Paper on urban transport ( debate )
The next item is the Commission communication on the Green Paper on Urban Transport .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Rarely has a debate been so topical , since you have only just come out of the meeting .
Thank you for delivering a copy of the Green Paper to me so quickly .
You know the rule , ladies and gentlemen : we will apply the catch-the-eye system .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks on behalf of my Group !
That is a fantastic idea - promoting mobility while taking measures to avoid disasters and environmental pollution .
But you have stressed that you want to observe the principle of subsidiarity .
When we read through the paper , you make very practical proposals , on city tolls and other matters for instance .
How do you want to ensure that your good proposals and the debate we are all waiting for and which we will be having for a whole year do not lead to us telling cities and regions what to do , but only to an incentive actually to adopt best practice ?
We are agreed that we have to do something for cities and establish best practice .
We are familiar with the accident statistics .
In many cities and towns there is a high accident rate , but not in others .
This is due to how matters are handled locally .
How then do you want to manage the development of collective ideas without the cities and regions getting the feeling they are being patronised by Europe ?
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we know that we are still at the beginning of an entire process and I therefore look forward to hearing the responses of stakeholders and the concrete actions that you are planning for next year .
I feel , however , that it is highly important that you place this on the political agenda in order to show that this is a priority for the Commission and for the European Union as a whole , in order both to bring about sustainable mobility and to achieve our agreements in relation to climate control .
I think that one of the most important things is to establish an instrument through which good examples that already exist in many cities can be exchanged in such a way that we can learn from them .
Each city is different and each problem is different , yet I believe that it all comes down to establishing an effective mechanism and I wonder what your view is on this .
How can we exchange all the good ideas that form the basis of associations in small and large cities so that we can learn from them ?

( FR ) Mr President , I am especially pleased , Commissioner , with the five objectives you have just defined , although as you mentioned afterwards , there will be concrete measures following the consultation , which ends in March .
If you will allow me , Commissioner , I would like to repeat what the members of our Urban Housing Intergroup have pointed out : namely the need to adopt an integrated approach , not only for cities , but also , as you said earlier , for the suburbs .
As part of this integrated approach , bearing in mind that the European Union invests regional funds - the ERDF , ESF and EAFRD , the latter involving both rural and suburban areas - it seems to us that you and your fellow Commissioners need to take these various aspects into account , so that the integrated approach can truly be implemented by cities and municipalities .
Therefore , today I once again call for the integrated approach to be taken into account in this issue of urban transport .
Mr Jarzembowski , these are proposals .
They are not complete .
In a box , at the end of each set of questions , we have asked what the role of the European Union should be .
Therefore , I am not going to predict what the outcome of the debate will be .
The question is open and in fact it must be demonstrated that there is real European added value .
We are not going to claim to exercise any sort of supervision over European towns and cities .
Mr El Khadraoui , I think you hit the nail on the head : we want to make this a political priority .
I think you voiced my own thoughts on the subject . I would like elected officials , by supporting each other and through good practice and sharing the best experiences , to convince their compatriots somehow to engage in these bolder and more environmentally-friendly urban policies .
Mr Beaupuy rounded off what you said by pointing out that we can only truly succeed with an integrated approach , which effectively means that town planners also have to design towns and cities in a certain way , taking into account future mobility requirements , and specifically the construction of suburban areas : this should not be haphazard .
I would like to thank Mr Beaupuy in particular , as well as the urban mobility group , which I am sure will make a valuable contribution .
( PL ) Mr President , first of all I would like to express my thanks for the interest in the subject of urban transport .
This is an extremely serious and difficult subject , especially as the EU is concerned with urban policy .
The very raising of the subject at European Commission level in relation to towns shows that we are dealing here with an unusually interesting interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity .
I am very much in favour of the Commission 's actions in this sphere .
In supporting the Commission 's actions in this sphere , I would like to ask the Commissioner , although perhaps this question is a bit premature , but nevertheless , how are we to understand the arrangement whereby the Commission will implement the principle of partnership in this matter , in other words , what are the possible instruments of partnership ?
Are we talking about an exchange of experience ?
Are we talking about a partner who also in some sense does more than just propose , but actually demands ?
On the back of what Mr Jarzembowski has said , I would also like to ask for support for the Committee on Regional Development having reinforced cooperation with the Committee on Transport and Tourism in this matter .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , many thanks for your speech and for the Green Paper , the details of which we are still not familiar with .
It is true that more and more people are living in cities and conurbations , but there are also , of course , specific problems associated with shrinking cities , which should not be completely disregarded .
My first question is : are they also in our field of vision ?
We have capacity overload in the inner cities , primarily associated with individual private transport resulting in very high emissions , particulates , noise and also safety problems .
Secondly , if we now want to increase public transport , and networking it intelligently plays a crucial role in the solution , the question then arises , of course , whether we will be able to use capital from the Structural Funds for this purpose at all .
Thirdly , as regards the many individual proposals for freight transport logistics and so on : do we also have a forum for exchanging best practice models , in which this exchange can take place in an organised manner ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for the report .
You write here that you want to promote alternatives to the car , namely travel by bus , rail , cycling and walking .
However , you also know that 95 % of EU cofinancing , which the cities are asking for , goes solely to road transport .
You are therefore considering whether you should say that at least 50 % must in future go to these alternatives , because my home city of Berlin argues , for example , that EU funds should not be spent on local public transport .
I think that is mad !
If you do not change the funding , you will never be successful .
Therefore , how do you want to ensure that the EU 's alternatives can be considered in future ?


Mr Olbrycht , partnership can be expressed through sharing good practice and , at the request of the towns , through a set of guidelines concerning , for example , the use of a town 's central infrastructure , or through more harmonised information : sometimes there are signs that show a motorway in one colour in one town or Member State , but in another colour in a different town or Member State .
We should think of ways of harmonising information .
Therefore , obviously I think that this partnership will fully take account of the intentions of the regions and that we will find synergies to generate resources .
Mr Stockmann , the Structural Funds are available for some pilot initiatives .
In my trans-European networks budget and the budget of the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport in general , we have resources for monitoring pilot schemes , particularly through Civitas , which you are familiar with .
It is true that we also need to clarify further the use of the Structural Funds , which leads me on to say that Mr Cramer 's comment is justified and that , in some cases , we need to be more careful about how the Structural Funds are used .
It is true that the European Union has not indicated a percentage for the use of the Funds : it is up to the towns , cities and regions to decide .
For this reason , therefore , I believe that through this Green Paper and through the debate , our task will be to convince the towns , cities and regions to make better use of the Funds .
I think the example you gave is a very interesting one .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , I very much approve of some of the things you have mentioned .
You have highlighted the upgrading of public transport , greater road safety , and environmental aspects in driver training and satellite navigation .
All this is associated with certain problems - it costs a lot of money .
Mr Cramer has already demonstrated one form of concerted action .
I should like to put forward a second , which has not yet been mentioned .
We have the miracle cure in our hands .
We have the internalisation of external costs in front of us .
We hear that this method of calculation is ready and aspects of urban transport that cannot otherwise be paid for could be subsidised and paid for by comprehensive internalisation of external costs .
Two questions on this : when can we realistically expect the presentation of a preliminary model , which we can subsequently expand and enlarge ?
Can you also envisage using this money for similar projects ?
( FR ) Mr President , personally I am just as keen as Mr Jarzembowski that local authorities should be free to govern and I do not think that we can impose any sort of transport policy on an independent local authority elected by universal suffrage .
We would be misguided to do so .
That said , it seems to me that the Community added-value is indisputable , since we are trying to tackle the greenhouse effect .
What we are dealing with is the production of pollutants , particularly at regional level , by transport , which we know is the main source of pollutants and greenhouse gases .
Therefore , I do not think it is excessive for the European Union to become involved , including for conservation reasons .
On the other hand , I do believe that there cannot be any coercive policy .
There could be an incentive policy , Commissioner . I sometimes like to think that this would be hugely successful if there were , for example , a Community URBAN programme for transport ; in other words , a programme that encourages local authorities to engage in sustainable mobility based on a set of sustainable mobility guidelines .
I do not know whether you can envisage this .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commissioner for his political courage in dealing with this issue and suggesting that subsidiarity is an opportunity .
In the Committee on Petitions we are constantly seeing petitions from citizens at local level who are asking for the help and protection of the European Union , precisely to resolve problems that can no longer be resolved locally , because they are matters to be resolved globally , such as environmental and security issues , etc .
I would like to ask the Commissioner if in intelligent systems the subject of information to citizens is taken into account , as it could enormously reduce stress about disinformation .
Also , whether the problems of road safety on the daily commute to work will be taken into account , as this is one of the areas in which we are having the most problems .
Also , what would be the ideas regarding this rationalisation of the distribution of goods , which often causes these congestion problems .
( RO ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioner , the development of the European Union is based upon mobility and free movement of persons and goods .
80 % of European citizens live in towns and 40 % live in cities .
60 % of them believe that there is , in fact , congestion and pollution at an urban level and over 70 % of them are waiting for a European action .
I believe that the Green Paper on public transport will also solve , has to solve , the issue of the 40 % of the citizens who do not own a car and live in towns and , especially , the integration of disabled people into economic and social life .
Urban planning is extremely important and I also request the use of certain funds - structural funds , JESSICA , regional funds - for urban transport development .
I support the use of the project and the expansion of the CIVITAS project and CIVITAS + and , especially , the encouraging and supporting of new Member States in order to benefit from these funds for urban transport development .
( FR ) Commissioner , you are embarking on an ambitious project that concerns us all .
I truly hope that , in this transport debate , we do not forget the important role that transport has for territorial cohesion .
You talked about access to towns and cities by urban transport .
I sincerely hope that in this great debate , we remember to talk about rural areas and , as you said , incentives for local authorities in terms of rural transport , which is often overlooked .

Mr President , I would first of all like to thank those MEPs who have voiced their initial reactions . It has been extremely interesting to hear what they have to say .
Mr Leichtfried , we do in fact have the problem of the regional disc scheme , or ' Eurovignette ' , which is being examined as part of a study planned for 2008 in connection with the Eurovignette Directive .
The date is set in the Directive and the work is already under way .
I think we need to consider urban charging , as well as how the revenue generated is used .
I think that this is a very important issue , because it might , if we had a legal framework , help mayors to be able to use this tool in some cases , while monitoring the allocation of the resources generated .
To a certain extent , the final question in our questionnaire provides an answer to what Mr Savary said .
I quote : ' In the longer term , what added value might derive from targeted European support for the financing of clean and energy-efficient urban transport ? '
The question almost echoes what Mr Savary asked ; namely whether there could eventually be a Community programme .
It is too early to say , but it is crucial that we raise the question .
I would like to thank Mr Savary for saying that there is a certain amount of Community added value in such an important policy for the future .
Mrs Ayala Sender , public information is of course a major factor in intelligent mobility and we know that , in this respect , satellite navigation , combined with progress in new information and communications technologies , must ensure that a bus stop , say , can also be a passenger information point .
There is plenty to do here and it is essential that the most effective technology is made available to towns and cities .
You also mentioned rationalising the distribution of goods in town and city centres : there is a huge amount to be done there also .
Mrs Ţicău , thank you for raising the problem of access for the disabled and for people with reduced mobility in general .
I think that this is another major aspect of this issue .
We must give ' European citizenship ' content , and I can see only advantages in having a real charter on rights and obligations for passengers that would also be beneficial to these citizens .
Mrs Douay was right to remind us that , of course , mobility must be considered as a whole .
There are people who live in towns and cities , there are people who go to towns and cities to work , and there too there has to be a more integrated approach .
However , I will finish by saying both to you , Mrs Douay , and to all MEPs : we have made quite a rough sketch , if you like , because we did not want to confine answers at this stage within certain restricted rules .
The questions are deliberately open .
That said , I am also weighing up all the effort needed to achieve a coherent and efficient action plan , otherwise there will be no European added value .
Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and I sincerely look forward to continuing this exciting debate on urban mobility over the coming months .
Commission Question Time
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am happy to contribute by answering on the issue of the specificity of sport .
It would be very timely to discuss this even in more depth - not now , but later on - because on 11 July this year the Commission adopted a White Paper on sport .
This was a very important contribution , which stressed the importance of promoting the training of young , talented sportsmen and sportswomen in proper conditions , which is crucial for the sustainable development of sport at all levels .
This was an institutional and very political contribution to the question and to cooperation on this matter .
I quote from the paper : ' Rules requiring that teams include a certain quota of locally trained players could be accepted as being compatible with the Treaty provisions on free movement of persons if they do not lead to any direct discrimination based on nationality and if possible indirect discrimination effects resulting from them can be justified as being proportionate to a legitimate objective pursued , such as to enhance and protect the training and development of talented young players . '
I think this is a very important clarification of how to understand this issue .
The Commission is currently in the process of evaluating the compatibility of UEFA 's measures on home-grown players with Community law , with a view to striking the right balance between the need to comply , on the one side , with Community law and the autonomy of sports organisations , and with the interests of European football on the other .
This is done in the light of the declaration annexed to the Amsterdam Treaty , the so-called Nice Declaration of the European Council in 2000 , and the White Paper on Sport , which specifically mentions , as action number 9 in the Pierre de Coubertin Action Plan , ' to complete the analysis of rules requiring that teams include a certain quota of locally training players ' .
This comprehensive comparative information on football academies in Member States and on home-grown players is not available at present .
In 2006 , the Commission launched a study on sport academies in Member States , including the issue of home-grown players .
The results of this study are expected to provide valuable input for its analysis .
Concerning the second part of the question - because it consists of two sentences on the specificity of sport - Chapter 4 of this White Paper develops the concept of specificity of sport within the limits of existing EU competences .
As described in more detail in our Staff Working Document in the annexes , decisions taken by the European Court of Justice and the Commission show that the specificity of sport has been recognised and taken into account in the past .
The Commission shares the view that certain values and traditions of European sport should be promoted and will continue to recognise the specificities of this sector , while respecting EU law .
However , a case-by-case approach remains the basis for the Commission 's control of the application of EU law , and in particular competition and internal market rules .
This is in line with the current Treaty provisions .
In order to provide legal clarity for all stakeholders and to contribute to the improvement of governance in European sport , the above-mentioned Staff Working Document and its two annexes explain in depth this issue of specificity .
It concerns sport and EU competition rules and sport and internal market freedoms , and takes stock for the first time of European Court of Justice case-law and Commission decisions in the area of sport .
I want to underline that , for the first time , the specificity of sport is set out in our policy document much more than it has been at any time in the recent past in the EU context .
That is one of the most important contributions - not only to this answer , but also to the promotion of sport in the European Union .
UEFA 's rules requiring clubs to have a certain proportion of players that are locally trained and home grown is designed to make sure that clubs do not rely only on their financial muscle in the transfer market , but have to invest locally in their communities in training .
It is a vital scheme .
Yet the Commission , on this point in its White Paper , has not come off the fence in saying that it is a scheme that is acceptable under the Treaty and now , Commissioner , you say it could be , if ... - and you are still investigating .
May I ask the Commission , why is it taking so long ?
When will the Commission be in a position to endorse this welcome scheme ?
Member of the Commission . - I would love to give more of an answer , but there is already a kind of step forward if we recall our debates a year ago , or at least from the perspective of Parliament .
I think that the answer I quoted , which is part of the communication , of this policy paper , is an important assurance that we want to support the specificity of sport , particularly of football , in terms of the protection and promotion of young people and the training of , and investment in , young people .
The study has not been completed , because we do not have all the data we would like to have .
I hope that with the complementary questionnaire we are now working on we will get the remaining figures .
It is very important that partners from Member States ' associations , federations , clubs and leagues , work with us .
Hopefully in a foreseeable time - I would like it to be early next year - we will be able to give a definitive answer .
In two weeks ' time we will meet with all stakeholders from the world of sport in Brussels to debate the content and implementation of the White Paper .
I believe that this part will be very crucial for concrete action and the promotion of the values of sport .
On behalf of the Commission , I can tell you that we remain committed to these issues , and all the sensitivities must be dealt with duly .
Before we take any decision - not only in this area , which is quite specific - we have to carry out a thorough analysis and then take real decisions .

( DE ) Commissioner , without wanting to offend the Commission or the Court of Justice , I have the feeling that neither our judges nor our Commissioners , or the female members of the Commission , are seen very often at a football ground .
If they were there more often , they would notice that we are currently at the start of the European Cup season , in which we have teams playing against each other in which often just one member at any one time is a member of the national squad .
We have therefore witnessed the nurturing of new blood being totally neglected and we attribute an exclusively economic dimension to it all .
Football is more than an internal market , and football is not merely competition in the legal sense .
Football is a sports competition between national , regional and local teams .
Something needs to happen here , and fast .
Can the Commission promise that something really is happening apart from studies being undertaken ?
Member of the Commission . - I am sure that something really will be done .
I use football as a great example , because in a way Europe is the best in the world in football .
I think we can be the best in many other areas like , for example , higher education , which is usually not seen as the best of Europe .
No , what Europe needs is not only to refer to its successes or to refer to the importance of football or sport for its historical developments and current achievements , but also for the future .
A balanced approach to sport activities is one of the answers , which means it is not about money in the first place , but about the rules and values that govern the world and money to support healthy investment .
I know about the imbalances , the problems and doubts about the credibility of competitions and about corruption , and too much money deciding who is really a strong partner or strong competitor .
Since 1999 , with the Helsinki Report - you remember , maybe , even better - and then the Nice Declaration , there has been , I think , a new momentum .
The Commission had never come forward with a policy paper .
If we come forward , not just with a paper in hand , but to offer actions - and there are 53 actions offered under the name of the Pierre de Coubertin Action Plan - then we can do a lot .
If we stay credible in implementation , I think we can prepare also the first Treaty article on sport , because we do not have a legal base now , and that is why we cannot define some of the actions , and that is why we have to decide case by case , on individual problems .
There are many collateral issues in this answer , so more credibility means cooperation of EU institutions , national legislators , but also governing bodies in areas of sport .
They set the rules , they govern and they have to be also credible in governing individual disciplines or games or competitions .
I would say a sports forum , which we will organise under the Portuguese Presidency , could be one of the answers for permanent or regular transparent and credible dialogue on all problems and possible solutions , whether on a small scale , in Europe or in broader international cooperation .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , in his letter Michel Platini , President of UEFA , asks the leaders of the 27 EU Member States to intervene by dealing with the rising wealth of football clubs , which are spending ever more on players and other purchases , thus turning football into a business rather that a sport with values .
However , in his statements before this letter , the President of UEFA asked politicians not to interfere in football .
He said that the EU and the European Parliament should confine themselves to their political roles and stay away from sport .
Do you agree with these views held by the President of UEFA , and to what extent ?
Will the White Paper on sport be a good opportunity to clarify these outstanding matters ?

Member of the Commission . - The Commission is currently finalising the directive on the promotion of renewable energy , and I am targeting adoption of this directive by the end of this year .
And one of the very important issues in this directive will be addressing sustainability of biofuels , the principles described and ways of guaranteeing that biofuels do not have a negative influence on the environment .
For this reason , a particular scheme will definitely be proposed that could be used - and will be used - both for domestic grown biofuels and also for imported ones .
Would the Commissioner agree that our record in controlling the import of timber from illegal sources is lamentable - simply dreadful ?
Given this experience and the potential for corruption and falsification of documents that exists , how can we have confidence that any certification of biofuel crops will be valid ?
Might we not end up making a bad problem worse ?

Member of the Commission . - First of all , I cannot confirm that there is a lot of illegal timber being brought into the European Union , but what I can clearly say is that , so far , there has been a very limited amount of biofuels coming into the European Union .
We have not had any effect whatsoever in terms of negative consequences for rain forests .
The certification schemes that are proposed will be implemented .
I have no doubts whatsoever about that , because the general performance by customs within the European Union has been very positive .
( DE ) Commissioner , what has just been mentioned is a problem .
A second problem apparently is that due to the increased use of biofuels , prices of staple foods are beginning to increase , particularly in countries where this really can become a problem and many people , particularly in these countries , are no longer able to afford their staple foods .
Are you aware of this problem ?
If so , what are your thoughts on it and what is being done about it ?

Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) The main reason for the current price increases for food is rising demand , particularly in China , India and also in other states .
That is the main reason for the price increases .
My colleague , who will take the floor after me , will explain what measures we need to take .
It is clear that we have to produce more because demand also has to be covered .
As far as biofuels are concerned , their influence on food prices is very marginal at present because consumption of biofuels globally is still low .
We do , of course , have to take account of this because a great deal of maize is currently being produced for biofuels in the United States .
This can influence a certain sector , but there are ways to continue to meet rising demand .
I am of the view that we in the Commission have to find an answer to world market prices .
My colleague has already prepared some proposals on this .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , there is a view that growing biofuels and trading in them may absorb the surplus production of developing countries via conversion to biofuels for their own use or for export .
Does the Commission believe that the biofuels sector could unlock the Doha Round of the World Trade Organisation negotiations ?
Member of the Commission . - It is a normal Nordic approach : rather short but straight to the point .
I can clearly say that the next two months will be crucial for the Doha Development Round .
Negotiations have now re-started on the basis of the proposals that were submitted in July by the chairs of the respective negotiating groups on agriculture and on industrial products .
The chairs , in producing their negotiation proposal , have done an honest job .
I think we can say that they have distributed the pain fairly .
They put pressure on each of the key players on each issue of the so-called negotiation triangle - AMA , NAMA and domestic subsidies - which is most sensitive for the different players .
It is obvious as well that the text of the chairs is not cast in stone .
The WTO membership had a chance to offer preliminary reactions to these texts before the summer break .
But now negotiations really have to get down to specifics .
A further round of discussions on modalities kicked off at the very beginning of September , taking place in Geneva .
The objective of the WTO Director-General , Pascal Lamy , and the chairs is to be in a position to issue a revised paper some time in October to serve as an ultimate basis for a final deal on modalities , to take place no later than this autumn .
Whether this will be the case , whether there will be a final paper , depends entirely on the negotiating engagement of the different players .
The United States should now translate President Bush 's political commitment at the APEC Summit into concrete negotiating moves to try to clinch a deal .
It is imperative for the United States to be seen to engage and to move on agricultural subsidies , not least in respect of its objective to ensure access to the developing countries ' agricultural markets .
Brazil , India and , by the same token , other emerging economies have to move in the right direction and deliver their side of the bargain , and that means cutting , to some extent , their actual tariffs on industrial products .
The reality of these talks is that the distance to the finishing line - if we talk in economic terms - is fairly short at this stage , certainly very short compared to the road that we have been travelling until now .
The value of remaining concessions that both developed and some developing countries need to bring into the final package is small compared to the systemic gain of doing the deal , especially as global economic conditions are becoming more and more uncertain .
But the clock is ticking .
If there is no agreement on modalities in the autumn , an early conclusion of the DDA becomes very unlikely .
The United States presidential campaign will pick up speed and the round might then be put into the deep freeze for years .
For the round to succeed now , all parties need to show flexibility and willingness to reach a compromise .
The European Union will continue to reach out to the various constituencies of the WTO membership and their key members to ensure their constructive engagement .
I want to thank the Commissioner for her response .
I would have liked it if Commissioner Mandelson was here as well , because I know he had a meeting in America last week , where he was disappointed with the response .
But , very briefly , you spoke about the developing countries and you mentioned , as part of that , Brazil and India .
From an industrial point of view and from an export point of view , they cannot be classed as developing countries .
Yet at the same time , from a cultural point of view , they are classed as developing countries with regard to the benefits that they will get .
Should Europe give more in the agricultural field , in particular when you see that the US Farm Bill , which has now come into being , is taking more subsidies out of the package that was originally negotiated , and Europe seems to be giving all of the leeway , whereas America is not taking any of the pain ?
Is that a correct way to continue ?
And , finally , if autumn is the deadline , the end of October is autumn . Winter starts on 1 November .
So do you see a time frame there for that to be successful ?
Member of the Commission . - In defining when winter starts , in my calendar it is December , but so be it .
First of all , it is obvious that , when we look at the direction that the US Farm Bill is taking , it is not very productive in terms of supporting an agreement within the Doha Round , but we cannot prejudge the decisions in the Senate at the end of the day .
I am not going into a discussion on whether Brazil is a developed or developing country when we talk about the mix of agriculture and industrial products , but it is obvious that , in the agricultural sector - and in biofuels , which were discussed just a few minutes ago - Brazil is a very competitive country .
Biofuels produced from sugar cane are very competitive in the global market .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
You said that it is very important that the US make an offer .
It has been strongly suggested in recent days that the US has in fact made a very significant and very interesting offer on domestic market supports .
I would just like to ask you if this is so , and , if it is , could you give us any information ?
My second question is : would you not agree that , certainly up to now , we seem to be the ones that are making the concessions ?
Can you confirm that Commissioner Mandelson has offered 70 % cuts in support to EU farmers , and , if this is so , do you support this position ?
Would you not agree that such cuts would devastate European agriculture and , in particular , the beef sector ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , when we looked at the negotiating papers from the two chairs , Mr Falconer , who is responsible for the agricultural sector , put a paper with some gaps between the figures .
And when we look at domestic support , which is the most difficult issue for the Americans , it is obvious that they have now signalled that they will be able to operate within the gap or within the two figures mentioned in the Falconer paper .
The negotiations , or discussions , are ongoing , so it will be extremely difficult to say where the final game will end up .
But I have to say , the difficult issue for the European Union is , as far as the agricultural sector is concerned , of course the tariffs .
But even more important than the tariffs is the way that we treat our sensitive products .
This is simply key and more important , actually , than the reduction of the tariffs in the different bands which we are operating .
So I can only encourage you to keep a close eye on the way to treat sensitive products as this will be key in the final game .
( DE ) I do understand that we have to deal with these negotiations on quota prices etc . , but what I do not see here is the negotiation or dissemination of what Europe represents , the dissemination of our way of life .
Madam Commissioner , the question for me is whether you are entering into these negotiations and saying : we do not want any products that have been made by children !
We do not want any products that have been made by forced or slave labour !
We do not want any products that have not been produced in compliance with core labour standards !
Is this the issue and are you making an issue out of it ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is still of the opinion that there is a window of opportunity for a positive outcome of the Doha negotiations in the very close future , as I mentioned in my previous answer .
I can only say again that , unless a breakthrough is achieved before the end of the year , I find it very difficult to see a possibility of finalising the negotiations , because of the upcoming presidential elections in the United States .
However , current offers made by some of our negotiating partners are still falling short of what could be required to obtain a balanced outcome to the negotiations .
Regarding the scope of a final EU offer , the ongoing common agricultural policy reform constitutes clearly the limits of the Commission 's negotiating mandate , and this means that we cannot accept a deal that means that we have to reform our common agricultural policy again .
It is clearly in accordance with the mandate given by the Council , and the negotiation limits that we have will also be , of course , the equivalent concessions from our WTO partners in agriculture and elsewhere , resulting in improving market opportunities for our exporters .
It is important that when we talk about the reduction of tariffs we sometimes fear that our agricultural sector will come under immense pressure from imported commodities .
We have to remember that the coin has two sides , which means that a reduction of tariffs will also take place on the new emerging markets that could be - and I am sure this will happen - of huge interest for European producers to enter into , such as , for example China , and India .
So we are still striving towards a positive outcome of the Doha Round .
It is obvious that a multilateral solution is to be preferred , whereas a bilateral one could be supplementary to the multilateral discussions .
We are doing our very best at this stage , but it is crucial , if we find a solution , for it to be a balanced solution - within the three pillars of agriculture but also between agriculture , industrial products and services .
( EL ) Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
I have the feeling that you are speaking more as a Commissioner for International Trade and less as the Commissioner for Agriculture .
Does Mr Mandelson , the Commissioner responsible for International Trade , also share your view that the review of the CAP will not do any damage ?
Does he share the view that accepting the modalities of July 2007 , which go beyond the offer made by the EU in October 2005 , does not exceed the negotiating mandate given by the Council of Ministers of 2005 ?
If so , before you make any commitment to our trade partners , you need not ask for a new mandate from the Council .
Member of the Commission . - When the CAP reform was agreed among the Ministers in the Council in 2003 , it was the mandate that was given to the trade and agricultural commissioners .
Within this mandate we could negotiate .
What we are now presenting - or what we will be presenting on 20 November - is the health check of the agricultural policy , and this is not a new reform .
It is not a new reform and therefore it is not my perception that , whether or not we get a Doha deal , it will have influence on what we are suggesting as the health check of the common agricultural policy .
So it will not be influencing or moving the mandate that we have already got .
( DE ) Madam Commissioner , genetic engineering in farmed foods makes many people in Europe uneasy , anxious and afraid .
Is this subject again playing , or will it continue to play , a greater role in the Doha Round ?
Member of the Commission . - It is obvious that what we have experienced throughout the last few months in terms of the price increases in Europe , especially as reported in the newspapers in Germany throughout the summer break , has of course raised many questions .
These are quite new questions on agricultural policy in Europe , where we were previously fighting against overproduction , intervention stocks , and we are now in a much more balanced market , thanks , I think , to the decoupling of the direct payment to farmers , which allows farmers to react to the market instead of calculating the best outcome on the cheque from Brussels .
It is clear that in the Doha Round the préférence communautaire or the security of food supply is not in itself an issue .
It is , of course , crucial to everybody round the world to be sure that they can feed their own people , but it is not exclusively a chapter in our negotiations .
In addition to expressing unease about yet further concessions damaging to our agricultural interests , can I ask you what focus there has been in the negotiations on raising beef production standards amongst those who seek greater access to our market , so that we might end the prejudicial impact on our own producers of permitting food imports where traceability and quality fall far below the standards that we expect of our own producers ?
Member of the Commission . - I think I have heard this before .
I might be wrong , but it reminds me of some question raised by the Irish Minister and some Irish MEPs on the import from Brazil , traceability , and the opinion of the Irish farmers on lack of traceability .
It is obvious that we are following this case closely , and I know that my colleague , Commissioner Kyprianou , will be meeting the committee in Parliament .
We want to ensure fair trade , which means that importers or exporters into the European Union have to meet the same quality standards as our own producers .
I will be visiting Brazil next month to see if they can show me what I want to see : that is , how things work in Brazil concerning the possibility of tracing back the products that are taken into the European Union .
Question No 36 is inadmissible as its author is no longer a Member .
Subject : Amendment of the CMO in wine
On 4 July 2007 the Commission unveiled a proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in wine .
Funds for the ' national envelopes ' are allocated according to a key which is based to 50 % on the historical input of Member States , 25 % on area and 25 % on production .
Moreover , adjustments have been made in favour of certain Member States .
Will the Commission say which criteria were used in the selection of the specific allocation key and why the funds are not allocated on the basis of the historical payments of Member States over a representative reference period , as occurred in the case of all those CMOs which have so far been amended ?
Furthermore , given that the overall amount of resources is limited , how was it decided to adjust input for the benefit of some Member States , which necessarily results in a corresponding decrease for the others ?

Member of the Commission . - In order to propose a fair share between Member States of the overall amount that will be allocated to the national envelope , and of the amount transferred into our rural development policy , we have actually been using three different criteria : areas under wine on the basis of all the available historical data that we have ; secondly , the production in terms of volume on the basis of historical averages ; and , thirdly , expenditure , on the basis of an historical average , except for Bulgaria and Romania where the budgetary requirements calculated within the framework of adhesion were used , as those were the only reliable figures that we could use .
The weighting between these three different areas is 25 % on area , 25 % on production and 50 % on the budget for the envelopes and the transfer into the rural development policy .
50 % for area and 50 % for production for that part of the envelope which is specifically related to promotion in third countries , which I consider to be a new and very important forward-looking policy for the wine sector .
When we had this discussion on the redistribution between Member States ' envelopes , we made a positive correction for three Member States so as to limit their reduction in view of the important divergence for these Member States between their share in historical expenditure and their share in the two other criteria .
This correction was not made to the detriment of the amounts allocated to other Member States , meaning that we did not cut other amounts to find money for these three Member States , so we simply increased the total budget .
This makes it possible to share Community support equitably by taking into account , on the one hand , the respective reductive capacity of each Member State and , on the other hand , effective implementation of the new measures proposed within the framework of the reform .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , at a time when the Commission believes that it is necessary within the framework of the law to make structural changes for some Member States , is it examining the possibility of reacting in a similar way to help Greek wine-growers recently hit by the catastrophic fires ?
Their income for the coming years will be significantly reduced .
Huge areas covering thousands of hectares of vineyards have been burned ; this means that the vine-growers have suffered loss and that their plants have been damaged .
In view of this , does the Commission intend to demonstrate solidarity and to help these people ?

Member of the Commission . - First of all , I think that everybody who watched the devastating forest fires in Greece on the television wondered what would happen afterwards with the damaged areas .
I have had the possibility to discuss it with Greek Members of Parliament , with the Minister , with the Ministry , with the Minister for Economics from Greece as well , while travelling round to find solutions .
And there are different solutions , and that will be for my next question .
I can only say we cannot solve the problems of the forest fire within the CMO for wine .
That is excluded .
And I can tell you , if we re-open the distribution of money between the envelopes and Member States , it will be like opening Pandora 's box , and I have no more money available than the present budget of approximately EUR 1.3 billion every year for the wine sector .
We have to find solutions to the consequences of the fires within rural development policy , within the regional funding , and I am quite sure that decent solutions will be found .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : Payment of CAP support for areas hit by fires
The recent fires in Greece had a disastrous impact on farming , particularly in the olive oil , fruit and vegetable and wine sectors , with serious consequences for the environment and the development of these regions , posing a major threat to the continuation of farming activity .
How must the application of cross-compliance be redefined so as to ensure the legitimate payment of uniform decoupled aid to farmers affected ?
How will the implementation of the new COM for wine be ensured in areas hit by fires , in particular as regards the Commission 's proposals for granting direct aid to wine-growers who use practices that respect the environment ?
What additional provisions and clarifications are required in the new regime for raisins so that immediate crisis-management measures can be implemented ?
Is it possible to increase the resources for operational funds in order to finance such measures in the event of emergencies ?
Is it feasible to create a specific national programme to support farmers with funding from the COMs for fruit and vegetables and for wine ?
Subject : Funding of non-governmental organisations and bodies for immediate reafforestation in Greece
Greece recently suffered the greatest environmental disaster in its history .
However , many Greek environmental bodies and monasteries located on burned land possess the know-how and the scientists necessary to organise the rapid reafforestation of these areas by extensive planting operations .
How can the Commission provide funding directly to non-governmental organisations , monasteries , environmental bodies etc . ( i.e. outside the framework of the third CSF ) so that they can immediately restore the environment in Greece 's forests which have been destroyed by fire ?
Which Community initiatives could be used for this purpose ?

Member of the Commission . - First of all , I can again only express my sympathy with all the people that have been hit by the consequences of the fires .
I think it is important to say that the single farm payment - the direct payment to the farmers - is not at risk .
The possible destruction of the crops , of animals or of buildings , has no consequence on the decoupled payment since there is no obligation to produce .
As regards cross compliance , one important rule is that the reduction of direct CAP payments under cross compliance can only be decided as a result of actions or omissions directly attributed to the farmer .
Therefore , forest fires like the ones we saw in Greece this summer would not result in the reduction of payments .
As far as wine is concerned , in the event of partial destruction , vineyards could be eligible within the restructuring scheme , under the current Regulation , and within the national envelopes that will be foreseen for the new CMO .
The reformed CMO for fruit and vegetables foresees new crisis prevention and management tools .
However , this new regulation will only be in place from 2008 , and there is no retroactive clause .
As for the last question , the financial rules do not allow the Commission to transfer possible savings from the market organisation budget to specific national programmes to support Greek farmers .
Concerning the specific question on non-governmental organisations , monasteries or environmental bodies , the Commission does not have the possibility to directly support these for the purpose of environmental restoration activities .
European Union assistance is only possible through specifically designed programmes and interventions which are drawn up by Member States following the principle of subsidiarity and submitted to the Commission for co-financing .
I want just to mention some specific possibilities in our rural development policy which could be used to help as well .
I referred to these in my previous reply .
The first option concerns the programme 2000-2006 , and can involve modification of the programme complements of national operational programmes and the regional operational programmes in order to reconstruct agricultural potential after national disaster measures .
This can , for example , mean that a farmer can get money for buying cattle , fruit and olive trees or to restore buildings that have been destroyed .
However , I have to repeat very strongly that it is not possible , via rural development policy , to compensate farmers for lost income .
The second option is the new rural development programme 2007-2013 , which includes measures for restoring agricultural production potential , as well as forestry potential , following natural disasters .
It must be noted that interventions through these two options would be limited to reforestation and reconstruction of production potential , and again cannot be used to compensate for loss of income .
I want to conclude with the possibilities that will be available within state aid schemes .
A disaster like the forest fires in Greece would normally be considered exceptional occurrences , which actually allows Member States to grant support to compensate for material damage .
Nationally funded assistance to agriculture and forestry may be given following notification of a state aid scheme , and is subsequent to approval by the Commission .
I would also remind you that there is a much easier possibility , which is to use what we call de minimis state aid , which means that Member States can pay farmers , with the new changes that have taken place , EUR 6 000 - and you can do that every three years .
So , without asking anyone , you can actually pay direct to the farmer up to EUR 6 000 to help immediately , if necessary .
deputising for the author . - ( EL ) Commissioner , I would like to ask if you have received a specific draft plan for the reconstruction of the regions affected by fire .
What will the procedure be for approving such a plan ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is good to be here again .
I would like to thank the honourable Member for the question concerning the funding for research .
Her question refers clearly in the first instance to research funded by the European Union and in my answer I shall deal with these aspects .
However , the need for increased investment in research at national as well as European level , private even more than public , is central to achieving the Lisbon goals .
At the same time we have to make sure that this money is well spent to ensure the maximum effect .
The question is essentially in four parts and I shall reply to each of them in turn .
At the same time , we must bear in mind that it is still very early to draw definitive conclusions and lessons from the sixth and seventh framework programmes .
But before turning to the four aspects of the honourable Member 's question , I should like to recall that European Union cohesion policy , especially the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund , also makes an important contribution to the development of the European research area .
The Commission estimates that cohesion policy support for research and innovation will more than triple in the programming period 2007-2013 compared to 2000-2006 .
Turning to the first element of the question , what are the sectors of research that the Commission considers to be lagging behind in funding provisions under the plans 2007-2013 ?
The Commission believes that it has a good balance between the more top-down thematic areas in the programme and other , more bottom-up activities in framework programmes , such as frontier research and fellowships .
It would not be appropriate to single out specific areas in particular need of funding .
The closer you look at our 10 thematic priorities , the clearer it is that we need more funding and more research in practically all of them .
But , to give you an example , I could mention the research infrastructures of pan-European interest , for which the final budget in Framework Programme 7 is much less than the Commission had originally proposed .
This is an important area where we have real added value in Europe .
We are seeking to combine funding from many sources , especially from national and regional sources and the European Investment Bank .
It is also evident , following the first call for proposals of the European Research Council , that we are faced with serious oversubscription .
We have received many more excellent proposals for fundamental frontier research than we have money to fund .
Looking at thematically orientated research , we can clearly see the need to better support research areas such as energy and climate change .
Here , Member States can help not only by increasing investment in research but also by exploring ways of combining research efforts rather than allowing them to remain fragmented .
This is also one of the areas which we advocated in our Green Paper on the European Research Area .
Turning to the general criteria , the thematic priorities for funding are set out in the Cooperation Specific Programme .
These research areas are the ones which will be supported through calls for proposals during the 2007-2013 period .
Our proposal was made after an extensive consultation with stakeholders during 2004 , including a web-based consultation on the cooperation themes as well as input from industrial stakeholders through the European Technology Platforms .
It was also based on an extensive ex-ante impact assessment .
Results from ex-post evaluation and monitoring exercises also form an important element in determining the priorities for research funding .
This learning from past experience was indeed a key element in defining the priorities in the Framework Programme , as you suggest in the third part of your question to which now I turn .
You asked how assessment of the usefulness and effectiveness of the research that was funded under the sixth framework programme influenced the selection of new research projects .
Here we have to distinguish two different ways of making that link .
First , at the more detailed , operational level , we should note that the several thousand FP6 projects are monitored by the Commission services .
These colleagues are in frequent contact with the research community and their up-to-date insight into the progress achieved within this project is an important element in preparing the Framework Programme 7 work programmes .
But , in the second place , at a more global level , in 2008 the Commission will organise the ex-post evaluation of FP6 .
This assessment of the overall impact of the different research activities will be carried out by high-level experts .
The results of this FP6 ex-post evaluation will be a major input in the forthcoming mid-term review of FP7 in the year 2010 .
Finally , turning to the last part of the question , when considering the priorities for funding in each research sector , the topics to be funded are specified in the annual work programmes and the call for proposals .
Each year , we undertake consultation with the right variety of stakeholders in drawing up the work programmes .
We also call on the assistance of external advisory groups , key specialists in the area , who provide input on ensuring that the work programmes contain the most essential areas of research , taking into account ongoing projects that have been funded in previous calls for proposals .
Once the individual proposals have been received in response to the calls , they are evaluated by expert peer reviews using a standard set of evaluation criteria .
The proposals funded are those which receive the highest overall mark for the call or part of the call they address .
In conclusion , I believe that it is fair to say that for research funded through Community instruments we have a transparent system which allocates funding to the most relevant areas and also ensures it is then awarded to the best proposals .
( EL ) Thank you for your rather informative reply .
I should like to ask whether international progress in research is taken into consideration when decisions are made on various actions , seeing that we live in a globalised world .
To what extent do young people in Europe receive special funding for participation in research ?
Member of the Commission . - Of course there is no other way than to look at the global context .
If you look in practice at what other major communities around the world are focusing their research on , then it is the same as ours .
More than that , we do combine our efforts in many areas .
One of the things we really strengthened in the seventh Framework Programme was precisely international cooperation .
We are funding and supporting that , and will do so more in the future , because we believe that in the world of globalisation the challenges which lie ahead of us - be it food , health , drinking water , climate change , security or energy - are global and it is for us all to deal with them in the proper way .
Commissioner , you mentioned among the top priorities the thematic subjects energy and climate change .
That is a correct priority , and the European Union needs a breakthrough .
How does the Commission intend to organise cooperation between the best brains in the EU to work on this subject , and maybe - even more so - to promote cooperation between the best brains in the world ?
Because this question is a crucial one .
Member of the Commission . - Yes , we are truly focusing on that .
It was basically that philosophy - it is shared in the existing framework programme - but the truth is that we are now also focusing on the preparation of a strategic technology plan for Europe .
It should be adopted by the Commission by the end of the year .
In that , we are of course consulting practically everybody in this area in Europe .
So we have consulted all the technology platforms which already exist .
We have had very open talks with them .
They are , from bottom up , practically all included in our activities and we are trying to find a proper way of having this coordinated .
You properly said that it is also vital that we share in the best possible way , in an international way , on how to address these questions .
But in that respect , there are two things : when you also try to address it from the private sector , you have to do it in a balanced way , before or between the cooperation and competitiveness , and that is exactly what we try to take into account .
( DE ) Commissioner , the Council has reduced research funding for 2008 .
How are you preparing for the health check , the mid-term review of the Financial Perspective ?
Do you believe that we can submit new initiatives and proposals here that also reflect the importance of research in the European budget ?

Member of the Commission . - The ITER project , as the honourable Member knows , is a project which is an international flagship of the world fusion energy research programme .
Since its inception during summit discussions in the late 1980s , Europe has played a leading role in the successive preparatory stages for the project .
The Commission can be justly proud of the confidence shown by the ITER partners in according Europe the central role of the host party to the joint implementation of this project .
The JET facilities , designed and built through the joint action of Euratom and its members , provided an outstanding example of what can be achieved when leading fusion research organisations pool their expertise and resources .
The ITER project extends this principle from the European to the global level of cooperation .
ITER technical objectives and design are based on the steady and scientifically rigorous prospect process of development , in fusion research worldwide which has witnessed dramatic increases in the performance of experimental fusion facilities over recent decades in an atmosphere of international scientific cooperation that has transcended political barriers .
Beyond JET , ITER extends the experimental side to the level where the scientific and technological feasibility of fusion energy can be demonstrated .
Since the signature of the ITER Agreement in November 2006 , the ITER partners have all handled properly the commitments that they accepted through the ITER negotiations .
At the political level , all the partners have pursued to completion their respective constitutional requirements for ratification or acceptance of the agreement , which is now accepted to enter officially into force within October this year .
In the mean time , the partners have properly honoured their undertakings to abide by the terms of the agreement to the fullest extent possible until it enters into force .
The staff of the international ITER team and the ITER site in Cadarache in France is building up with representatives of all partners now present .
The partners are providing their financial contributions to the budget of the ITER organisation and are pursuing conscientiously the necessary joint technical preparations for the technical and scientific contributions to which they have committed themselves .
In the European Union , a joint undertaking for ITER and the development of fusion energy was established by the Council Decision of 27 March 2007 .
Its role is to prepare and coordinate activities for the construction of the demonstration fusion reactor and related facilities .
To date , its supervisory body , the governing board , has met twice and adopted a first work programme and the administrative decisions necessary for the joint undertaking to be operational early 2008 .
In particular , the headquarters agreement with Spain has been signed .
The governing board also appointed the director , the chief executive officer of the joint undertaking .
ITER is indeed an ambitious project .
In bringing it to fruition we shall be pushing back the boundaries of our experience in the scientific , technological and organisational domains .
It is the nature of experiments that the results cannot be forecast with certainty .
But ITER is not an enterprise that we have entered into lightly or in the expectation of serendipity .
ITER consists of long-term international partnerships and commitments , bringing together partners that represent over half of the world 's population to address issues central to our common future , the development of sustainable , non-polluting sources of energy at the service of humanity .
The prospects for ITER rest on the strong scientific and technological foundations of the project and on the enthusiasm and commitment demonstrated to date by its partners - by all of them ; or rather , by all of us .
There was never such cooperation in the world as we have gathered in ITER .

( FI ) Commissioner , our experience of one particular cooperation project , Galileo , is bad .
The European Union had to finance it , contrary to the original plans , while not all parties shared in its financing as planned .
Is the Commissioner 's answer to be interpreted as meaning that we may not have any problems with ITER as regards fulfilling the commitments made , i.e. we will not have the same problem with ITER as we did with Galileo , where the parties concerned neglected the responsibilities they had committed themselves to ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , I would like to thank you for the question concerning the area of nanotechnology .
The Commission takes the question of safety and consumer protection very seriously and it is working to ensure that the public can benefit from the innovations that nanotechnologies may bring while being protected from any adverse impact .
Much effort is dedicated to addressing safety issues .
Something like EUR 28 million from FP5 and FP6 has been dedicated to projects expressly focused on environmental and health aspects of nanotechnologies , and such research is planned to increase significantly in Framework Programme 7 too , both in size and in scope .
As you know , the Commission adopted an action plan for nanosciences and nanotechnology for Europe 2005-2009 and Parliament adopted a resolution on it , in which the action plan was well received .
In the communication published this month on the implementation of the nanotechnology action plan , we fully address the second part of your question .
A wide range of European and wider international , especially OECD and ISO , approaches are pursued , both regulatory and non-regulatory , to address the potential adverse impact of nanotechnologies .
The Commission is performing an assessment of regulatory aspects in relation to health , safety and environmental aspects of nanotechnology-based products .
Preliminary results indicate that , overall , the existing Community regulatory framework gives good coverage with regard to nanotechnology-based products developed today .
Different aspects of production and products , such as the ones mentioned in the question , like cosmetics and medicines , are already subject to various Community provisions , albeit not specific to nanotechnology .
Consequently , there seems today to be no need to develop new legislation for nanotechnology-related safety risks or to propose major amendments .
Nevertheless , on the basis of scientific development or regulatory needs in specific areas which the Commission closely monitors , regulatory changes may be proposed where necessary .
It is not nanotechnology as such where regulatory aspects should be considered but rather nanotechnology-based products .
The Commission is convinced that the moratorium on nanotechnology would be severely counterproductive .
Apart from denying society the possible benefits of such technologies , it may lead to the emergence of technological paradises outside Europe , where research and innovation are carried out without regulatory frameworks .
Finally , I would like to mention another Eurobarometer survey , which was about new technologies and was carried out in 2005 on a sample of 25 000 people .
If you compare it to the NanoDialogue exhibition , which you mention in your question , this one was based on 700 respondents .
Eurobarometer found that , on the whole , Europeans supported the development of nanotechnology , with approximately 55 % in favour .
These technologies are perceived as useful to society and morally acceptable .
Understandably , as many as 42 % of respondents were uncertain about the effects of this new technology , but according to the survey almost 70 % of the respondents who expressed an opinion as to its effects were optimistic .

( SV ) I think we are agreed that the worst thing for nanotechnology would be if the products we release now are poorly monitored and damage the reputation of the technology in its early development .
I do not believe that traditional toxicity tests assess the risks of nanotechnology sufficiently reliably ; on the contrary I think that the toxicity tests required in current legislation must be updated .
I think that we need a labelling system so that consumers can choose for themselves , and I wonder whether the Commission is planning such legislation .
Member of the Commission . - I fully agree with you and with the first statement .
The worst thing would be if something happened , so we have to prevent that and we have to be on the safe side .
That is the name of the game and I fully agree with you .
Proposing legislation does not fall within my responsibility , but falls within the responsibility of my colleagues in the Commission who deal with protection .
I am sure they are looking at that very carefully .
What I can say is that we are doing everything possible in research to try to analyse the potential risks that you mentioned , and this is certainly something done under my responsibility .

( DE ) Commissioner , where will the focus be in the nanotechnology sector in the Seventh Framework Programme for Research ?
The population has very high hopes here , particularly in the ' live a long and healthy life ' sector .
Do you too see totally new opportunities here in the medical sector for being able to live a long and healthy life ?
Member of the Commission . - Yes , the answer is clearly positive .
This is one of the areas .
Nanotechnology , if one were to compare it , is a bit like information technology , because there is a horizontal influence on many sectors .
One of the sectors where the results are very promising is health , so this is also part of our research , which is also , without any doubt , orientated in this direction .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your answers .
I was very pleased to hear that you think that the common regulatory framework is developing in the right direction , and also that you challenge the NanoDialogue project and findings of the study to which the question is referring .
I think that the Eurobarometer shows clearly that European citizens are in favour of developing nanotechnologies .
My question for you is that , in his question , Mr Schlyter says that nanotechnology involves increasing risks .
Do you have any data now that shows nanotechnology would pose such a risk , which Mr Schlyter seems to say is already a fact ?
Member of the Commission . - Without any doubt , this is an area which needs attention , not least as concerns risk .
When we enter into areas which in practice have this inherent potential then we have to act with caution .
If we do not want people to turn against something which , if handled carefully , would certainly benefit them , then we have to do things in a way in which everything possible is done so that this does not happen .
That is exactly our approach .
At this very moment , of course , there have been no incidents connected to this area , but it is obviously one in which it is much better to take a cautious approach .
That , surely , is the right way to proceed .
Questions 43 and 44 will be answered in writing .
Subject : London buses
According to figures released by the Greater London Assembly in June , the so-called ' bendy buses ' ( long single-deckers with two carriages ) found in many European cities and introduced in London in 2002 , were involved in 1 751 accidents in 2006 .
This is 75 % more than other types of bus , and represents an average of almost five accidents per day or more than five accidents per year for each ' bendy bus ' in London 's fleet .
Given this clearly unacceptable situation , particularly in comparison with other types of bus , what steps is the Commission taking to ensure that there are adequate safety measures for the operation of ' bendy buses ' and that drivers receive the necessary level of training ?
How can they be considered safe enough for operation in crowded urban conditions ?
The Commission is not aware of worrying statistics in other European cities that use articulated buses .
However , Community legislation addresses the problem in several ways .
Directive 97 / 27 / EC relating to the masses and dimensions of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers lays down the standards for the manoeuvrability of buses in general , as well as specific standards for articulated buses .
Directive 2003 / 59 / EC on the initial qualification and periodic training of drivers of certain road vehicles for the carriage of goods or passengers is aimed at improving the level of driver training .
In this respect , it would be desirable for national legislation transposing the Directive to make provision for special training programmes for drivers of articulated buses .
In terms of driver vision , European legislation addressed the problem of heavy goods vehicles by Directive 2007 / 38 / EC on the retrofitting of mirrors to heavy goods vehicles registered in the Community .
However , the Commission is aware of the need to take account of other categories of vehicles , such as urban buses .
That is why , as requested by the legislator in the abovementioned directive , the Commission will submit , when the time comes , a report on the results obtained , accompanied , if appropriate , by a proposal for the revision of existing legislation .
These are my answers to Baroness Ludford .


I think my question is well-timed , as just today the Commission has published its Green Paper on urban mobility .
I cannot expect the Commission to address my personal sense of loss that the iconic double-decker London Routemaster bus has been replaced by these low-level continental-type ' bendy ' buses ( or ' articulated ' buses , as the Commission put it ) , but I am grateful for his reference to various pieces of EU legislation which ought to apply .
Could I ask him actually to make contact with the Mayor of London and Transport for London to investigate why these buses have a 75 % worse accident rate than other buses , and to examine whether these directives are being properly applied in the UK , and specifically in London ?

Mrs Ţicău , rail priority axis No 22 must , in effect , link Germany with Greece via Prague , Vienna , Budapest and Sofia .
A branch to the north of this axis will go , via Curtici and Brasov , to Bucharest and Constanza .
Romania and Bulgaria , as well as the other countries concerned , are making considerable efforts to construct this railway line so that eventually their respective capitals and the port of Constanza will be linked to the rail network of the rest of the European Union .
These efforts should continue during the period 2007-2013 .
These projects are potentially eligible for Community funding through the Cohesion Fund or the Structural Funds , or even via the trans-European networks budget .
More specifically , Romania is prioritising the development of the Curtici-Brasov-Bucharest-Constanza railway line .
A 92 km section to the north of Bucharest has already been built .
Projects are under way between Bucharest and Constanza . These should be progressively completed between now and 2010 .
Romania has indicated , in its transport operational programme for 2007-2013 , that it plans to develop the Curtici-Brasov-Predeal line using EUR 1.1 billion from the Cohesion Fund .
In terms of the Sofia link with the EU network , a major step was taken with the signing of the contract for the construction of the road and rail bridge over the Danube at Vidin-Calafat , financed by the ISPA Fund .
The bridge should be completed in 2010 .
In addition , Bulgaria plans , in its transport operational programme for 2007-2013 , to develop part of the Vidin-Sofia line .
The cost of the work to be carried out up to 2013 comes to EUR 320 million , out of a total of EUR 1 380 million for the entire line .
Romania is committed to completing , by 2013 , all preparatory studies for the upgrading of the Craïova-Calafat line to the north of the Danube bridge , so that it is ready to carry out the work shortly after 2013 .
There you have it . I apologise for giving you all this information verbally , but obviously we can supplement this if necessary in writing , Mrs Ţicău , if you request it .

( RO ) Mr. Commissioner , indeed , if possible , I would like to receive this information in writing as well .
I would also kindly ask you to organize a seminar on structural funds in Romania , because I consider that the new Member States need to be supported in order to be able to gain access to structural funds and develop their transport infrastructure .
The European Union 's access to the Black Sea is important and , for this reason , I believe that , for the mobility of passengers and goods , it is also important to develop the railway .
I come back to the question regarding the high-speed train : the mobility of passengers is important and , for this reason , I request a dialogue in order to be able to achieve , step by step , whatever is necessary for this important project .

I will answer Mr Posselt .
The Paris-Strasbourg-Stuttgart-Vienna-Bratislava railway axis No 17 is one of the 30 priority projects of the trans-European transport network .
The Stuttgart 21 project that you mentioned is a major link in this priority project .
On 19 July 2007 , an agreement was signed between Mr Tiefensee , the German Minister for Transport , and the authorities in the Federal State of Bade-Wurtemberg , the region and city of Stuttgart and Deutsche Bahn .
This agreement is a key phase in the elimination of the bottleneck represented by the Stuttgart-Ulm section , since it includes funding for the work to start in 2010 .
The Commission is keeping a close eye on the modernisation of the sections between Stuttgart and Ulm .
In July 2005 it appointed a European coordinator for this line , Mr Péter Balázs , who has already submitted his second report .
This report was sent to the Chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism .
It is available on the website of the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport .
The coordinator , Mr Balázs , is continuing to give great attention to the Stuttgart-Ulm bottleneck , which must be eliminated .
In his report , the coordinator analysed the progress of the Paris-Bratislava priority project and concluded that most of the project could be completed in 2015 .
However , given the complexity of the Stuttgart-Ulm section , this section will not be built until 2019 .
It is clear that a priority project does not exclude continuation to other destinations .
Other priority projects , such as the Athens-Sofia-Budapest-Vienna-Prague-Nuremberg-Dresden axis , will extend the Paris-Bratislava project as far as the Black Sea and Greece , while the Eurocaprail priority No 28 project will link Brussels to Strasbourg via Luxembourg .
In July 2007 Member States submitted their proposals for Community cofinancing .
These proposals are currently being evaluated .
Based on this evaluation , the Commission will propose the RTE-T budget allocation for the period 2007-2013 to the European Parliament and Council .
Those are the answers I wanted to give you , Mr Posselt .
Personally I am extremely interested in the Paris-Budapest axis , and I can tell you that Mr Balázs and I are really keen for every effort to be made to complete this major project .


( DE ) Commissioner , the historical credit for setting in motion what Mr Kohl and Mr Mitterrand had decided to do back in 1982 , and which is now finally becoming reality , goes to you .

I have two brief questions .
Firstly , the Strasbourg-Kehl-Appenweier and the Munich-Mühldorf-Salzburg cross-border projects are also highly complex .
Is there any news on these ?
Secondly : can you perhaps appeal once more to the rail companies - when we are already deploying so many European funds for cross-border routes - and ask them to stop cutting back cross-border train connections ?
We are expanding the railways with our money at the same time as the rail companies are hacking transport routing to pieces with national timetables .
Mr Papadimoulis asked me a question , which I will now answer .
The Commission has taken note of the Greek court of arbitration 's decision of 13 July 2006 on flights carried out as a public service requirement , and of the decision of 6 December 2006 concerning the relocation of Olympic Airways to Athens International Airport .
The Greek authorities have already informally consulted the Commission on these decisions on compensation , which were the subject of a preliminary examination .
Based on that preliminary examination and the documents submitted at this stage by the Greek authorities , the Commission is still unable to adopt a position on the nature of these decisions under EU rules on State aid .
If these decisions were to involve further aid , they would obviously have to be notified under Article 88 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
The Commission 's services informed the Greek authorities of this preliminary evaluation and we are awaiting their response .
Broadly speaking , the Commission is doing everything in its power to ensure that the aid which it has ordered to be recovered are actually recovered .
That is the information I can give you , Mr Papadimoulis .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is not just Olympic Airways that owes money to the state .
The state also owes money to Olympic Airways , a very large amount .
In total , Olympic Airways is demanding more than EUR 1 billion from the Greek state .
I would like to ask you whether the Commission intends to wait for , and especially to respect , the final judicial decisions by the Greek courts having jurisdiction .
I am informed that next week you are to meet with the responsible Greek Minister with whom you will be discussing these matters .
Can you outline for us which points you agree on and where you disagree with the Greek Government on this subject ?
In Greece there is considerable concern , and a significant section of public opinion blames the Commission for liquidating Olympic Airways while it was still in operation , for a token price , for the benefit of its competitors .
What reply can you give on this subject ?

For the time being , we are awaiting clarification from the Greek authorities on the ruling of the court of arbitration .
We have not been in contact recently with the Greek authorities concerning any privatisation plans .
The issue is not whether the court of arbitration has taken the correct decision but whether the contractual relations on which it was based as a point of departure are compatible with Community law .
I cannot say much more about it , Mr Papadimoulis , since , as you yourself stated , I have just agreed to a meeting with the new Greek minister . I think that we will have the opportunity to discuss this with him then .
That is all I can tell you at the moment . We need more information from the Greek authorities before we can take the necessary decisions .
Thank you , Commissioner , and thank you for dealing with that last question .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( DE ) Madam President , please allow me to speak on the Rules of Procedure .
I have been talking with my colleague , Mrs Madeira , and have also , of course , listened to the Commissioner 's answers .
We have been asking our questions now for about three years and have not managed to get an oral answer to a single question .
Of course the written answer is also very detailed and correct , but it is easier to ask and make inquiries verbally and it makes the result even more interesting still .
Do you have any advice or guidance as to how this could perhaps be achieved in future ?
Mr Leichtfried , thank you for your comments .
All I would say , in connection with the Working Party on the Internal Reform of Parliament , is that conduct of Question Time is one of the issues that we are looking at very carefully , and your comments will be taken on board .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.30 and resumed at 21.00 )

European Institute of Technology ( debate )
The next item is the report by Reino Paasilinna , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Institute of Technology - C6-0355 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am happy to be here tonight to take a very important step with not only your approval but your engagement in proposing and establishing a European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) .
As you all know , much progress has been made over the last month on this important proposal as a result of joint efforts .

I would like in particular to thank Mr Paasilinna , the rapporteur on this issue ; the Chairwoman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Ms Niebler ; Ms Hennicot-Schoepges from the Committee on Culture and Education ; and also Mr Böge from the Committee on Budgets , for their relentless efforts and very valuable contributions .
Without these contributions we would never have achieved our current status and possible outcome .
The report adopted by the Industry Committee and the text of the general approach adopted by the Council clearly go in the same direction .
I think this is very important .
It undoubtedly makes it easier to move towards a compromise text .
The EIT will provide an environment whereby partners from business , research and academia who are excellent in their respective fields can work together and spur their innovation potential .
We have agreed that the EIT should develop gradually .
Two to three Knowledge and Innovation Communities ( KICs ) will be set up in a so-called start-up phase .
Further KICs will then be developed in the second phase , subject to the evaluation of the EIT and KICs ' activities .
Long-term strategic activities or policy guidance will be provided by Parliament and the Council through the adoption of a strategic innovation agenda .
Your Parliament report contains useful amendments that clearly enrich the proposal and I thank you for them .
By way of example , I welcome the proposal to report to the European Parliament and the Council on the selection process for board members , to ensure that this is done transparently .
There is also a proposal to amend the name of the EIT to the ' European Institute of Innovation and Technology ' but to keep its well-established brand ' EIT ' .
I also welcome those amendments aimed at streamlining the EIT 's financial management in clarifying that the procedure laid down in point 47 of the interinstitutional agreement applies to this setting-up .
The Commission can also support very many of your amendments , either as drafted or in spirit , where we need to adapt the wording .
However , we have concerns with some of your amendments suggested by the Industry Committee .
I will focus on four main issues .
Firstly , the education aspects .
We need to be careful to avoid watering down the education dimension of the EIT , which is a cornerstone and one of the most innovative features of the proposal .
We share Parliament 's views that the mobility of researchers and the mobility of students will be instrumental and should therefore be highlighted .
But I strongly believe that the wording on degrees and diplomas should remain untouched .
Second , the presentation of the EIT has been established on a pilot-phase basis .
I think we all agree that the EIT should develop progressively and be subject to continuous evaluation .
However , there should be no doubt as to the long-term vision and commitment of the European Union regarding this initiative .
Uncertainty about this point - and especially at the beginning - will threaten the viability of the project altogether .
Third , the participation of third countries : we fully agree with the principle of facilitating third countries ' participation in the EIT - this is one of the very important conditions .
However , it has to come along with the principle of preference for EU Member States .
The EIT is and should remain a European-driven initiative .
Fourth , the participation of the EIT and KICs in the Community programmes : there should not be a shadow of doubt on this .
The EIT itself will not seek to participate in Community programmes , nor will its administrative costs be funded by them .
The KICs , on the other hand , will be entitled to bid for funds but in no way benefit from privileged access - no preferential treatment .
To make this crystal clear , I believe that the right approach would be for the institutions to agree on a political declaration to this effect to be annexed to the proposal .
The financing of the EIT is now the key outstanding issue .
You know that last week the Commission adopted a proposal for a revision of the multiannual financial framework to accommodate the needs of both Galileo and the EIT .
I hope that this will provide a solid basis for discussions and an agreement by the budgetary authority before the end of this year .
This was requested by the European Council in June .
I am looking forward to the discussion .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , the European Institute of Technology has been in preparation for more than a year and time has passed because the Commission 's original proposal needed improving considerably .
Parliament 's committees , led by the Committee on Industry , Research and Industry , have been reworking the proposal to give it a new look .
Parliament and the Council have been guaranteed more say in the matter , without jeopardising the EIT 's autonomy .
The election of the EIT 's Governing Board will very much bring to mind the way the European Research Council was elected , and so the science world has been arguing over the procedure .
Some attempt has been made to strengthen the opportunities SMEs might have to participate .
That is exactly where the impact on employment will be greatest , and that is exactly where we find the flexibility speedily to implement innovation .
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology will , as its name suggests , focus on innovation .
The two other elements of the ' knowledge triangle ' , education and research , will remain , but innovation is clearly the apex of the triangle and is the priority .
Innovation must be given special attention because it is innovation which is Europe 's Achilles heel .
It is incredible that the Americans file over a third more patent applications with the European Patent Office , our very own patent office , than we do ourselves .
This is a good place to start .
The sceptics may ask whether the Union will be competitive without innovation or increasing innovation .
Well , we are talking about inventions and processes which can be widely introduced in the world of business .
Do we not need more ?
We had better get a move on because the United States is forging ahead and China is not far behind us .
The Lisbon Strategy is also urging speed .
Why do we not even have faith in our own strategic decisions ?
Research and development accounts for an increasingly lower share of the Union 's GNP than in the other world economic powers .
We spend less than 2 % on it , whilst the United States spends almost 3 % , Japan more than 3 % , and just Sweden and Finland spend almost 4 % on it .
Our high standards of education , training and research , however , produce far too few commercial applications , or at least they are not realised in Europe but in the United States - there especially .
The problem obviously has many aspects and relates in part to how willing universities and colleges are to cooperate with the business world , together with the fact that our patenting system is awkward , and so on .
Of course , the EIT will not eliminate these problems , but it may to some extent ease them .
The brain drain should be something to be taken seriously .
Why is that ?
Because we are trying to become the world 's leading knowledge-based economy and brains are draining away !
The EIT will offer the private sector a new kind of contact with the educational and research community .
It will help create opportunities for the commercial exploitation of the results of research and strengthen cooperation in both directions .
The Institute will not become a super-university which robs top universities of their best researchers and scholars .
Parliament 's amendments will see to that .
The EIT will be able to offer the best universities and colleges a new and long-lasting opportunity to work closely with companies which are hungry for innovation .
It may help the best universities to attract the world 's best and most able students , scholars and researchers so that they may develop and utilise research and innovation and the processes and methods involved in its management working side by side with top companies .
It cannot be denied that the proposal contains areas which overlap with current instruments .
The technology platforms under the Seventh Framework Programme and the broader-scale JTIs , as long as they are brought into operation , are largely based on the same principles as outlined for the EIT .
The same goes for the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme .
There may be some slight degree of overlap , but Europe is not witness to too much innovation but too little , so there is room for new competing enterprise .
It is all a matter of how the EIT fits into the current jigsaw .
I believe that it can be made to fit into the European research scene without offending against that environment .
We have added a trial stage with evaluations to the project and increased the powers of Parliament .
A week ago the Commission announced a proposal to take cash away from administrative bureaucracy and to support agriculture , wine and potatoes if you like , and to put it into innovation .
Should we not do that ?
It is an interesting idea .
Crucial to the EIT 's fate now is the willingness of the Member States to finance it , Member States which are not investing enough .
Do we all stand behind the Lisbon objectives ?
This will be a test of that .
The EIT may produce more added value with a view to achieving the Lisbon objectives , but only if it does not cannibalise the Lisbon programmes .
The Union needs innovation , ladies and gentlemen .
People need it ; our future needs it .
Why would we not support necessity ?
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission presents its proposal to establish the European Institute of Technology as a project creating an important European institution that will integrate research , education and innovation and will help to transform innovative discoveries into commercial opportunities .
As a result , the Committee on Budgets examined the draft budget very carefully .
Unfortunately , it turned out that the combined draft budget presents numerous problems and is very ambiguous .
The main problem is that the funding was not explicitly included in the multi-annual financial framework for 2007-2013 : the sum involved is EUR 308 million .
There are doubts about a further EUR 1.5 billion given the proposal to finance the Institute from other programmes , in particular the Structural Funds and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research .
Although there have been a number of discussions with both the Commission and the Council since the Committee on Budgets adopted its opinion , the matter of the Institute 's financing has not yet been solved satisfactorily .
However , the additional funds could only materialise , as already mentioned , as part of a review of the financial framework .
Of course we will not know how effective and successful the EIT will be until it has been established .
However , it has to prove its viability by attracting money from the private sector too , as the Commission also proposes .
This can only be achieved if the projects are topical and they are of a high quality , and if the results are successful .
I hope the Institute will succeed in these endeavours .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in its report on policy strategies for 2007 the European Parliament expressed scepticism regarding the European Institute of Technology , stressing the risk of duplication of structures already in existence and fearing that it might compete with already limited funding for research .
Certainly , there is a need to improve Community efforts with regard to research , innovation and education , to create public-private partnerships and , above all , to facilitate access to new knowledge by small and medium-sized enterprises .
We cannot , however , ignore the hasty manner in which the Institute has been put forward , which has long-term effects .
These are all the more evident in view of the simultaneous launch of new strategic instruments such as the European Research Council .
It should also be noted that the financial resources of the Seventh Framework Programme were cut by 30 % following the agreement on the Financial Perspective .
In view of the limitations on funding for research at the European level , we need to ensure that the European Institute of Technology will not attract resources that would otherwise have been destined for other activities in the sector .
The funding should be added as a supplement to the current Financial Perspective and the new resources should come from various sources - Community , national , regional and private .
Firstly , a transparent selection procedure needs to be ensured for the management committee , in which the Commission should at the right moment be called on to refer to the other institutions .
In addition , the European Parliament and the Council must be able to express their consent in relation to the strategic priorities of the European Institute of Technology prior to final approval by the Commission .
Finally , the Institute 's accounts should be fully visible to the European Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
I believe that only after a comprehensive review of a pilot programme on the basis of an independent external assessment will it be possible to establish whether it is advisable to set up the European Institute of Technology as a permanent Community body or whether Europe could gain more benefit by directing the funding towards other Community activities relating to research and development .
Mr President , it is a shame that the Commission launched the European Institute of Technology project without first securing funding for it .
The Committee on Culture and Education approved the proposal after clarifying certain points , such as the award of training qualifications . This will in fact remain under the competence of the Member States and the partner higher education institutions .
These training qualifications will bear the EIT label as a European mark of excellence , although the training qualification will aim to take account of the diversity of the higher education landscape in the European Union .
In addition , the EIT must make a positive contribution towards student mobility . In this respect , the issue of the transferability of grants still needs to be resolved .
I am asking Members to vote in favour of Amendment 36 to encourage student mobility .
Did you know that only 3 % of European university students have taken advantage of mobility ?
The EIT is a fascinating future project for cooperation , innovation and research , and the private sector will help ensure that higher education institutions are involved .
This will be a real challenge for the future for European competitiveness .
I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna , and I would like to thank the Commission and the German Presidency , who really helped to make progress on the text .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( PL ) Mr President , the idea that was floated in 2005 , of setting up a European Institute of Technology , is in every way deserving of support .
The proposed structure of the network of Knowledge and Innovation Communities has a chance to become an excellent stimulator of innovation throughout the EU .
Providing a proper legal basis and consequently enabling permanent funding of the Institute was my priority as draftsman of the committee asked for an opinion under the Committee on Legal Affairs .
In this context , conferring on the Institute the status of an agency on the basis of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 , and specifically part C of it and Article 47 , is of immeasurable importance , as is the Committee 's proposal concerning the increase in the margin in section 1A in the budget for 2007-2013 , guaranteeing the Institute EUR 309 million .
The birth of the EIT is especially important for the scientific milieu in the new part of the united Europe , which has an inherent vast and so far unexploited potential .
I therefore warmly support the decision of the authorities in Wrocław who are seeking to get the Governing Board or one of the knowledge communities to set up their offices in the city , where as many as 140 000 students are studying .
Finally may I convey my warmest congratulations and thanks to Reino Paasilinna for excellent cooperation , and my congratulations on a superb report .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) Mr President .
Our brief began with the report by Wim Kok .
His message was clear .
We were responsible for guiding the Lisbon Strategy towards its most important objectives and for giving it the appropriate content .
Together we devised the Seventh Framework Programme and the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme .
We thereby gave a European dimension to research and enterprise .
However , we were uncertain as to whether this was enough to increase European innovation .
We were aware that there was a shortage of around 100 000 engineers and researchers in Europe and that we could not stimulate innovation per se merely by direct incentives and projects .
We still had no a link with the universities and thus no human resources management .
This deficiency is covered by the EIT .
Its added value is the link it establishes between the research sector and the academic and business world .
The research and academic groups which will become members of the knowledge and innovation community within the EIT will have to demonstrate their excellence .
The EIT mark , which participants will be able to use , will therefore also be an external mark of the group 's quality .
I expect that participants will use the label to their advantage as a label of their quality .
At the same time , the EIT mark should also assist potential business customers .
They must provide the critical mass of appropriately trained employees and respond to short- and long-term problems with research and development projects .
The EIT mark will facilitate the choice of partners or managers for training and research projects .
The provision of appropriate funds for the EIT 's operation has been an awkward sticking point in previous negotiations .
We believe that we will be successful in securing public funds but that is only a small part .
It will soon also be the turn of business , of the private sector , to respond to globalisation with the same commitment we have shown .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would , of course , first of all like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Paasilinna , on this laborious work .
It is truly a very difficult birth - not just the report to this Parliament , but also the Institute as such .
In fact , it is sad that the EIT has to begin such an important job with so little enthusiasm , particularly on the part of some Council members and perhaps on the part of the Commission too .
I fully agree with the essence of the Commissioner 's comments , even those concerning the KICs .
As Mr Paasilinna , whom I warmly congratulate on his work , has also proposed , we need a limited number in order to assemble any pilot schemes at all .
This is absolutely right .
I hope that the schemes will also produce positive results .
As regards financing , I am also in agreement .
It was very frivolous of some Council members to say : you want to do something new , alright , but nothing will come from new funding .
Simply take the money that is available to you in the budget .
There should be no frivolity where something new has to be created .
The fact that we are essentially using research funds is totally acceptable , but it is absolutely right to seek new funding opportunities , for this project as well as for Galileo for example , partly in the context of surplus budgeted funds , funds that have not been spent , and partly with new commitments by the individual Member States .
One important point - and Mr Paasilinna has also brought this up - is that the EIT and the KICs have helped us in holding on to , as well as winning back , high-calibre employees in Europe .
We know from many analyses that people are leaving not necessarily because of finance , but because of opportunity .
If we can recreate new opportunities through these institutions so that high-calibre employees stay in Europe or come back from America or other countries , then a substantial contribution will have been made to Europe once again becoming a hub for new technologies .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Mr Paasilinna for his very effective cooperation .
It was a very difficult piece of work , but you were always prepared to cooperate .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for the tenaciousness he has shown over many months and the loyalty he has shown to the project .
You will see , Commissioner , that your persistence will pay off in the end , despite all the resistance you have experienced , right from the very beginning , especially from the scientific world .
Since President Barroso was obviously inspired by the MIT and sowed the idea of creating a European institute of technology , this idea , this project , has been transformed .
Today it looks different from the original version .
This is just as well , because at the outset we were still somewhat vague as to the structure .
A European project has now emerged and something new has evolved .
We are a continent of ideas .
We know that .
We are very good at research ; we are very good at science ; but where we have difficulty is in converting these wonderful ideas that have revolutionised the world into tangible products .
That is our problem .
Therefore , when it comes to defining research as financial investment in knowledge , innovation would be the reverse process .
Out of knowledge comes a product , a licence , a patent , which turns back into money again .
This is our weakness in Europe and it is precisely here that the EIT , the European Institute of Technology , can help .
It goes without saying that this regulation text is not an unqualified success .
This we can say straight away .
But it is a good compromise and it is now up to us to take it to the people and particularly to clarify it with those involved .
The rapporteurs have been working very well together .
We should not lose sight of the great objective in its entirety because the target audience of this EIT is small and medium-sized enterprises specifically .
The aim is also to access knowledge at university institutions , but it mainly involves this networking process , which is not working so well for us .
I would like to respond to a few controversial points .
The Commission is proposing that it should set the EIT 's strategic agenda itself .
To this I would say we should not be doing so .
There must be autonomy here , too , as for the European Research Council .
Otherwise the private sector has little chance .
The question of intellectual property then needs to be dealt with in such a way that it also becomes attractive for a medium-sized enterprise to participate in the EIT .
Of course we need an EIT , which is a brand and has a brand name .
We want a strong EIT and we do not just want a pilot project either because that would deter many investors , and we need investors .
Let me say something else about financing .
I have been personally addressing the subject of the ' Lisbonisation ' of our budget for some time now .
This means we can ' Lisbonise ' the large budget that we have in the sector of agricultural and regional policy and we are evidently at a point where we are talking about the subject of Galileo and EIT being lumped together .
This is already coming very close to ' Lisbonisation ' , namely that we are investing in innovation .
Therefore : let us get on with it .
I call upon Parliament to endorse this compromise tomorrow with a large majority .
Congratulations to you once again , Mr Paasilinna , on your work .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , it is excellent that , despite earlier doubts , we now have the opportunity for constructive comments to be made in Parliament on the subject of the establishment of a European Institute of Technology .
I would very much like this initiative to be a truly European one .
I think we should place emphasis on the principle of an even geographical distribution of the Knowledge and Information Communities .
We should try to ensure that European funding of this project is a priority for a number of reasons , not least the weakness of patent protection in Europe .
We will not be able to shift this burden onto private business .
Europe needs this institution .
The best evidence of this is the lively response from businesspeople , local authorities and the scientific community in Lower Silesia .
Before the legislative procedure for this has been completed , we already have a specially set up company , EIT + , we have a willingness to involve structural funds , we have letters of intent from the largest businesses in Lower Silesia , and we also have 35 000 signatures of people who live in Lower Silesia , who are calling for the Institute or institutions forming part of it to be located in Wrocław .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , we are really sorry , but this proposal is not serious .
Once again Europe wants to act but cannot .
The Greens were in favour of the Institute project , but of a real project , and the proposals that are on the table are inadequate and incoherent .
After the negotiations , the question of funding has still not been resolved .
The European proposal of EUR 308 million is clearly inadequate and , moreover , it is a much , much lower figure than what the European Commission itself proposed based on its studies .
We therefore have before us an invitation to gobble up and weaken other European projects such as the Seventh Research Framework Programme .
If the European Commission really wants to establish the Institute , as we do , the negotiations will have to be restarted on the financial perspective and a real budget will have to be created , a large budget of more than EUR 2 billion , which is what is needed .
In short , if we want to promote research and technology , we need to back it , we cannot give cannon fodder to the eurosceptics , as we are doing with such an incoherent project .
There are also problems with the content .
We have removed the ceiling on administrative expenditure ; we have required a ceiling for all projects , but here we have removed it .
We have also removed one of the main issues of life in general - climate change - which was going to be one of the issues , one of the main ones in fact , and has been removed .
This is very shocking , very shocking .
In short , here we have a project that obviously has no ambition , no money behind it and does not have a coherent project , which we deeply regret .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , adding an institute of technology to stand with the existing universities sounds a good idea , but that is not what is on offer .
It is proposed to set up an institution with the Commission vetting the board , which then selects the knowledge and innovation centres with which it will at first work but which it will , in time , subsume unto itself .
It will even issue qualifications bearing the EU logo , with no reference to the universities of which it has made use .
Surely , this is about innovation , but you do not get that by wishing it .
Especially this one , by encroaching on universities , will stifle enterprise , not promote it .
If you want to encourage innovation , look to individuals coming through universities .
Look to individuals in the SMEs , and offer resources to help them develop and promote their ideas .
If you are suggesting a network to enhance and spread ideas , do not bother .
This Community already communicates across the world .
Good ideas soon become international .
For goodness ' sake , drop this attempt to harmonise universities and consider the value of the varying contributions made by these different institutions .
If you have money to spare , use it to support innovators .
They work alone or in concert with small teams .
Europeans like Archimedes , Newton , Pasteur , Ehrlich , Röntgen , Fermi , Teller and Watson-Watt were brought on by no institute .
They just needed time and space to think and conduct research .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the few areas in which we recognise that the European Union can offer real added value compared with national initiatives is research .
That is why we are in favour of establishing a European Institute of Technology .
We also share the concerns , or questions , of the rapporteur .
The future EIT must be complementary and must not compete with initiatives already carried out at European level in the field of research and innovation .
Above all , it must not drain the budget allocated to the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development - which is already meagre enough - but should receive additional funding .
In view of its design , which consists of bringing public and private partners together , it would be much better if its resources came mainly from private funding and from its operating revenue .
This would be a sign of its usefulness and effectiveness .
Furthermore , the European Union should provide the impetus , rather than create yet another bureaucratic organisation that is a burden on European taxpayers .
For these reasons , it seems that the EIT label is a better idea than the possibility of the Institute issuing its own degrees and diplomas .
On this point also , the EU must offer added value and not try to replace what already exists .
Finally , this fear of pointless duplication , as well as financial and functional competition with other programmes , has led us to support an evaluation at an earlier stage than that proposed by the Commission , although the frequency of subsequent evaluations , extended to every seven years , seems too long .
If our fears materialise , we would have to act swiftly to make the necessary adjustments , or even substantial amendments , to the regulation . Alternatively , even though this is not the norm for Europe , we would have to put an end to the experiment .
Mr President , here we go again : more posturing , another hubristic attempt to emulate America .
The US has the dollar , so we must have the euro ; the US has a GPS system , so we must have Galileo ; the US has MIT , so we must have EIT .
We have perhaps forgotten that MIT is privately financed , not state funded , which is a key reason for its success .
Great academic institutions grow from the bottom up , not from the top down .
They do not spring up from the ground fully formed at the stroke of a bureaucrat 's pen .
No one questions the need for innovation and research in Europe , but this is the wrong way to do it .
State-imposed solutions will not work .
The proposed EIT will duplicate and conflict with existing EU programmes , like the Framework Programme for Research , the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme and the Lifelong Learning Programme .
This proposal exists outside the current Financial Perspective and its funding is by no means assured .
No wonder that established and excellent academic institutions in Europe are concerned that they may lose funding , they may lose key staff and they may lose research projects to the EIT .
I can well understand President Barroso thinking of his legacy , but we must not let his legacy damage European universities and research facilities .
Mr President , we need to support innovations and research all over Europe .
That is a crucial task for business life , universities and research institutes , Member States and the Union .
It will require much more funding for research and innovations .
That is why I would like to underline what the Commissioner stated earlier - that , regarding the EIT , the key issue now is the financing and funding .
This is because we need to ensure that , not only is the EIT funded , but also that it is not funded and getting its finances via money that otherwise would have financed research and innovation in other programmes and projects .
I think this cannot be underlined too much , as the funding for the EIT must come from other items in the budget than those which today contribute to the efforts of innovations and research in the Seventh Framework Programme , in the CIP or other items under the 1A heading .
If we can manage to do that , then we can manage to bring additional resources to innovations and research in Europe and can contribute to the innovations .
From the perspective of my group , I would like to underline that that is the crucial test that the Commission has to live up to and we need to contribute to because , if so , we can all contribute to Europe with more and better innovations .
If we succeed with this , we will succeed with innovations .
( FR ) Mr President , the rationale behind the European Institute of Technology is a fair one : namely that research is central to any economic progress .
Research depends on scientists educated at leading universities .
Universities must be able to count on significant and foreseeable public and private funding .
The European Union is lagging behind in all of these areas .
Our funds for research are , on average across the EU , way below the public - and especially private - research budgets of Japan and the US .
The EU - population 500 million - employs 1.2 million scientists .
The US - population 300 million - has 1.3 million .
On average in Europe , public and private funding for higher education represents 1.3 % of GDP , compared with 3.3 % in the US .
Europe spends less than EUR 10 000 per student , the US more than EUR 35 000 .
However , all is not a bed of roses on the other side of the Atlantic .
Out of 2 500 universities , only around 100 are truly excellent and these share EUR 32 billion each year of research funding .
This figure should be compared with the paltry funds proposed for the EIT .
If our governments do not set aside more money for research , the EIT and other schemes will fall by the wayside .
Each year , the US produces some 40 000 doctors .
One third come from the rest of the world . In physical and life sciences , the proportion of non-Americans is more than 50 % .
Why is this the case ?
Because the US still believes in scientific progress .
Where Europeans are quick to see risks and hide fearfully behind the precautionary principle , Americans see new opportunities .
This applies to biotechnologies , nanotechnologies , even when it comes to tackling climate change .
While Europe focuses on regrets , the US extols technological and scientific progress .
Fear of the future and fear of progress are at the root of Europe 's failings .
Without a change in attitude , Mr President , the EIT will not make any difference .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express the hope that the Knowledge and Innovation Communities that make up the European Institute of Technology will be spread evenly across the European Union .
This is particularly important because the Institute should be an instrument that mobilises the whole of the Community uniformly , and should boost competitiveness and technological progress , with the corollary of economic development for all the European Union , not just the old Member States .
I would also like to use this opportunity to give my firm support to the Polish proposal to locate the offices of the Institute 's Governing Board in Wrocław .
This is a rapidly developing city on the boundary between old and new Europe , on the borders of four states : Poland , Germany , Austria and the Czech Republic .
It is a city with some excellent higher education institutions and nearly 150 000 students .
Both the national authorities in Poland and the Wrocław local authorities , as well as the Polish academic world , are fully prepared to put this task into effect .
I would like to stress that locating the Institute 's Governing Board and the Knowledge and Innovation Community in Wrocław will not in any way clash with the fundamental criterion for the EIT - the criterion of excellence ; in fact quite the contrary .
Polish research and academia is at a high European level , and in many instances is leading the world .
The Institute must become an instrument that promotes higher levels of innovation throughout the European Union .
This is the only way for us to have a chance to meet the challenges of a global knowledge-based economy .
( PL ) Mr President , before the European Institute of Technology has even been born , its name has already been changed to the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
If this is supposed to help it to come into being , I am sure no one will have any objections .
It is worth pointing out that , in parallel to the work going on in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , some important matters have also come before our Budget Committee in connection with the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
It has been agreed that about EUR 400 million will be earmarked for this purpose for next year , and by 2013 the budget will be six times greater than this .
The problem is , though : who do we take from to give to this Institute , since no provision has been made in the seven-year budget ; not a single euro has been allotted .
It is as if we were thinking that the Lisbon Strategy , of which this Institute was supposed to form a significant part , is just another piece of paper , and that these are just more politicians ' fairy tales .
I mean , the Commission did previously inform the Parliament , formally or informally , of the intention to set up the Institute , and at the same time we did not allocate so much as five euros to it .
This demonstrates a certain lack of compatibility , xxx or even some sort of schizophrenia .
My city of Wrocław meets all the criteria to become the headquarters of the Governing Board of a European Institute of Technology .
A decision on this should be taken by the European Commission as soon as possible .
Mr President , surely in modern politics one of the most difficult things for a politician to say - other than ' I was wrong ' - is ' let us stop and think again ' .
We could do with that in this debate .
I am the first to acknowledge the hard work , in this House and in other places , that has gone into this proposal and into this report , and it is a matter of great regret to me that the end result really does not justify it .
It is a great regret for me personally because I was initially very enthusiastic about this proposal .
I myself sold it to our universities in Scotland , to our SMEs , to various other parties , and I have watched the proposal become increasingly weaker , diluted , muddled , precarious and , increasingly , underfunded .
Surely , we all agree in this Chamber that Europe does not commercialise our research enough .
We have agreed on the need to do something , but ' we must do something ; this is something , therefore we must do this ' is surely a bad logic , which will result in a bad , artificial , weak EU creation that will not achieve our hopes .
So let us be brave and rip this up and start again , and innovate and research a better EIT for Europe 's future .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , my sincere thanks to our rapporteur , my fellow Member Mr Paasilinna , to all the shadow rapporteurs and fellow Members on the committees asked for their opinion , who have been working very constructively in recent months to bring the EIT into a form on which we can all make a decision tomorrow with a large majority .
The European Institute for Innovation and Technology has the opportunity and potential to become a European beacon .
I am firmly persuaded of this and I regret that we have scheduled the debate on this important project so late in the day .
This matter really deserved to be discussed in the morning .
I very much hope , however , that the amendments to reject the Commission 's entire proposal will not gain a majority tomorrow .
We were always of one mind in setting objectives for the European Institute of Technology : we want to strengthen Europe 's capacity for innovation .
We also have to improve the transfer of technology and know-how from research and training to industry and to the economy - here too we were always of one mind .
The crucial question was always : can the European Institute of Technology make a valuable contribution to this ?
I think that the EIT in the form we now have it in Mr Paasilinna 's report really does have the capacity to carry out this work and generate European added value .
We have called a halt to the way , unlike the Americans , we have been locating the institute out on its own and pumping a lot of finance into it .
No , we are doing this our own way , the European way , by building up a networking structure here and promoting and supporting the universities , polytechnics , research establishments and teaching institutions we already have here .
We shall then hopefully create European added value through an intelligent networking structure .
I am confident that the EIT will be a success and I am happy to be making my contribution to it .
I will not now speak on behalf of Munich , which has also , of course , been lobbying for the headquarters of the EIT .
It is important that tomorrow we give our blessing to the project with a wide majority .

Mr President , according to legend , the scientists in Los Alamos who developed the atomic bomb in the Manhattan Project in the US during the Second World War spoke Hungarian among themselves .
They turned to English only in the presence of Robert Oppenheimer .
Indeed , Edward Teller , E. P. Wigner and Leo Szilard were born in Hungary and they studied in Budapest .
We Hungarians belong to a relatively small nation , but we are proud to have 50 Nobel Prize winners , mostly in the natural sciences .
As our language is isolated , many talented young Hungarians attracted by the natural sciences seek to carry out activities where there are no linguistic barriers .
Our scientists and young researchers , mainly in mathematics , physics , chemistry and in the life sciences , are very respected all over the world .
That is why my country , my compatriots and I are pleased to offer Budapest as a seat of the governing board and a centre of the European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) .
Of course , I urge that the decision on the seat should be taken as soon as possible .
As a new Member State , without the seat of any EU institutions , on the one hand , and with extremely rich experiences in natural sciences , on the other hand , Budapest would serve as an ideal seat of the EIT .
I fully support Mr Paasilinna 's report .
We do not need a huge bureaucratic organisation , just a network of the knowledge communities .
An open and transparent selection procedure on a competitiveness basis for such communities is also of high importance .
University research centres and enterprises should cooperate and we have to do our best to involve business in the work of the EIT .
Making the EIT visible by labelling the qualifications added through such knowledge communities is likely to bring further added value .
As regards financing , I do not support the idea of financing the EIT from the common agricultural policy fund , as nobody can foresee the next year 's harvest in agriculture .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Mr Paasilinna for an excellent report .
The idea of a European Institute of Technology was only born in the Commission after the EU 's multiannual financial framework had already been adopted .
That is the reason why the financing for it was sporadic and its mission statement was vague .
After Parliament 's debate the proposal was considerably improved , even if there is still much to clarify .
EU financing is still problematic .
Just as Mrs Škottová said , most of the financing is assumed to be coming from the Structural Funds and the EU research programmes .
This is not at all obvious , however , because the Member States decide on how the Structural Funds are used according to their own priorities .
Most funding for research is granted for reasons of competition .
Despite the Commission 's assurance , the principle of fair competition might be difficult to adhere to when the applicant is someone 's ' own baby ' .
Financing for the EIT 's networks of Knowledge and Innovation Communities ( KICs ) is also , in principle , open .
If funds are to be granted from EU programmes , the KICs should have to provide their own funds as well .
EU budget money cannot be used for that : it has to come from elsewhere .
How this will be done is not clear either .
The amendment to the Financial Perspective proposed by the Commission last week is a partial solution to these problems .
Hopefully things can only get better .
The EU 's development into a viable European institution will take hard work .
It cannot be achieved with money alone .
That is why I wish the project success in the future .

( PT ) In March 2006 the Council recognised that the European Institute of Technology proposed by President Barroso would represent an important step to fill the gap between higher education , research and innovation .
That is understandable .
Since European research and innovation are known to be inferior to those of North America , it would be fitting to devise instruments enabling us effectively to compete with the United States in this area .
We all know that researchers enjoy much better working conditions and pay in the United States and also that investment in the public sector , in particular linked to the defence industries , universities and the private sector are incomparably higher than those in Europe .
To be able to compete we therefore need a real European engine capable of reaching this goal and that engine needs to be given enough fuel , that is , sufficient budgetary means .
The plan therefore was to identify and select public and private investors , with part coming from the EU 's own resources , but Parliament took fright at that suggestion .
It ceased to consider the fundamental objectives , turning its attention to that point , to some extent putting the cart before the horse .
What we should do is give the Council the responsibility for providing the EIT with the necessary means as regards the Union 's contribution .
Budgetary temerity and probably some corporate academic interests soured the whole discussion .
If the fundamental questions relating to the launch of the MIT had been dealt with in this way , there would still be no MIT today .
Thus I am very much afraid , Mr President , that when the Commission proposed a high-performance Ferrari , Parliament gave it only a small pedal tricycle .
I shall vote in favour of the resolution , since it is the only one we have , because it is the only one left , but I regret that it did not go much further , which moreover might have entailed a special added value for us , ladies and gentlemen , since the building where we hold our sessions would become the seat of the EIT , thus doing away once and for all with the political , judicial , functional and financial aberration of having to come to Strasbourg every month for these plenary sessions .
( PL ) Mr President , I hope I will be able to speak for two minutes .
I congratulate the rapporteur on a balanced report and I thank the Commissioner for two and a half years of hard work .
This project has changed considerably in comparison with what it was in the beginning , and the changes have been very positive .
Competitiveness and innovation in Europe have perhaps been the most important issues for each successive presidency in recent times .
And what we are talking about is very much that future competitiveness of Europe that the appearance of the European Institute of Technology is meant to promote . I have four points to make on this subject .
Firstly , the European Union already has a Joint Research Centre , it has its own Research Council , and it is currently instigating joint technology initiatives .
It is very important that we do not allow European science and innovation in the European market to become fragmented . These institutions must not just begin working for themselves , in isolation .
This is also a very important task for the European Commission .
Secondly , we must bear in mind that the institutions to which I have referred cannot erase the differences that exist between them .
So let us not forget that the European Institute of Technology is meant to serve the full triangle of knowledge .
Particular emphasis needs to be placed on cooperation in education / innovation , since no European institution is working on this de facto .
This means that we have to promote education for innovation , as research is , after all , not required for every specific innovation .
Sometimes a good engineer is all that is needed .
Thirdly , I support the creation of an institute , but all these scientific and research and development institutions will not be able to resolve every problem , as they only serve to pump innovation into the economy .
Care needs to be taken to ensure that this mechanism works in another direction , and that depends on whether our market is open , whether we shall have sensibly restricted public assistance . In other words , it depends on how the common and free European market is going to function .
And fourthly , science , student exchanges , exchanges of competent engineers and innovations have always been the basis of integration between peoples and countries .
The same can be the case now , and that is why institutions linked to the European Institute of Technology should be located in the new Member States .
I would urgently appeal for this to be the case .
( ES ) Mr President , congratulations Mr Paasilinna , on your excellent work .
It has not been easy .
A great deal of effort has been made to design a viable institute , inspired by other models of excellence , but with the necessary adaptation to the complexity and diversity of Europe .
The result means that I can now express my support for the EIT , insofar as it is a new and promising instrument for integrating the three axes of knowledge : education , research and innovation , which we hope will add value to the existing instruments .
The EIT should also be a focus of excellence , based on a model of integrating the research institutions with companies , which we hope will serve as a catalyst for a culture of innovation , which is so essential for improving our competitiveness .
The funding of the EIT is the big agreement still to be reached .
I agree that the initial funding and its governing structure should come from the Community budget , and that both the public contributions from Member States and the private contributions should be used to develop innovation and knowledge communities that are in line with the Institute 's priorities .
( NL ) Mr President , we in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy have , through excellent collaboration and consultation , added innovation to the name European Institute of Innovation and Technology , as it now reads .
This is excellent .
Commissioner Figel has also led me to understand that the Commission would also like to adopt this .
Indeed , it is all about introducing ( a ) education , academics , engineers and ( b ) innovation from knowledge institutions and companies onto the market .
The knowledge-skill-till chain is encountering increasingly strong competition worldwide and requires even more intelligent organisation .
We must close this European gap with innovation and not allow ourselves to remain bogged down with education alone .
Mr Paasilinna arrested our attention with great enthusiasm whilst discussing this subject .
A second observation is that it is no bad thing that we are now opting for a limited set-up and a restricted financial basis .
If the formula is successful , we will also see from within the business community that that public partner , together with the public partner in the Member States , will start to provide financial support by means of structural funding or otherwise .
The EIT title must be desired .
In this instance , ' excellence ' stands for ' world leader ' .
That is where you want to belong and there is also support for this .
If you listen to the universities , the nanotechnology industry and the emerging climate-related industry , there is wide support for this .
Having listened to the many arguments for Wrocław , I also ask whether a choice has already been made with regard to establishing a control centre in an effective location within central Europe .
I hear that there is enthusiasm for this in many locations .
Finally , Mr President , there is a true niche , a gap between what we have in the previous instruments and educational programmes , between the various programmes .
It must be created with daring and ambition .
A strong leader is required .
Something really must come of this and then , in 2010 , we will say : sure enough , that was a good move . Investment pays off in time .

( RO ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioner , first of all , I congratulate Mr. Rapporteur Paasilinna , who almost entirely rewrote the Commission 's document , making it functional .
The triangle of knowledge - innovation , research and education - made up of universities , research centres and institutes and companies is indispensable for achieving the Lisbon strategy objectives , namely to have 3 % of the gross domestic product invested in research , of which two thirds should come from the private environment .
The knowledge and innovation communities will be a bridge between the private sector and the academic and research community .
I believe that the pilot projects proposed by Mr. Paasilinna are necessary and I hope to have such a pilot project in Romania as well .
Investments are required all the way through , from production to dissemination and use of the research and innovation results .
The financing of this institute is the first step , but we also need investments in the field of small and medium-sized companies and in the private sector , because there are people and resources for co-financing the research projects .
There has to be a long term strategy .
Intellectual property is important , but we have to be careful for this initiative not to overlap common initiatives , joint undertakings .
I hope this institute would work more in the field of climate changes , the information society and nanotechnologies .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the planned European Institute of Technology , often said to be the flagship of European innovation , links the three elements of the triangle of knowledge : innovation , research and education .
The key to the success of this undertaking is , in my opinion , good cooperation between academic centres and business environments .
The European Institute of Technology must first and foremost be in a position to accumulate large amounts of private funding .
Today I want to draw the European Parliament 's attention to the preparations being made for Wrocław to become the headquarters of the Institute , or else one of the centres of its Knowledge and Innovation Communities .
Wrocław may be a symbol of European history ; it is often called the Strasbourg of Central and Eastern Europe .
There are currently more than 140 000 students studying in Wrocław ; the city is one of Poland 's main research centres .
It has given birth to the EIT + Centre for Innovation and Technology , which is lobbying to have the Institute located in Wrocław . One final comment .
In the last ten years , Wrocław has become a city of modern financial services , a place that draws in capital from all over the world , a symbol of European creative energy and development , and a positive symbol of globalisation .
( NL ) Madam President , yet another new institute .
That may well be this evening 's conclusion .
In addition to the European Research Council and the technology platforms , the joint technology initiatives , Eureka , the CIP , the Seventh Framework Programme and the JRC , we now have yet another knowledge institute .
The added value is innovation , because that is what is lacking in comparison with the United States , Japan and China .
The idea behind this is that there are enough good ideas and scientific insights within Europe , but that they are not developed into concrete products .
The question is of course whether a new institute can help in this process .
The question is also whether SMEs can find their way amongst all these knowledge and research institutes .
The lack of innovation should perhaps be ascribed to the complex legislation that hinders innovation , rather than to a lack of institutes .
Nonetheless , the new institute with its Knowledge and Innovation Communities may provide a contribution and I hope that the EIT can provide a major contribution and will excel in the field of climate policy , because a great deal of reform and innovation is sorely needed in this area .
Despite my doubts , I wish the EIT an excellent start and a successful future .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you for not only giving me the floor but for the possibility of being at this interesting debate , because , when we reflect back to two years - or at least one and a half years - ago , we can see a total difference .
I just want to react to some points and prepare for further cooperation , because we are not at the end .
We are far from the definite establishment , but what we have already achieved in Council and Parliament is really something very significant .
First , a smaller point , which was raised by some colleagues from the Verts / ALE Group : according to Mr Hammerstein , climate change was dropped .
We do not think so .
In the proposal as it stands now , there is , inter alia , a field of renewable energy and climate change .
We do not want to insist , we do not want to put it very narrowly , because it is for the governing board definitively to decide and define .
But the global challenges or highly demanding issues which we face now are one of the reasons why we speak about the EIT , because we need to pool resources and put together the forces we have in order to respond in a way .
Mr Smith , I visited and gave a speech at the Royal Society of Edinburgh on higher education , and the EIT was a very strong , interesting debate , and also inspirational mutually .
I would not be discouraged by such messages from Edinburgh or the rectors I met , but of course the scheme is under preparation .
Participation is voluntary and I think we should see it as a common responsibility but with the full freedom to take some positions .
On overall content , I would like to make four points .
First of all , my thanks for the innovative mood in this Parliament because , as some of you have said , it is about innovations , and you have to start innovations by addressing the way we deal with innovations .
It does not happen just through technology ; it must first of all come as a new approach , a new way of communicating and putting together institutions , conditions for mobility , for recognition of qualifications and so on - and , of course , money , but that is not the decisive element .
It is not the first element .
That is the mentality , the approach , along , of course , with some reasonable funding .
Since spring 2005 , we have gone from ideas to concept to proposal , and you have always been involved .
It is not just the Commission and bureaucrats or whatever , it is a kind of common work , and that is why we should be aware that if we try to achieve something together we will be much more successful than without such a committed approach as we see here .
If you recall , two years ago in the media it was about Strasbourg or about something false , not about a real commitment from Europe to innovate .
Now we have many serious candidates .
Just this evening , Wrocław , Budapest , Munich and many more were mentioned - I do not want to forget about them .
I got many more messages from different universities .
That is fine , because it shows that now we at least believe the idea or want to offer something very serious .
That is something Europe needs .
We are not the ' United States of Europe ' .
It is not Massachusetts .
It is about the way we will put together better conditions and one concrete project towards a more innovative Europe .
The EIT is not the absolute answer .
It is one of the answers .
Some people have said it is a flagship .
I would say it is rather an icebreaker towards a more innovative Europe , to create better conditions for intellectual property -you know how long it takes and how weak we are - and better acceptance and recognition of diplomas and degrees etc . - many issues .
If the three cities mentioned are not the seat , then they should at least be Knowledge Innovation Communities .
But I want to say that it was wrong at the beginning to say it is about money and the place .
No , this will come as part of the proposal , but it is not the most important part .
The answer will come within 12 months after we have agreed definitely on the establishment .
I am really happy that there are very credible candidates now , but this will come when we agree on the legal base .
The Council will try to choose the best out of the existing serious candidates .
Secondly , on money : last week we proposed the way in which we could come to the final point where we say not only how much money but also from which source we can finance the body until 2013 .
It is for basic operations , but it must , as many of you have said , mobilise much more money .
It is not , I would say , decisive in terms of overall volume but as a credible contribution of the Union .
We cannot expect anybody to give a blank cheque or promises if we do not bring something credible .
But there are many concrete responses , intentions to invest , even from businesses and associations of businesses , but we have to make our proposal full .
On what Mr Buzek said on initiatives or joint technology initiatives , networks and platforms , this proposal is not competing .
It is a proposal complementary to existing policies and initiatives and we can imagine that some existing cooperation models will step up the intensity of cooperation and join with some other partners , either from universities or business , and apply for a place under the EIT .
So I think that from platforms , from initiatives , from networks , to get into an integrated partnership is a reasonable change of the way we innovate .
Lastly , I wanted to mention the step towards a new culture of innovation .
This is the right approach .
The EIT is not so much about the place , one seat and the board , but a new and better culture for innovation in Europe .
I think that is all I could , or wanted to , raise as points in my response , but thank you very much for a very positive and constructive climate here in this plenary .
And thanks also to the rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna , once again , because I know it was not easy , and it is still not easy , and we are not at the end .
But we can finalise this proposal .
I am looking forward to it .
( Applause )
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Paasilinna report ( A5-0293 / 2007 )
The Commission can accept Amendments 3 , 12 , 14 , 18 , 20 , 23 , 38 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 72 and 73 .
The Commission can accept Amendments 7 , 16 and 28 in substance .
The Commission can accept , subject to redrafting , Amendments 2 , 15 , 17 , 26 , 39 , 29 , 30 , 32 , 36 , 37 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 56 , 57 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 70 and 74 .
The Commission reserves its position on amendment 21 on financial aspects pending an agreement on the funding .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 19 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 27 , 31 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 47 , 55 , 58 , 69 , 71 , 75 , 77 , 78 and 79 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Institute of Technology has the ability to reduce innovation gaps between the European Union and its external competitors and to gain the interest of millions of young researchers all over Europe .
In order to achieve these objectives , it is essential to ensure the feasibility of the project .
The EIT , in the form proposed by the Commission , will use over 1.2 billion out of the funds designated for the cohesion policy and will draw from the resources of programmes that operate successfully in order to achieve the Lisbon strategy .
This would mean centralizing the research funds into a single European project and reducing the financing possibilities open to private companies .
The EIT should be a complementary innovation institution in Europe , not a substitute for small research and development centres .
For this reason , together with the Council , we must find another financing formula for this project .
One of the provisions in the report states the necessity for the institute to be established in a European Union country where there are " centres of European academic excellence and reputation ” .
As a country with an important research and innovation tradition , Romania possesses important academic centres and well-qualified series of graduates in technology .
Selecting Romania as the host country for the European Institute of Technology would stimulate economic development in the entire region and would contribute to balancing the gaps still existing in the European Union .
in writing . - Education , research and innovation are windows to the future .
They are the building blocks of what is called the ' knowledge triangle ' .
We need to be competitive .
The knowledge triangle is one of the keys .
Therefore I see the European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) as an investment to the future .
There has been scepticism to the added value EIT could offer .
The network structure supported in this , Mr Paasilinna 's , report will be a good solution .
The expertise lies in the participating universities and higher education institutions .
Therefore , rather than what the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , has called a ' flagship ' of European research , the EIT will try to be a label branding European research .
I support this idea .
Remembering my academic years , I also support the report 's idea of the EIT 's ' Knowledge and Innovation Communities ' ( KICs ) being autonomous .
This way the EIT KICs will give the best kicks to European innovation .
Towards a common European foreign policy on energy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jacek Saryusz-Wolski , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a common European foreign policy on energy .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I am presenting to you an own-initiative report recommended by an overwhelming majority in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Our report advocates a common EU foreign policy on energy in order to face challenges of energy security .
It would bring necessary and substantial added value to efforts made at national level , according to the subsidiarity principle , and would allow better protection of Europe 's energy interests .
What should this policy look like ?
It should be based on the following four principles : diversification ; unity in defending the EU 's interests and the EU speaking with one voice ; solidarity in crisis ; and strengthened cooperation with partners .
We need to develop a proactive broad energy diplomacy aimed at strengthening our cooperation with all major producer , transit and consumer countries , and to create an energy market based on the principle of reciprocity .
The report welcomes the proposals of the third energy package , as adopted last week by the Commission , which addresses these concerns and is in line with the report .
The EU has to be active , determined and united .
The geopolitical dimension of energy security has been so far neglected and it is high time to fill the gap .
Hopefully the new Treaty will equip the EU with a legal basis for energy solidarity , thus allowing for the EU 's institutional competence to negotiate an energy security framework with third countries .
The report recommends including in our agreements with producer and transit countries a so-called energy security clause which lays down a code of conduct and explicitly outlines measures to be taken in the event of disruption of supply .
We should replace the current EU Member States ' preference for energy unilateralism with a new common policy of energy solidarity based on a multilateralist approach .
Meanwhile , there is a necessity to establish a good practice of consultation among Member States on strategic decisions which may affect the EU or one of its members .
The new common foreign policy on energy must be consistent with all EU policies having an external aspect , e.g. internal market , competition , transport , trade , environment , consumer protection , budget and others .
One cannot create a new common policy overnight .
We propose , therefore , to adopt a gradual approach and furthermore , to be efficient , this new policy should be equipped with appropriate instruments .
We suggest the creation of a new post of High Official for Foreign Energy Policy after the new Treaty enters - hopefully - into force .
This office would allow for the coordination of all the above-mentioned sectoral policies of the Union and especially those aspects related to the external side of energy security , working under the authority of the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , who would , in future , also be Vice-President of the European Commission .
That would reinforce the synergies inside the Union .
This institutional novelty therefore constitutes an important anchorage of the new approach .
We also propose to elaborate a precise roadmap indicating short- , medium- and long-term objectives with a specific timeframe for implementing them and obviously subject to the European Parliament 's scrutiny .
To be successful , we need to engage the EU 's internal dynamic and to secure the necessary public support .
The citizens ' interest is in secure and affordable energy .
This interest of our citizens should be at the core of the project , thus constituting one of the targets of our ' Europe of results ' approach .
Common threats to secure energy for Europe should therefore produce a common response .
But we may also achieve more : a new common policy can become a trigger for further European integration , giving it a new impetus and new strength to the EU as a global actor .
A demanding and courageous approach should be an ambition of the European Parliament .
Today 's European Union started a long time ago with energy .
Then , it was coal giving an initial push to our reconstruction .
We should not miss the opportunity to let it happen once again .
We need energy for Europe , indeed , both in literal and in metaphorical terms .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I welcome very much the initiative of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and in particular the chairman , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , to propose a report on a common European foreign policy on energy .
Recent developments have confirmed that this is a very timely initiative .
The report serves to underline the growing importance of energy issues in the Community context , particularly the external aspects and the importance of the European Union speaking with one voice on external energy issues .
I appreciate that the report clearly highlights that substantial progress has been made over the past year by the European Union and its institutions towards the goal of speaking with one voice . This includes the establishment of the Network of Energy Security Correspondents ( NESCO ) , in addition to the existing gas coordination group and oil supply group .
NESCO has been active since the early summer , which has permitted a very useful and early exchange of energy information between Member States .
However , an earlier exchange of information on planned initiatives by particular Member States would still be highly welcome .
Therefore , as the report underlines , a lot still remains to be done .
The call for a suitable Treaty basis for energy and energy security is particularly important and timely , as is the call for concrete provisions in the Treaties that will lead to the creation of a common European foreign policy on energy .
I very much welcome this approach , including the proposal from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy that the principles of the common energy policy be included in the EC Treaty at the forthcoming intergovernmental conference , so that there will be a solid basis for joint action in the energy field directed towards third countries .
I also note that the Committee has reflected further on the proposal on how to anchor external energy policies more firmly both in the Commission and the Council .
We will need to reflect further on this important subject .
I believe that this version of the report is also balanced geographically , recognising the importance of enhancing our energy relations not only with our eastern neighbours but also with our Mediterranean , Middle East , Asian and other partners .
I already enjoy the genuine energy partnership with the United States but I do believe that we can achieve more in this area .
I also believe that we need to continue to work with like-minded energy partners , such as Norway , Canada and Australia , to strengthen the consensus on the value of open , transparent and competitive international energy markets .
Recognising the value of the Energy Charter Treaty , I agree with the Committee that Russia 's ratification would be very important .
However , at the same time I firmly believe that the principles of the Charter also need to be included in a robust energy agreement within the framework of the post-PCA agreement with Russia .
I do have a practical concern about the number of reports that it is suggested that the Commission should produce .
I know that each of them per se is important but I believe that most of the issues raised will be covered in the framework of the regular review of the Energy Action Plan or are already covered in the Commission 's annual reports on the application of competition law .
I do , however , favour more involvement by Parliament and I will examine the suggestions proposed to my colleagues in the College to determine what , in practical terms , the Commission can do to address the concerns raised .
Finally , with respect to the substance , the Commission intends to press ahead with the work in which we are engaged since early last year and which reflects most of the priorities identified in the report , in particular , on the feasibility study to examine the existing legal arrangements in the EU if its neighbours ' energy sectors fall short , and how to strengthen them .
Equally , it is important to put concrete proposals on the table on reciprocity , and I welcome the fact that your report recognises the importance of reciprocity measures aimed at protecting our internal energy market .
This is a very timely report , both politically and also in terms of substance .
The Commission has been actively working over the past year and a half to reinforce the EU 's external policy on energy and , as the report recognises , there have been a number of significant achievements .
However , we do need to go further and I therefore fully support the call in this report for concrete provisions in the Treaties that will lead to the creation of a common European foreign policy on energy .
With energy security , we are talking about the security of our economies and our way of life .
As the EU is becoming increasingly dependent on imports of energy , it is crucial that we have a coherent and focused response to the challenges that this presents , not least in our relations with our major external energy suppliers .
This has already been reflected in the Commission 's latest package on the internal electricity and gas markets , and I very much welcome your appreciation of the proposal .
I can also announce that the Commission will be a holding a rapid and in-depth review of the wider aspects of the EU 's external policy in energy and that we will definitely make the results of that work public .
I would like to thank the Committee on Foreign Affairs and particularly the chairman , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , for taking this initiative and for giving Parliament an opportunity to debate this extremely important issue for Europe , and I look forward to continuing our cooperation in the future .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my first words will be to congratulate my colleague and friend Mr Saryusz-Wolski for his excellent report .
It is now time for Europe to speak with one voice on energy , because we face serious threats to security of supply , transit and investment .
However , it is a shame that paragraph 62 of the report is too categorical as regards full ownership unbundling of energy production , transmission and distribution , since other solutions exist to reconcile the creation of a European energy market with the essential political security that we must maintain over our networks .
In terms of international trade , we need to insist on the inclusion of chapters on energy in any new trade agreement .
Fair competition must be established at international level , particularly through and under the supervision of the World Trade Organization .
Finally , we must support international scientific initiatives such as the ITER thermonuclear experimental reactor programme , which , apart from the European Union , also involves a number of other partner countries around the world .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the depletion of fossil fuels and changes in the geopolitical situation have placed energy security at the top of the European Union 's political agenda .
The European Union 's growing dependence on external energy supplies , mainly from unstable countries , gives rise to concerns regarding the economic and political interests of the Member States as well as the EU 's overall security .
I do not believe , however , that we can respond to these challenges and problems solely by increasing production and supplies from abroad , but should rather seek a response to energy demand within Europe .
It is for this reason that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety urged a focus on energy efficiency and renewable energy sources during the next decade , as the major way of reducing dependency on oil and gas .
Since production and consumption of energy are the main sources of greenhouse gas emissions , an integrated approach to the environment and energy is required to achieve the objectives of a sustainable energy policy .
Therefore , combating climate change should not remain the preserve of environmental policies , but ought to lie at the heart of the European Union 's policies , both internal and commercial .
For example , with regard to biofuels it is vital for the European Union to ensure that they will not threaten security of food supplies worldwide and will not create pressure on the economy of the global South to expand monoculture and deforestation .
Support for the development and use of renewables can ensure a fair transfer of technologies to non-EU countries and bring benefits in terms of European leadership in the development of international markets .
The proposal for energy partnership with Africa is therefore important , and we should add similar partnerships with China and India in view of the growth of these countries .
The attainment of the millennium objectives for developing countries is a priority .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Madam President , the cornerstones of the energy policy for the European Union are transparency , reciprocity and the rule of law .
And , as we have all experienced in the last two years , this is also a vitally important issue when it comes to energy and foreign relations .
We already have problems in Europe when it comes to security of supply , consumer rights and environmental concerns , and we have to do something about the greenhouse effect .
We also have a disturbance on the market that is severe , which Neelie Kroes 's report showed us very clearly and which puts on the table the need to unbundle , which is also a foreign relations concern .
This is a very important aspect of this issue .
So we have to rebuild our energy system in Europe with regard to production , distribution and consumption .
I would like to thank the rapporteur Mr Saryusz-Wolski for very good cooperation .
He has taken account of all the texts from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
What I am not so happy about is what he added with regard to the new Solana-like function , to be able to talk with one voice for the European Union .
This new institution would , as I see it , cause uncertainty of roles , a divide-and-conquer situation , and it takes completely the opposite approach to our cornerstones in our energy policy .
We cannot check on reciprocity with an institution like this , transparency is ruled out and the powers of Parliament are diminished , which is also completely the opposite of what we want in all other areas .
We have therefore asked for a split vote on this topic tomorrow .
Finally , I want to agree with the Commissioner that it is vitally important that we add the energy issue to the new Treaty .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , this report is a serious , thorough and inspirational piece of work .
The rapporteur has rallied support across the Committee on Foreign Affairs but also across the other four committees that we have just heard from .
In my view it will meet with widespread acclamation tomorrow , including my own support , and , I am very happy to say , that of my British colleagues .
Commissioner Piebalgs , you went a very long way in your introduction to support the initiative that the Committee chairman , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , has raised with , as I say , a lot of innovation and skill , because , to many , there were challenges .
I have two specific questions to which perhaps you might reply .
You stated , in terms of one of our major suppliers , Russia , that you look forward to a new agreement under the action plan .
What is wrong with the old agreement that Russia has actually signed , the Energy Charter , including the Transit Protocol ?
Because , if our neighbours and suppliers , with whom we have mutual dependency , constantly renege on agreements , what confidence can we have in the future ?
We are looking for harmonious relations , but we have to defend our own corner and not merely agree with those who are in a supply situation .
I disagree with Ms Ek in her reservations - perhaps she might listen - about the High Official .
It seems to me that Mr Saryusz-Wolski is absolutely right in that we must have an institutional representative , whether it is yourself or whether it is , as we foresee , a double-hatted responsibility - both the Commission and Council .
I disagree thoroughly with Ms Ek .
This increases transparency , because Parliament would have a direct contact in the Vice-President of the Commission role of this High Official .
Could you dwell , in your reply , a little bit on this institutional issue , which seems to me to be extremely important and which Parliament is going to stress very strongly ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( LT ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and express my thanks for the good cooperation in coordinating the changes to the report on this new , brave issue .
The European Union is uneasily implementing its common foreign and security policy and is just starting to create its energy policy .
It is proposing to go even further , that is , to create a common European foreign policy on energy .
I believe that this is the right step , because the interlacing of foreign and energy policy is becoming more and more apparent and we need to look to the future .
Those countries that manage energy sources can fall into the temptation of managing the entire world or at least having a special impact on certain regions .
This report presents ways of avoiding this by using a justified EU measure - solidarity .
I am sure that the creation of a High Representative for Foreign Energy Policy with dual subordination is very important .
Bringing to mind Henry Kissinger 's well-known expression , the officials of countries that supply resources , transit countries and the representatives of large companies would call him and he would not be able to stop calls from the capitals of the EU Member States .
The Members of the European Parliament would expect to receive reports from the European Commission on the implementation of the proposed policy and the assessment of how third countries are complying with the principles of transparency and mutuality .
If this policy is acceptable to the European Union , we will avoid any stumbling when bilateral agreements are concluded , bypassing their neighbours in the European Union .
The EU and Russia depend on one another in the areas of energy imports and exports .
Both are searching for possibilities to diversify and they will not stop doing this .
However , they will still remain natural partners in supplementing one another for quite some time .
It is very important that agreements between the EU and Russia are based on international law and are transparent and clearly monitored .
The way forward for this is also presented in this report .
( Applause )

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Saryusz-Wolski , who has written an excellent report on a very important and topical issue , and I would like to thank you for working together , for your cooperation and your willingness to reach a compromise .
There is no doubt that the issue of energy security is one of the biggest challenges facing the European Union .
Nowadays this is not primarily a technical issue , or an economic issue , or even a matter of energy sector management .
Fundamentally , it is a strategic issue .
The European Union as a whole currently obtains 50 % of its energy requirements from outside the EU .
According to estimates by experts , by 2030 it will be importing 70 % of its energy requirements .
This means that its energy dependency is very high .
Even now , many Member States depend to a much greater degree on energy supplies from abroad , and a good few of the new Member States depend on a single external supplier .
Moreover , this supplier is one that is increasingly exploiting energy as a means of asserting its own political interests .
Sometimes it is bent on punishing the Member States , at other times dividing them .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am referring to Russia .
A common energy policy is urgently needed , an energy policy based on unity and solidarity , exactly as Mr Saryusz-Wolski has just set out .
It is vital that we diversify our sources and our transport corridors since the areas of the world we are dealing with in both cases are unstable , or largely unstable , and this also poses a threat to our security of supply .
The report proposes appointing a High Official for Foreign Energy Policy , but the ALDE group does not support this .
We are concerned that it could lead to conflicts over competences ; we are concerned that the European Parliament 's powers of scrutiny would be curtailed and we fear that it would not represent real added value .
At the same time , however , we believe a very important aspect of the report is that it highlights the significance of energy projects , notably Nabucco , as a major common energy undertaking of the European Union , which could represent the first step towards a real common foreign policy on energy .
The report , and Mr Saryusz-Wolski , deserve particular credit for drawing attention to the concerns surrounding the Nord Stream pipeline .
These concerns are partly environmental , but they are also at least as much political , and this pipeline can only be constructed if we find satisfactory solutions and satisfactory answers to all of these concerns .
The Energy Charter Treaty is especially important because it is the basis of European cooperation on energy matters , and Russia too must ratify it .
Thank you .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) We have a good chance of achieving a common energy policy .
The most recent communication from the Commission indicates that we are on the right road .
The report from Mr Saryusz-Wolski is also an important step in this direction .
In the first place , we have here a reasonable picture of the problems of energy trade in the context of foreign policy .
The European Union has been avoiding this for a long time .
It took the hostile abuse of energy by Russia to make us realise that trade in energy had become a narrowly political instrument .
The report builds energy security into the EU 's security priorities .
What we find here is a well-defined principle of solidarity and the requirement to diversify suppliers and transport corridors .
We find very reasonable doubts about the Nord Stream pipeline , the demand for Russia to respect the principles of the Energy Charter , the involvement of the WTO and the expansion of our energy policy beyond the context of European Union Member States .
For all of these reasons , our political group is happy to support this report .
I congratulate the rapporteur .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I share the assessment of the rapporteur , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , concerning the problems of dependence on imports and the growing dependence on imports of energy fuels and I have little disagreement with it - the report describes it very well .
I do not , however , agree with the solutions this report puts forward and am of the opinion that important strategic objectives of internal , intra-European energy policy should have been reflected in this report .
In my opinion , the most important instrument for reducing this growing dependence on imports is the reduction of energy consumption in all areas and I am also of the opinion that the 20 % increase in energy efficiency which Europe has undertaken to achieve by the year 2020 has to be a target that must leave its mark on strategic foreign energy policy .
When we realise that in the construction sector in Russia alone , as much gas is consumed unnecessarily as is otherwise exported from Russia to the European Union , then it is clear how much we can gain if we implement our efficiency strategies at home and then also turn the outward-looking energy strategy of the European Union into a viable method for Russia .
This would therefore also involve influencing Russia 's internal energy policy by example .
On the subject of oil - dependence on OPEC is always a disadvantage in the light of the heated debate about Russia - I would say : if Europe manages to make economical , efficient cars on a pilot model and implement an aviation fuel tax for aviation gasoline , then we would gain more than with heated debates with OPEC on markets and export opportunities .
We support some parts , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , but not other parts !
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , this is in some respects a very honest report .
The wording is clear .
There has been no Treaty basis for this energy policy to date .
Correct !
Then for me the question is : why is this initiative being taken ?
The initiative is being taken - we have now heard this more clearly in the spoken contributions than could be read in the report itself - on account of Russia 's energy policy .
This base line is precisely the thread that runs through the entire report .
It is an anti-Russian report - as clearly worded in a variety of ways at various points - and it is a report that clearly states that the European Union wants to be a global player and a foreign policy on energy is virtually a means to that end .
This , too , is honest in some respects and something which may or may not be politically desirable .
We do not want this !
Clear demands are being made in relation to certain projects .
The lobbying policy for the Nabucco pipeline project , which is also being pursued within this Parliament , can also be found in this report .
Countries are dealt with collectively : Turkey is regarded almost exclusively as the transit hub for energy supplies .
However , Turkey is rather more than this .
I find the wording with regard to the USA particularly good .
Here it states : ' underlined the importance of enhanced energy dialogue with the US and other key energy partners that share EU values . '
I would just remind you that the USA is conducting a war in Iraq with a range of allies , also partly because of energy issues .
If these are the same values , we must be very clear about saying ' no ' to this development !
The wording is clear that , in the G8 , the various Member States involved will be backing interests in the energy sector , and a link will be established with the military components .
As I have said : it is in some respects a very honest report .
A colleague of mine has described it thus : this report has a whiff of the Cold War about it .
I believe this is right and my Group will therefore be rejecting this report .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , time is pressing for concrete steps to be taken towards a European external energy policy .
Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report does not push forward the Nabucco project in particular without good reason .
Our Commissioner for Energy , Mr Piebalgs , eloquently dubbed this gas pipeline ' an embodiment of the existence of a common European energy policy ' .
Sure enough , words must be followed by action and it is for that reason that we also greatly welcome the appointment of Jozias van Aartsen to the position of EU coordinator for the Nabucco project .
The recent British and Austrian missions in respect of potential gas suppliers for Nabucco , Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan also serve as evidence of European decisiveness .
In any event , the positive responses from Ashgabat and Baku offer perspective .
Two issues are of essential importance for an effective follow-up to the Nabucco project , the cost of which runs into billions of euros .
First of all , there must be harmony between the current group holders .
In short , Austrian project manager OMV must immediately discontinue its stubborn attempts at a hostile takeover of group partner , Hungarian oil and gas firm MOL .
A clearly urgent task for the new Nabucco coordinator and on behalf of the EU will be for Mr Van Aartsen to also be on the alert for further attempts on the part of Russia to infiltrate this interesting energy diversification project .
Madam President , in the event that the Nabucco project and similar European plans are unsuccessful , there will be insufficient energy diversification for the new EU Member States .
This will result in a fragmentation of the European energy market and the diplomatic curtain will then unfortunately fall on a European external energy policy .
The European institutions must never let it come to this .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in common with the rapporteur , I also believe that it is necessary and important to align foreign policy with energy policy .
I hope it is not necessary to elaborate on how appropriate coherence between the two policies , which would both be strengthened by a common strategy , would lead to economic growth and prosperity for European citizens as well as greater political stability worldwide , and a probable domino effect for our major European partners .
The priority , however , should not relate exclusively to security of supply , but we should at the same time focus on a sustainable , efficient energy policy that makes Europe increasingly self-sufficient in energy terms and thus independent of external pressures that may have an influence , and at times a strong one , on the EU 's commitment to the promotion of democracy , human rights and peace .
An effective common policy must be based on increased resources for research into renewable energy as well as investment in nuclear power , and so we should focus on what we have : skills , professionalism and technologies .
If we also add political will , we can transform the European energy crisis into a unique opportunity : gaining a full technological advantage in order , when the imminent world energy crisis arrives , to beat our major competitors at the economic challenge .
Madam President , today 's debate could well be titled ' who is going to have the upper hand in conducting the EU 's foreign policies ? '
Will it be big corporations and third countries or will it be the EU institutions ?
By creating a common policy on energy , as proposed by Mr Saryusz-Wolski , the EU will become a much stronger player on the world stage , better placed to defend the interests of all its Members .
A common energy policy has to become an essential part of our common security policy .
As late as January 2006 , the EU countries started to realise that energy has been used and will be used by Russia as a central instrument of its foreign policies .
President Putin has openly defined the state-owned Gazprom in such a role .
For my country , Estonia , this is nothing new : Estonia experienced a full-scale energy blockade 16 years ago , when Russia punished its former colony for trying to become genuinely independent .
This report shows that it is high time for a united approach .
Too often , bilateral agreements have in fact led to looking away from democratic standards and have caused real damage to the EU 's unity and credibility .
For example , the Baltic Sea gas pipeline project should be seen first of all as a political tool , which will enable Putin 's Russia to further divide the EU , by playing certain states against the others .
Therefore , I strongly support two key ideas of this report : creating a special EU official to coordinate foreign energy policies and including an energy solidarity clause in the future Treaties .
But I am especially encouraged by Commissioner Piebalgs for his deeply professional , constructive and forthcoming approach and I look forward to our good cooperation .

( DE ) Madam President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , for the opportunity to work with him well and to be able to reach a compromise .
One of these compromises has just been mentioned and concerns those responsible for a foreign policy on energy .
I know this is a difficult field , not without controversy , and the Commissioner will still have to do a great deal more work on it .
If it comes to it , not only will the foreign affairs politicians need to be involved , but also the Commission 's energy politicians .
One important aim of our foreign policy on energy is diversification .
This does not mean that we want to take action against those countries from which we obtain crude oil or natural gas , but we do want to tap other sources .
Even Russia is trying to gain access to sources in order to supply crude oil or natural gas to Europe .
It is our legitimate right to try to gain this sort of access as well .
In addition , the question of reciprocity is an important aspect in relation to Russia .
For our Group this does not entail a policy vis-à-vis Russia , but a policy of equal rights .
If Russia is opening up its markets , we shall do so too .
But we cannot be asked to open everything up while Russia is closing everything down .
It makes no sense for us .
The final point I would like to mention is a very difficult matter , also included in the amendment , and that is the relationship between energy policy and human rights policy .
When I was in Azerbaijan for a short time with my colleagues , we did discuss this .
Unfortunately , most of our sources of supply are in countries where the issue of human rights is not the top priority .
This cannot lead us to say we will not source any more energy from these countries .
But it must mean - if we want to remain credible - that we will do both : energy policy , but also human rights policy , and improving the human rights situation in these countries .
It cannot mean that we say ' we are sourcing energy ; nothing else is of interest to us ' .
We must offer a parallel strategy .
This is the only credible thing to do .

( FI ) Madam President , I too wish to congratulate Mr Saryusz-Wolski on an excellent report on a very important issue .
The report shows that the Union still has much to do to establish a common policy on energy .
I would like to emphasise the importance of renewable energy as a way to improve self-sufficiency in energy , diversify energy sources and control climate change .
We still need to invest considerably in research and product development if we are to increase the share of renewable energy .
Member States must be able to maintain their right to take decisions on energy and exploit their own energy sources , but at the same time we need cooperation , an exchange of best experience and also common rules and regulations to promote the establishment of a common energy policy .
It is also important to implement joint projects on renewable energy in collaboration with the Union 's neighbouring countries , so that all Europe 's renewable energy resources can be used more efficiently , effectively and sustainably .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , for his very comprehensive and extremely topical report .
Energy is a sphere in which EU competence is shared with the Member States .
It is clear that under these circumstances working towards a common foreign policy in the energy sphere is not an easy task .
Resolving the situation as quickly as possible , however , makes us dependent , for our energy supplies , on unstable countries with doubtful democratic credentials .
Security of energy supply is an important element of general security .
Experience to date has shown that energy can be a highly effective instrument of political pressure .
The only counter-measure is a common policy and solidarity .
One of the largest suppliers to the European Union is Russia , with whom a new partnership and cooperation agreement is currently being prepared .
The principles of the Energy Charter need to be worked into this agreement , and of course Russia must ratify the charter .
In relation to non-EU countries in which a growing need for energy can be observed , the European Union ought to ensure that technology relating to renewable energy sources is supplied to them on preferential terms .
This will definitely be worthwhile in many ways in the future .
Last week the Commission published a proposal for further liberalisation of the market .
Unfortunately , this immediately met with opposition from certain Member States and from Russia .
It is symptomatic that opposition comes from those countries where businesses have attempted in the recent past to benefit from the creation of special bilateral relations , ignoring the rights and interests of other Member States , as is the case , for instance , with regard to the north European gas pipeline project .
I would like to hope that we will nonetheless be able to agree , and that this will also make us stronger in foreign relations .
Thank you .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to thank our rapporteur .
Energy has become a geostrategic issue once again .
It is also the Achilles heel of the European Union .
Since it cannot meet its energy needs alone , the EU is striving to diversify its sources of supply under trade agreements signed with countries in Latin America , Africa and Eurasia .
The recent disagreement between the European Union and Russia over the Energy Charter is a sign that energy security has entered a new era .
Faced with dwindling oil resources , the ever-present nuclear risk and the advent of energy powers such as Russia and Brazil , it is also vital to restate the EU 's sustainable development policy .
In this respect , a coherent foreign policy will reflect the renewable energy targets set by the Spring European Council .
It will also make energy efficiency a premise of our external relations .
It is not enough to insist on guarantees of uninterrupted supply from other countries , particularly neighbouring countries .
We must also ensure that there is real coordination between the 27 Member States .
In fact , energy security means a loss of sovereignty in a European sector which has now become strategic .
The pressure that energy supply places on governments should not make us rush these decisions or neglect the principles we have worked on together .
As the previous President of the European Parliament reminded President Putin , human rights cannot be negotiated in return for our energy needs .
On the contrary , we must make our supply conditional on respect for human rights .
( PT ) This report starts with a real problem - the Union 's energy dependence - but it comes to the wrong conclusion .
The enemy is not Russia , whatever our opinion of Puttin , nor Algeria , whether or not we approve of their armed forces .
Climate change , the fossil fuel burden and a way of life that involves high energy consumption , those are our adversaries - internal and external .
We shall not beat them by focusing on security issues belonging to the Cold War era .
The obsession with security undermines cooperation and leads to an ' anything goes ' internal policy : from nuclear fusion to reliance on biofuels .
Only yesterday Le Monde revealed Paul Crutzen 's conclusions : a litre of agrofuel can contribute up to twice as much to the greenhouse effect as the equivalent amount of fossil fuel .
In conclusion I should like to paraphrase José Sócrates : It would perhaps be a good idea to start listening to the scientists and economists once again rather than to couch geostrategists .
Madam President , when the EU talks of a common foreign policy on energy , you need to be very aware of exactly who you propose to do business with .
President Putin is on record as saying ' The Commission should be under no illusions .
If it wants to buy Russian gas , it has to deal with the Russian state . '
Gazprom is not a private company .
It is a state-controlled tool of Russian foreign policy .
It is , moreover , in the hands of President Putin 's political henchmen and , allegedly , organised crime .
Take , for example , Alisher Usmanov .
This gentleman , the son of a Communist apparatchik , is Chairman of Gazprom Invest Holdings , the group that handles Gazprom 's business activities outside Russia .
He is the man we are doing business with .
He is the man who cuts off gas supplies if client states dare to question Gazprom 's demands .
Allegedly a gangster and racketeer , he served a six-year jail sentence in the Soviet Union in the 1980s , his eventual pardon coming at the behest of Uzbek mafia chief and heroin overlord Gafur Rakhimov , described as Usmanov 's mentor .
Usmanov bought the newspaper Kommersant .
Three months later the journalist Ivan Safronov , a critic of the Putin regime who just weeks earlier had been vigorously interrogated by the FSB , as the KGB is now called , mysteriously fell to his death from his apartment window , still clutching a recently purchased bag of shopping .
According to Craig Murray , the former British Ambassador to Uzbekistan , it was Usmanov who ordered the cutting off of supplies to Georgia earlier this year .
Please take note , Madam President , the Kremlin has now refused to sanction the construction of a pipeline to the EU over Georgian territory .
These are the people you want to do business with .
These are the people around whom you want to mould your foreign policy on energy .
Commissioner , good luck .
You will need it .
( DE ) Madam President , first of all I would like to compliment the rapporteur , Mr Saryusz-Wolski .
You can see by the very high attendance at this late hour how important the report is and you can also hear how emotionally charged the atmosphere is as we listen to the various contributions from different nationalities and groups .
It is therefore a compliment that the paper has actually been written and adopted .
As rapporteur for trade and economic relations between the EU and Russia , I would like to raise two aspects and then make a general comment .
The first aspect concerns the bilateral energy agreements .
If I read it correctly , the Saryusz-Wolski report is ' towards a common European foreign policy on energy ' .
In other words , this common foreign policy on energy does not yet exist .
While it still does not exist , it must therefore be possible to find other ways to talk about energy .
The Member States are able effectively to agree among themselves - this is highly desirable , it is not a chore .
It is not possible to impose a veto on bilateral agreements .
It is a credit to the rapporteur 's realism - because I know that he wanted something else - that he has written this in his report in this way .
My second point : combining the energy charter with Russia 's WTO membership .
Linking ratification of the energy charter with accession to the WTO is a backward step .
It is also advantageous for the EU if Russia is a member of the WTO .
Moreover , we are not able to make a decision on this alone .
The rapporteur 's report in favour of the common energy policy leans towards Russia , but this is simply consistent with the situation today .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is increasingly dependent on traditional energy sources , in particular oil and natural gas .
Many important measures must be taken to limit and reduce this dependence .
For instance , it is necessary to make substantial energy savings and step up research in this area .
It is necessary to start making greater use of alternative fuels , from wind , water and biomass to nuclear reactors .
It is necessary to ensure territorial diversification of supply , with a greater variety of countries and routes .
All these challenges and tasks cannot be approached independently , at national level alone .
It is becoming clear - and even the politicians in many Eurosceptic countries are beginning to understand this - that we have to find the solution together , through our common European policies .
This also applies to the common European foreign policy on energy .
I therefore welcome the report by Mr Saryusz-Wolski as a necessary step and a vital element in the debate on introducing this policy .
The report contains important principles and recommendations : the European Union should follow them so that it can defend the interests of all its members , so that it can speak with one voice , including to those outside the Union .
Among these tenets and important principles is the very important principle of solidarity , solidarity in situations of crisis .
It is possible to support all these tenets and principles .
However , in order to realise them we also need a new , stronger legal basis , in other words we need a Reform Treaty .
In my opinion , we should bear this aspect in mind when debating the establishment of our common foreign policy on energy .
( SV ) Madam President , I thank the rapporteur for seeking to make the Russo-German Nord Stream project into a common concern for the EU .
Indeed that is what it is in reality .
The EU needs gas , and Russia needs its export income .
At the same time the project gives rise to fear and anxiety among the inhabitants of the Baltic region and is perceived as a threat .
We need confidence-building measures in order to dispel this mistrust .
Russia cannot continue to fan the flames of antagonism between itself and the peoples around its most important export route .
But only a united EU can turn what is now perceived as a threat into an opportunity and a step forward in relations with Russia .
For the project to be given the green light , the EU must demand the following : a reliable assessment of its consequences for the environment , guarantees of compensation in the event that the gas pipeline causes accidents and full inspection of operations by a monitoring body with representatives from the countries around the Baltic Sea .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to make the point that , from the aspect of individual countries and societies , there are three types of security that are paramount : energy security , food security and personal security .
So my thanks go to the author of the report on European foreign policy on energy , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , for drawing up this complex set of ideas on the subject of European Union energy security .
May I at the same time express the hope that a common energy policy will be written into the European Union reform treaty .
Poland , which I represent , is experiencing for itself the effects of a divergence of interests in energy policy between individual Member States .
A striking example of this is the way in which Russia and Germany are implementing their Baltic Sea gas pipeline investment to the detriment of the interests of both Poland and the other Baltic States .
Two years ago , at a meeting of the EU Council , Poland announced a proposal for a common energy policy which could be described by the slogan ' one for all and all for one ' .
It is good that the report being discussed today is moving in that direction by proposing common solutions that would put the above principle into effect .
There can , after all , be no doubt that without unity in protecting the energy interests of the European Union , without observance of the principle of solidarity in crisis situations , the European Union will not be viewed as a single body .

Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to thank and congratulate you and Mr Saryusz-Wolski for your current work and achievements .
Allow me today to open a debate on a new proposal , not on a high commissioner but on a whole new issue .
Let us create a European fund for alternative energy resources .
You might be surprised at why I am speaking about this issue .
Have you ever heard about one terrific night in a frozen US in 1965 which led to the baby boom ?
You must be able to recall early May 1986 - Chernobyl - hours , days and months afterwards .
And , Commissioner , you probably did not have the opportunity to land and stay in Kuwait in 1991 when 300 oilfields were burning .
These are all cases of a lack of energy security .
Why do we have this lack of energy security ?
Because we do not have freedom of choice ; we are heavily dependent .
As a granddaughter of the founder of ČEZ , I know that we can say that the Česká republika is no longer ' Česká ' , but ' ČEZká ' !
When you asked for 2020 for 20 % of renewables , Prime Minister Topolánek came to us and he told us , I could sign it because it is total nonsense .
With this approach , we will stay insecure because we will not have freedom of choice .
How to achieve it ?
Of course , not only by external diversification - we Europeans have to find our own resources .
Therefore , using energy tariffs to create a European fund for alternative energy can help us , not to create another Lisbon Strategy for 2020 , but to really reach such people as Topolánek and give us the ability to have new resources , so as not to be dependent .
( PT ) This resolution reveals the glaring inadequacies of European policies in the field of energy .
In fact , the European Union is not a global actor here .
Those who , like me , believe that the European Union should guarantee itself a minimum strategic autonomy , can only view with consternation our vulnerability in this matter .
It is not a question of aiming for a Utopian self-sufficiency , but rather of recognising the need for greater coordination of national policies , ensuring there is solidarity between Member States and developing relationships with global partners which are less asymmetrical but predictable and based on a truly European approach .
For example , it is up to us Europeans to work against the ' divide and rule ' attitude which has marked relations with Russia in this area .
This report underlines the political dimension of the European energy market .
As long as the Member States , in an approach comparable to that adopted in the European defence equipment market , continue to insist on promoting , internally , a sovereignist and anachronistic protectionism and , externally , a liberalism that is more ' Adam Smithian ' than Adam Smith 's , then Europe will remain out of step in a world in which all the principal actors regard energy as an eminently political and strategic issue .
The rapporteur 's proposal to create a post of High Official is therefore helpful and we should act upon it as quickly as possible .
However , in this area the EU not only faces the strategic imperative of guaranteeing security of supply .
The actual sustainability of the European energy policy and the environmental implications of lack of diversification of our energy sources require an urgent change of course .
Europe cannot therefore continue to support corrupt and oppressive regimes in oil-producing countries .
The EU 's external energy policy must include imperatives concerning human rights , good governance and environmental sustainability .
In conclusion , pollution and the post-Kyoto scenario , oil prices , moral and human rights imperatives , political and economic instability due to dependence on hydrocarbons , the potential of new environment-friendly technologies to stimulate a new industrial revolution in Europe and throughout the world , everything around us means the EU must develop a multi-faceted yet coherent external policy .
Finally , Madam President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Saryusz-Wolski .
( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
I will repeat myself once again by saying that it is very necessary and well-timed , if it is not too late .
I have already emphasised the issues of the common energy policy and the security of energy supply several times because these are issues of vital importance for Lithuania and the other Baltic counties .
Remember the report by Mrs Laperrouze on guidelines for trans-European networks considered two years ago .
Unfortunately , here in Parliament , the understanding was completely different and still remains so in some countries , for example regarding the Nord Stream project .
Life will show who is right .
Today it is gratifying that the situation is changing and the European Commission has taken brave initiatives .
On 19 September the package with this report has finally begun to meet our expectations .
( SV ) Madam President , first let me congratulate the rapporteur on a report which is not just extremely good but is also timely .
Mr Saryusz-Wolski has done an extremely important job in shifting the focus from energy as a matter of our convenience to energy as a question of geopolitical importance .
It is precisely the geopolitical and security dimension which is uppermost in the minds of those of us who were born behind the Iron Curtain , but which western Europe has long neglected .
For that reason , perhaps , it is the most important element that the rapporteur brings to this debate .
We need to develop a common policy in order to protect our common interests better in this extremely important strategic area .
I am grateful to Mr Saryusz-Wolski for having the courage to present this report , which contains a number of important and innovative ideas .
We should indeed bear in mind that secure energy supplies are of vital interest to hundreds of millions of Europe 's citizens .
Finally , Mr Saryusz-Wolski is quite right to say that we need to speak with one voice on this matter , precisely because the energy question is also quite clearly a security question .
All our experience of foreign and security policy shows that , every time we have failed to speak with a single voice , we have lost out and our citizens have paid the price .
Hence I can only urge that we support Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report in its entirety .
Madam President , Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report is important and timely .
Energy today is strategic for the European Union , as coal and steel were decades ago .
Yes , the European Union needs a common European foreign policy in energy .
Starting from this statement , I believe two questions are legitimate .
Firstly , how could one have a common external energy policy without a common internal energy policy ?
We need a common agency for technological development in this field ; we need a European budget funded in an appropriate way and from appropriate sources ; we need a coherent strategy for the energy production ; we need an integrated network of energy transportation , compatible systems of distribution and a European Union policy to balance consumption and production .
We need a truly free internal energy market .
Secondly , how could one have a common foreign policy on energy without a general common foreign policy ?
The Russian factor is crucial .
Unfortunately , Russia perceives any common European strategy on energy as being directed against its interests .
How can we figure out a convincing win-win strategy on energy in our relations with Russia ?
Russia 's behaviour today is unacceptable .
However , we could not only tell Russia to behave , we have to motivate it to behave .
Therefore , I believe we should welcome Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report , but we should see it as one necessary important step in a long way towards our common goal .

( ES ) Madam President , Mr Saryusz-Wolski should be congratulated because his report clearly states the essential points that the Union should take into account in order to establish a genuine common foreign policy on energy : reciprocity with exporting countries , the need to better coordinate our energy diplomacy at European level , and the importance of establishing an integrated and competitive market .
In the field of external energy policy it is crucial to remember that a business that controls its market from generation to the final sale , as is the case for electricity , is not the same as another business whose product is dependent on factors that are largely out of its control , as is the case for gas .
Moreover , we should not confuse protectionism , which we condemn , with protection , which is a cautious measure .
We need to refocus the problem from the point of view of interdependence , as the Union represents around 500 million consumers , which gives us considerable weight on the global market .
However , we are repeating the error of not harmonising diplomatic efforts at national and European level , which weaken us economically and geopolitically .
We need to ensure that the bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries do not endanger the efforts made at European level .
A considerable number of Member States depend on imports for more than 90 % of their energy consumption , which obliges us to maintain well functioning and stable relations with producer countries .
However , there are times when the links are weakened due to unexpected events , which tends to bring negative consequences for trade between regions , that we are currently suffering from in Spain and that we saw in Poland and other Member States in the very recent past .
I will conclude , Madam President ; it is only through a genuine European external energy policy that we will be able to avoid similar situations in the future , and therefore any new legal basis and any new institutional instrument that contributes to building this has to be ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur for the laborious work and the openness showed in approaching the multiple aspects of a joint European policy in the field of energy .
One of these aspects that I would like to mention in my speech is the importance of the Black Sea region in the above-mentioned future policy .
Over the last years , we have witnessed several energy crises that have also affected the European Union .
The objectives of ensuring stable energy delivery , as well as a transparent market , have become an unquestionable priority for the European Union .
In this context , the Black Sea region represents an important key to securing the European energy sector by diversifying the energy sources and transit networks , and the European initiative to consolidate the Black Sea regional cooperation , by creating synergies , and should be used to the maximum for this purpose .
I particularly emphasize the strategic importance of the Nabucco and Constanţa-Trieste projects .
Consequently , I welcome the attention given to these projects in Mr. Sarvusz-Wolski 's report , as well as the recent appointment of a European coordinator of the Nabucco project .
The objectives to consolidate the network of energy coordinators and to implement the Energy Community Treaty are no less important .
I hope that these initiatives will be followed by even firmer steps in establishing a joint energy policy , steps that will turn to good account the Black Sea region and will lay the foundations of a dialogue with the external partners , based upon reciprocity and mutual confidence , joint values and , of course , on complying with the international obligations .
( PL ) Madam President , this excellent report from Jacek Saryusz-Wolski shows that the most important aspect of the EU 's energy policy is currently security of supply .
We are already half dependent on foreign supplies : in the case of gas this is actually 57 % , and in the case of oil 82 % .
What this means is that any crisis involving a supplier and the European Union , or involving a supplier and a transit country , could have a disastrous impact on our economies and our citizens .
This makes it all the more important to introduce the principle of solidarity between Member States in the event of crises into our legal order together with the reform treaty .
For this principle to be observable in practice , however , it is essential that we set up a system of strategic reserves , increase the number of links between transport networks , and , in short , construct a working response mechanism that would provide technical assistance to countries that have suffered the most as a result of crises .
Solidarity between Member States must also be manifested in the shape of a common foreign policy on energy , and it is good that the Commission is assuring us that it has the intention of creating such a policy , as we have heard from the lips of Mr Piebalgs , the Commissioner .
Member States still need to be convinced of this , to get them to give up their self-interests in favour of a common approach and the common good .
It is important that this policy be based on the principle of diversification of both sources and suppliers , and further , of routes and methods of delivery of energy .
It is therefore necessary to ensure political and financial support for new infrastructure projects like the Odessa-Brody-Płock pipeline , or the Nabucco gas pipeline .
However we are also obliged to act against projects that are divisive , for example the Baltic gas pipeline .
And finally a constant element in the game the European Union plays with its neighbours , especially the nearest ones , as part of the European neighbourhood policy , should be an energy clause following the model of the anti-terrorist clauses which we in this place , the European Parliament , insist are included in agreements with third countries .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I will start by thanking the rapporteur .
I think you see how complex the issue is , and it is very difficult to address all aspects , but it is good to try to address the complexity of the issue .
In my work , I am not pretending to be ' Mr Energy ' .
There are three pillars of external energy relations : one is supply transit ( and here I work with my colleagues Benita Ferrero-Waldner and Peter Mandelson ) ; the second pillar is clean energy and energy efficiency such as launching a global energy efficiency platform ( here I work with Stavros Dimas and Janez Potočnik ; and the third pillar addresses energy poverty ( where I work with Louis Michel ) .

That indicates how complex this is , and on top of it we have the Member States .
The Treaty , and also the Reform Treaty , says a very important thing : each Member State is responsible for its energy mix .
That is why I think the report calls for speaking with one voice .
I think that is the main message that I got from the report .
This is far from simple , and we are far from being there .
I believe that this report gives us a good chance of advancing the whole Union along this path .
I now come to Mr Beazley 's question , because I think it was addressing the heart of the whole process : Why do energy issues need to be addressed in a partnership and cooperation agreement , a post-PCA agreement with Russia , if you have an Energy Charter ?
The Energy Charter is a multilateral instrument .
For Russia , our relations on energy are definitely much bigger .
We invest in Russia .
Russia invests here .
A Russian nuclear reactor will perhaps be constructed in Belarus .
That means we need to build confidence on both sides , and confidence could be built if there are very clear legal requirements describing both sides ' duties and also rights .
If these are described , then we can also conclude that there are areas where we also need an External Energy Representative .
I hear this call for a High Official coming from other partners .
If we have Treaty provisions making provision for Union development then we should agree to a mandate - by a mandate I mean on a basis like Committee 133 for external trade policy - then on the basis of this mandate the person delegated could speak with external suppliers , transit countries , or any other participants in the energy market .
If we deal with this separately , then definitely it loses all power .
We should see it as a symbiosis because it is not a separate issue from speaking with one voice .
If you do not speak with one voice , then you do not need a messenger .
If you speak with one voice , then you definitely need a messenger .
So I will stay with this position .
I would like to thank you for a very good debate .
It was very interesting .
After the Commission produces this paper on external energy relations , I believe that Parliament will return to the issue because you cannot resolve this issue with just one report .
That would be too optimistic .
Again , I should like to thank the rapporteur for very good work .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Today , more than ever , economic powers are scrambling for energy resources .
China is providing enormous amount of aid without strings to developing countries in recompense for energy supplies .
Russia is using its gas and oil clout so as to become once more a global player .
The United States is foreseeing a future more dependent on nuclear technology .
Where does this leave the European Union ?
It has become essential to close ranks for the supply and security of energy .
Problems facing those EU countries such as Malta which have the potential of becoming energy suppliers have to be dealt with by the European Union as a whole .
Just as in issues of illegal immigration , where questions of energy arise , it is the EU which should intervene .
A common foreign policy on energy should not only be limited to supply and security but must also encompass two essential subjects : the emission of greenhouse gases and secondly the quest for alternative energy .
A common foreign policy on energy can only make sense in this wider context , a triangle , with supply and security at the top , climate change and alternative sources at its base .
in writing . - In our efforts to tackle climate change we should not jeopardise efforts to protect biodiversity , ecosystems and Europe 's food security .
The 8 / 9 March Council conclusions specify that the 10 % target for biofuels is an appropriate target only if it is subject to sustainable production .
The impacts of first-generation biofuels maybe greater than originally thought , for instance the USA 's desire to use bioethanol has led to a massive increase in the use of grain for biofuels production .
This demand is having a negative effect on European grain supplies with predictions that it will get much worse as the US surplus of grain diminishes .
The OECD-FAO foresees a significant impact of biofuels production on agriculture commodity prices with possible knock on effects on food importing countries .
A comprehensive international certification scheme for biofuels is therefore needed - as referred both in the Saryusz-Wolski and Thomsen reports - where both exports and imports to the EU are certified .
The certification criteria should be designed to ensure that biofuels provide significant greenhouse gas savings over the whole life cycle and that their production does not cause a loss in biodiversity or major socioeconomic problems such as serious food price inflation .
in writing . - ( HU ) The report entitled ' Towards a common European foreign policy on energy ' makes the important point that Europe 's energy supply depends to a growing extent on unstable and non-democratic countries .
This increasingly evident dependency is exacerbated by the fact that energy is being used more and more often as a means of exerting political pressure .
These processes make it all the more urgent to create a common European energy policy based on solidarity .
Large-scale European energy management projects may be the way to implement a common policy in practice .
The recent appointment by the European Union of a coordinator to head the most important of these projects , Nabucco , is therefore to be welcomed .
This , along with the fact that the hitherto reluctant Hungarian government has decided to support the construction of the pipeline , could mean that the gas pipeline connecting European consumers with energy sources in the Caspian Sea region could now become the symbol of a successful common energy policy instead of being an emblem of vacillation .
Within a few years the Nabucco pipeline , which represents a diversification both in terms of sources and transport corridors , may demonstrate that common action means increasing security of supply and affordable prices for consumers .
This is in the interests of all Member States , but it is especially important for Hungary , which at present is reliant solely on Russian gas .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European energy policy has focused on creating , stabilizing and regulating the internal market , a visible trend in the latest energy package of the European Commission as well .
It has been believed that the internal market liberalization will turn the EU into an important actor on the international energy scene , but it has been found that , in fact , the Union lacks an external and homogenous energy policy dimension .
The new reality , in which competition and liberalization are interconnected with climate changes and security of resources , generates not only external challenges ( fear of energy dependence on a single supplier , which uses its position as a political weapon ) , but also an important internal challenge , which tests the Member States ' ability to place their national interest second in order to create the premises for developing a joint and coherent energy policy .
The next step is to diversify resources through enhanced cooperation with neighbouring countries , especially with those from Eastern Europe and Central Asia .
This way , the convergent development of Member States and their neighbours is ensured and regional and interregional cooperation is encouraged , which is indispensable for making the European external energy policy more efficient .
The enlargement of the European Energy Community towards the East would stimulate the completion of energy liberalization , providing a joint advantage for possible future European Union enlargement .
in writing . - It is vital we ensure that the principles and goals of the EU 's development policy are respected and promoted through the measures foreseen in the field of energy and foreign policy .
Access to energy is an essential enabling factor for economic growth and for the provision of basic living conditions for all human beings .
EU Member States and European energy companies cooperate extensively with developing countries in the field of energy , yet it is not always clear how much the citizens of these resources actually benefit .
For this reason , I support all steps aimed at promoting transparency , the rule of law and improved governance in the energy sector .
Economic development does not have to mean repeating the polluting practices of the industrialised countries .
Many developing countries are heavily dependent on high carbon-emitting sources of energy .
They need assistance to be able to diversify their sources of energy to achieve a more sustainable mix .
I deplore the widespread use of coal-fired power stations in China .
We should take all reasonable steps to encourage their transition to clean technologies through building sustainable energy capacity and facilitating the transfer of clean technologies .
Set aside for year 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the proposal for a Council regulation , under examination by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , derogating from Regulation ( EC ) No 1782 / 2003 establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers , as regards set aside for year 2008 - C6-0302 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I can tell you that the cereal market outlook is clearly at the forefront of our minds , as we are in a situation where the prices have shown unprecedented growth in the recent months .
This is not only the case within the European Union but all over the world .
With too much rain in certain parts of Europe and with droughts in other parts of Europe , the climatic conditions within our own regions this year have been adverse to cereal production and , with an estimated output of 258 million tonnes , the 2007 harvest is below average .
A compulsory set-aside of the present 10 % in the old Member States , the EU-15 , is not compatible with the present market situation .
Against this background , the Commission has proposed to set 0 % on set-aside for the autumn 2007 harvest and the sowing in spring 2008 .
According to our estimates , this will mean extra production within the European Union of between 10 and 17 million tonnes , and I think this will send a positive signal to the sector and , hopefully , also contribute to stabilisation within the grain sector .
A rapid decision on this matter is clearly needed so that farmers can decide their next production year and , in this context , I am actually very thankful for the fact that Parliament obviously understood the urgency of the matter and agreed to follow the fast-track procedure .
I really am very grateful .
Finally , our legal proposal will be as short and as simple as possible and it will not imply any new administrative burdens .
Looking further ahead , it is necessary , within the health check , to take a good look at whether the set-aside is still an appropriate tool in the present and in the future market circumstances .
We also need to consider how we can retain the environmental benefits within our set-aside system , such as maintenance of permanent pastures , the protection of riparian strips and measures that are also linked to climate change .
So , thank you for a quick reaction .
It is nice to see that Parliament can really move when it is badly needed .
chairman of the AGRI committee . - Madam President , Commissioner , yes , Parliament can move very quickly .
Of course , the thought that Parliament could be blamed for the fact that farmers would not know what to plant on their land this year did concentrate our minds quite a lot , so we were delighted to work with you to be able to get to this firm decision .
I also compliment my own committee , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on its unanimous decision .
The points I would like to raise really is , what a difference a year makes !
Twelve months ago we were talking about EUR 90 / tonne for wheat .
Now we are talking about EUR 250-270 , so we are talking three times the price .
Now is the time , therefore , to look seriously at bringing set-aside down to 0 % .
I would even go further back than that .
When you think that for 20 odd years now in Europe we have been talking about food surpluses , farmers are not really needed , that we have to turn the land over to something else and that food security does not really matter .
All of a sudden food security does matter .
I think there is a moral argument here as well .
When the world has plenty of food , then perhaps Europe does not need altogether to do its share of production , but when the world is short of food and the prices go up , then Europe is morally obliged to produce food .
Europe is never going to starve , whatever the price of food is , because we basically have money to pay for it , but many parts of the world will .
All of a sudden we are in a different world and one that we must face up to .
The Commission is proposing a set-aside of 0 % for 2008 and at the beginning of the marketing year 2008 , like I said , the market is characteristically high in price .
As the Commissioner said , we have had droughts in some parts of Europe and we have had floods in others .
We also see , throughout the world , changing situations on grain , where in Australia you have salt coming up through the land and it is becoming very difficult to plant .
We are also seeing China and India taking in unprecedented amounts of food because of their economies increasing and wanting more food .
All this is taking its toll on the wheat and cereal production throughout the world .
We are now probably at about half the stocks that we historically have and stocks are getting low , so now is the time to do it .

I believe , Commissioner , and I am sure you do too , that if we have a common agricultural policy that is decoupled away from production , we cannot really have set-aside in many respects because , if ever there was a policy that was linked to production , then set-aside must be that , so now is very much the time to remove it .

As we remove set-aside , we must remember that there have been some environmental benefits to it and we must remember , too , that farmers will have the choice now as to whether to plough up set-aside land or not .
Under single farm payment systems they could still carry on using it if they so chose , but the economic benefits of actually growing cereals will mean that many of them will plough the land .
We can still have the six-metre strips around the fields and hedgerows on environmental means and I think that is also very good .
It is not really something to be debated tonight , but I think , in the health check , one of the things we will deal with is that there is no doubt that we will have to move to second generation biofuels and not actually use wheat and oil seed rape for biofuels .
Again , a year ago I was very much in favour of that when prices were low , but now when prices are high we will literally only fuel that .
I recommend to Parliament that we deal with this swiftly .
I thank all the groups for their support and I thank the Commissioner very much for her speedy response .
Together I think we can come to the right decision .
There are a few amendments here from the PSE Group and the Verts / ALE Group , most of which we will be able to support .
One , however , I cannot accept - and that is a tax on the export of grain , because farmers have suffered low prices in the past .
As soon as prices rise , please do not actually put a tax on it because that would not be quite right in my opinion .
If we are going to deal with market forces we are going to have to face up to the realities of life .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I would first of all like to thank the Commissioner for her presence this morning and now once again at this debate , which was added to the agenda at the last minute .
Most of all , however , I would like to thank her for her proposal to remove the compulsory set-aside for the coming season .
She complimented us on our speed , but the Commission has also shown that it is able to respond relatively quickly to developments within the market , which is now enduring a period of dwindling cereal supplies in the EU .
It is expected that stocks will reach an all-time low at the end of this season at worldwide level too .
An instrument to control supplies , such as the compulsory set-aside that was introduced in 1992 , therefore no longer has any real purpose .
Consequently , it is only logical that the Commission is proposing that this obligation now be removed .
It is also logical that the Commission is retaining the set-aside system and is only reducing the compulsory percentage from the current 10 % to 0 % .
This will keep the debate on track .
After all , only when it is time for the health check is it time to discuss a potential change to the existing regulations and structures .
Furthermore , I understand that , should we agree to this proposal and should the Council also make a swift decision , it is likely that we will break a record for passing legislation quickly .
This will also send out a signal to citizens and to farmers in particular that , when necessary , the EU can also make rapid decisions .
There is just one more thing , however , that I would like to get off my chest , Madam President - not as a PPE spokesperson , but as a member of the CDA in the European Parliament from the Netherlands .
There are yet other sectors in which , given the current market development , a certain degree of flexibility would seem appropriate .
Take the dairy industry , for example , in which demand is increasing sharply and Europe is probably not making the most of its full potential .
One option is probably to make quotas that are not fully utilised in certain Member States marketable across borders , or to increase the quota even further on 1 April 2008 by a few percent .
Finally , Madam President , I would therefore like to make a personal appeal to the European Commission to show the same drive that is now being exhibited in respect of cereals in other sectors too , as and when necessary .
I too am pleased to see the Commissioner here and should like to say that current conditions on the cereals market oblige us to reflect , but above all to act , and I congratulate the Commission on its proactive stance .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament shares the Commissioner 's analysis of the present situation and agrees that , within the health check , we shall have the opportunity to examine this issue in depth and take more fitting definitive decisions for the future .
We are also fully aware that the problem facing us cannot be solved merely by eliminating set-aside in the context of the transitional measures we are preparing to take , but agree that they might help significantly to redress the balance of the market in the coming year .
We share the opinion that this measure might , in a pessimistic scenario , bring at least half of the current 3.89 million hectares back into production and that could represent , in a year with normal climate conditions , additional production of between 5 and 10 million tonnes at least , even though some land is of the less productive variety , which is naturally why the farmers set them aside .
We think , however , that in order to achieve this objective , it would be appropriate for the Commission to extend this derogation slightly , that is to extend the validity of the measure to two years rather than one ; and it is understandable that it should be prolonged because it is obvious that there is a lack of programming for agriculture and at the beginning of the next Autumn-Winter season we shall still not have a definitive decision on the outcome of the debate we shall be holding within the health check .
I therefore call on the Commission to take into account the amendment we will be tabling to that effect and which , I am sure , will merit a majority in tomorrow 's plenary session .
On the other hand , we are all aware that bringing all this area back into production will have obvious negative impacts both as regards the release of CO2 from the ground , and as regards biodiversity , since everyone nowadays acknowledges the environmental added value which set-aside brought .
We therefore think that it would be appropriate for the Commission to carry out an impact study as soon as possible so that we are able to have all the relevant factors available for taking the decision which we shall be obliged to take within a year on this same subject .
( DE ) Madam President , Madam Commissioner , yes , we have worked quickly , but the Commission has also been late in submitting its proposals .
This has been discussed for a long time and the growers ' impatience has pretty much been fuelled by the question of when it will finally be over .
We have not held up anything , that is true , nor did we want to do that .
Your justification is that prices are high and some stabilisation was needed here .
I hope we are both pleased - and especially your husband with his enterprise - that money will finally be reaching the enterprises .
This has been long overdue , and we should be careful to say here that we must do something to push down prices .
What is more , this somewhat contradicts your statement this morning in relation to sugar .
You will remember that you said : with the price of grain as it is , people are now perhaps going faster into cereals and out of sugar .
If you force grain prices down again now , your own logic and your own intention could be undermined with it .
You address the fact that this entails crop rotations .
Yes , that is correct .
Originally , this was a measure associated with crop rotation , since crop rotation also needed vegetation .
This means we have to attend to the environmental aspect , even though this has been very much neglected in recent years , simply by making continual set-aside possible , whereby a large proportion would be taken into production for energy products .
We are asking you in an amendment not just to deal with what you have in mind for 2008 , but also to tell us in Parliament how crop rotations are to be arranged with a view to environmental protection .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that Parliament ought to see this as a new element , one which opens up a new period of reflection and a new debate on agricultural production in Europe .
The point is not only that we have had a change in climate and that in some rural areas we have had production difficulties .
The issue is that the entire system of agricultural production in this sphere is changing because , and there were some references to this in the previous debate , today many crops are being produced using different production systems , as we have heard .
The point is that we should now review the policy implemented for agricultural production in recent years by the European Community .
It is not only grains that are the issue , but in a few months ' time we will also have to tackle the problems of meat production and dairy production , because there are already changes in production and drops in production in this field .
I therefore believe that the Commissioner and the Commission ought to have a careful period of reflection and enable Parliament to give a definitive response to these problems , to avoid the current situation : a rise in food costs that is causing problems for many families in Europe and elsewhere .
Madam President , at a time of spiralling and punitive increases in feedstuff prices , which is so hurting our intensive sector , it would be criminal to lock out of production land capable of decreasing our reliance on foreign imports .
Thus set-aside must go and must go now .
But more is needed , including a proactive plan to address the looming crisis in our intensive sectors .
For my part , such must include hands-on pressure on the multinational supermarket chains to give up the pricing strategy which suppresses farm-gate prices .
If this does not happen , we are facing wipe-out in much of our intensive sector .
Such would be the greatest failure of agricultural policy of our time and something , Madam Commissioner , which you must urgently address .
( ES ) Mr President , to start with , I welcome the European Parliament 's decision to adopt , by urgent procedure , the immediate abolition of mandatory set-aside .
I think that European consumers and farmers are the main victims of the massive increase in the price of agricultural raw materials .
I think that the current situation should lead us to undertake an in-depth discussion on the shift that is currently occurring in the common agricultural policy , and we should ensure that the decisions adopted in this area are in harmony with the global context , in which the demands of third countries are growing at a staggering rate , in particular due to the growth in consumption of countries such as India and China , which play a decisive role in the global economy .
If this deficit situation continues , I think that the European Union should think about creating new mechanisms to avoid unsustainable increases in food prices .
For years we have been hearing that the common agricultural policy involves excessive costs for European taxpayers , but I would now like governments to explain to citizens why they will now have to pay more for bread and milk .
I would also like governments to explain the measures that they are prepared to adopt in order to guarantee a fair price to consumers and prevent an excessive burden being placed on producers , which would endanger the profitability of many farms .
The world needs more and more food , and the exponential growth in consumption will not be resolved by an agricultural policy that is increasingly mean and stingy towards European producers .
I think that European leaders should think twice before putting producers between a rock and a hard place .
I think that the European Union should use the health check on the common agricultural policy to introduce mechanisms that avoid serious deficit situations in the future , if we do not want other global producers to monopolise the international markets .
( ES ) Madam President , it is true that cereal stocks have decreased in recent years and we have already heard some reasons relating to the current climate - increasing consumption in emerging countries , adverse climate conditions in producer countries or production being reserved for internal consumption in exporting countries .
Neither can we forget the impact of certain speculative movements on the markets concerned , such as Paris or Chicago .
All of these issues have contributed to prices reaching historic highs .
However , according to data from the International Cereals Council , in addition to the problem of supply there is a problem of reserves : global reserves , which are below 17 % , which according to the FAO guarantee food security , and Community reserves , which are practically exhausted in a market with prices that are above international levels .
In my opinion , Commissioner , in view of the health check we should think about the role in this crisis of the disappearance of the Community instruments to regulate the market .
The European Union is obsessed with the costs of managing stocks and the pressure from the World Trade Organization ; it has reoriented its agriculture policy towards containing production and liberalising the markets and has turned its back on producers and consumers , abandoning the fundamental principal of the CAP : guaranteeing self sufficiency .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to express my support for the recultivation , on a voluntary basis , of land that is currently set aside in order to boost European production of cereals and oilseeds , to replenish stocks and thus ensure our self-sufficiency .
However , two production and marketing years seem necessary to allow farmers to adapt to this change .
It is also important that we apply quotas to cereal exports so that Europe 's needs are met first .
Conversely , I am more cautious about the proposal for a measure abolishing taxes on animal feed .
I am well aware that the increase in food prices makes things very difficult for farmers , but I would not want this measure to open the floodgates to imports of genetically modified soya and maize .
However , I am in favour of promoting and encouraging the development of a European GMO-free animal feed industry , which would be in a better position to guarantee both our food security and our independence .
I would also like to point out that , although set-aside is no longer economically justified , it is vital for biodiversity and for soil and river protection , and this should be recognised and maintained .
The Socialist Group is therefore asking the Commission to carry out an environmental impact assessment of the effects of scrapping the set-aside scheme .
I am mainly thinking of the consequences that the abolition of set-aside would have on the necessary diversity of sources of pollen and nectar for bees , at a time when this sector is going through a serious crisis .
Finally , abolishing set-aside now will not help us resolve all of the problems at the heart of the CAP review in 2008 and 2009 .
Member of the Commission . - Thank you , Madam President , and I should like to thank the Members very much for all the positive comments , for all the endeavours to stabilise our cereal market .
I feel quite well equipped now to continue this discussion in the Council tomorrow with the Member States and I hope that the legal act can be published within a short period .
I am quite sure farmers will be keeping an eye on us to see what decision will be taken here in Parliament and in the Council tomorrow .
I shall just speak briefly on the four different groups of amendments .
On the idea of extending this one-year 0 % set-aside to two years , I must say that we will have the possibility of discussing the communication during the winter and the legal proposals next spring and summer , when we will have a clear idea of which direction we are moving in .
So I will not be able to support the idea of extending the one-year period , but we will return to this issue .
On the environmental benefits of the set-aside , it is obvious , as I said in my first intervention , that we will have to look into this in the health check to see whether we can find solutions to maintain the benefits of the environmental biodiversity issue in the set-aside .
On the monitoring of the cereal market , it is obvious that we will do everything possible to keep up a strong dialogue with Member States , stakeholders and the public at large to see in which direction the market is moving .
On Amendment 8 on export restrictions and the possible introduction of an export tax , I must say that this is not the way we want to follow .
It will send totally different and wrong signals to the market .
It will bring us into a situation similar to that of Russia and Ukraine , which we have both accused of using this tool to keep their production for themselves , and therefore this is not the way to follow .
Regarding the other idea that you mentioned on the import side , we will look - and we have actually started doing so already - into the suspension of cereal import duties .
They do not fit with the present situation .
A change of the entire policy , the stock policy , would , I think , be an option for us to discuss in the health check to find the best way to tailor-make solutions both to farmers and to cereal stakeholders , to the cereal sector .
Thank you , again , very much .
I do really appreciate the enthusiasm with which Parliament and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have acted in this case .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - A serious situation has developed through rising grain prices throughout the European Union which is being driven by high world prices .
It is necessary that we have security in our food supply .
We no longer have that .
The cost of grain has continued to spiral upwards .
This can only be dealt with through rising prices to the consumer .
The Australian government last week said that Australian production this year will be down by 30 % .
We must have market access to cereal substitutes from the United States or the supply of beef , sheep and chicken meat will become more difficult .
I call on the Agriculture Council and the EU experts to approve new cereals at a faster pace to guarantee us security of supply .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Honourable Members , good morning !
Today , 26 September , is the European Day of Languages .
We have a duty to remind people here at the European Parliament , the temple of languages , of the importance of this day for the philosophy and the substance of the European Union , and the work we carry out to achieve a multicultural Europe , where distinctive features , cultures and the spirit of our peoples are respected .
- ( ES ) Madam President , many thanks for allowing me to speak .
Today we are celebrating the European Day of Languages , and I wish to echo the feelings of many citizens of the Spanish state who fail to comprehend why they are discriminated against by the European Parliament 's Bureau , since Catalans , Galicians and Basques like myself , citizens ' representatives , are not permitted to use our languages in Parliament .
Unlike the Commission , the Council and the Committee of the Regions , where the people 's representatives may express themselves in these coofficial languages , the Bureau refuses to accept Basque , Catalan or Gallego , which are coofficial languages in the Spanish state .
Madam President ...
( The speaker spoke in Basque )
Mr Ortuondo , the Presidency will seek information on this matter , even though it is something that we have discussed many times and the answers are well known .
Immigration - Legal migration - Policy priorities in the fight against illegal immigration of third-country nationals ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the statements by the Council and the Commission on immigration ,
the report by Mrs Lilli Gruber , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the policy plan on legal migration and
the report by Mr Javier Moreno Sánchez , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on policy priorities in the fight against illegal immigration of third-country nationals .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is still facing considerable challenges in terms of its response to the changing migration situation .
The Global Approach to Migration , which was adopted by the European Council in December 2005 , still forms the basic framework for defining the response to these challenges .
On adopting the Global Approach , the European Council underlined the need for a balanced , global and coherent approach , covering policies to combat illegal immigration and , in cooperation with third countries , harness the benefits of legal migration .
Implementing the Global Approach has been an essential priority for successive presidencies .
The Global Approach to Migration has not remained static but has been refined and developed by the European Council in light of events and progress made in its implementation .
It is now integrated within the comprehensive migration policy of the European Union .
At its meeting of 21 and 22 June this year , the European Council adopted conclusions on the expansion and reinforcement of the Global Approach .
These conclusions in particular provide for the application of the Global Approach to neighbouring regions to the east and south-east of the EU and for the development of partnerships between the European Union and third countries in terms of circular migration and mobility .
The importance of implementing the Global Approach was highlighted by events in the summer and in particular by those events which occurred on the EU 's southern maritime borders .
As we continue to apply the Global Approach , the measures to be taken must include both measures to fight illegal immigration and measures to develop opportunities for legal migration .
The Council has tried to make headway with these two inseparable objectives .
At its meeting in June it discussed the situation at the southern Mediterranean borders .
It reaffirmed the importance of the role that Frontex must play and decided to carry out new work in light of suggestions made by Malta .
This work was carried out and resulted in the adoption , at the Council meeting of 18 September , of conclusions on reinforcing the management of the EU 's southern maritime borders .
Some of these conclusions call for urgent action to strengthen current measures and existing arrangements .
The Member States are encouraged to give bilateral support to those Member States facing exceptional pressure in terms of illegal immigration due to their geographical situation and the level of cooperation with neighbouring third countries .
This cooperation will cover , for example , return measures , reception conditions , responsibilities for asylum seekers , refugees and minors .
The conclusions also highlight the need to strengthen cooperation in this area with third countries of origin and transit , particularly in terms of managing their own borders , assuming their responsibility for search and rescue operations , fighting human trafficking and smuggling , and building an effective framework for returning illegal immigrants .
Emphasis has been put on the need for close cooperation with international organisations such as the UNHCR ( Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees ) and the IOM ( International Organisation for Migration ) .
Another essential element is the attempt to reinforce the activities of Frontex , notably by setting up long-term joint operations and expanding activities within the European Coastal Patrol Network .
As regards long-term measures , the Council has invited the Commission to present a report on possible additional measures together with an in-depth analysis of certain proposals made by Malta , a study of the relevant parts of maritime law and a commitment , within the ongoing debate on the Commission 's Green Paper on the Common European Asylum System , to the creation of specialist asylum teams .
Frontex 's role in ensuring the effective control by Member States of the EU 's external borders is becoming increasingly important .
As you know , Frontex only began operating in October 2005 , but in the relatively short time since then it has developed its operational capacity and taken important steps aimed at reinforcing the security of the European Union 's external borders by focusing on the fight against illegal immigration .
Various joint operations coordinated by Frontex have been conducted and others are ongoing in the Atlantic and Mediterranean .
A particularly important moment was the launch , in May this year , of the European Coastal Patrol Network , which in the long term will integrate the future European monitoring system .
Another significant event was the adoption by the Council in July of this year and the entry into force on 20 August of the Regulation establishing a mechanism for the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams , known as RABITs .
The Regulation establishes a mechanism for the provision of rapid operational assistance for a limited period of time to a requesting Member State facing a situation of exceptional and urgent pressure , especially due to the arrival at external border points of large numbers of third-country nationals trying to enter the European Union illegally .
Frontex is currently in the process of implementing this Regulation .
However , for the operations coordinated by Frontex to be effective , it is crucial that appropriate equipment be available .
In accordance with the Frontex Regulation , Frontex has set up a centralised record of available technical equipment , known as CRATE .
This record already contains an extensive list of helicopters , aircraft , vessels and other equipment which the Member States are ready to make available for operations coordinated by Frontex .
In terms of legislative measures aimed at illegal immigration , the competent Council bodies have already begun analysing the proposal of for a directive of this Parliament and the Council laying down sanctions against employers of third-country nationals in an irregular situation .
This proposal , aimed at fighting illegal employment as a factor for attracting illegal immigration , was presented by the Commission in May 2007 .
Using the codecision procedure in order to rapidly reach agreement , the Council has also given high priority to the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and Council on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals .
This is currently being analysed by the competent Council bodies .
In terms of the readmission policy , it should be mentioned that , following the entry into force in June of the readmission agreement with Russia , a decision to sign the readmission agreement with Ukraine has already been made and a series of readmission agreements with the Western Balkan countries and Moldova have been signed .
All these agreements will be finalised once the European Parliament delivers its opinion .
I should now like to say a few words on the policy plan on legal migration .
As you know , the Council and the Portuguese Presidency are also prioritising the promotion of legal migration .
A high-level conference dedicated to the issue of legal migration was organised in Lisbon by the Presidency on 13 and 14 September .
This brought together ministers , senior officials and renowned academics as well as representatives of this Parliament and the Commission .
This conference tackled the issues of legal migration , such as legal migration channels and the management of migration flows , integration and the Lisbon Agenda , and migration and development .
The results of this conference will be very important in steering our work over the next few months .
The Council will also shortly start work on proposals for a framework directive on the rights of migrants legally residing in a Member State in order to work and creating a single residence permit , and for a directive on the conditions of entry and residence of highly qualified workers , which we hope the Commission will present in the next few weeks .
These two proposals , together with others which will be presented over the next few years , constitute the next steps in the policy plan on legal migration presented by the Commission in January 2006 .
The Council has already started analysing the proposed Council directive amending Directive 2003 / 109 / EC in order to extend its scope to beneficiaries of international protection .
The aim of this proposal is to extend to beneficiaries of international protection the possibility of obtaining long-term resident status .
The Council is just waiting for Parliament 's opinion so that this draft instrument can be quickly adopted .
On external relations in the area of migration , I must inform you that the Council has actively pursued the implementation of the Global Approach to Migration , as defined by the European Council in its conclusions of December 2005 and 2006 .
Your attention is also drawn to the conclusions on the expansion and reinforcement of the Global Approach to Migration , adopted by the Council in June .
In December 2006 the European Council invited the Commission : to make proposals on how to apply the Global Approach to the eastern and south-eastern regions neighbouring the European Union ; to propose ways of integrating opportunities for legal migration into the EU 's external policies in order to develop a balanced partnership with third countries suited to the specific needs of the labour market in the Member States ; to suggest ways and means of facilitating temporary circular migration ; and to present detailed proposals on how to better organise and provide information about the various forms of legal movement between the European Union and third countries .
The Commission presented two communications in response to these invitations and , following the adoption of these Commission communications , the Presidency presented draft conclusions to the Council aimed at initiating work on the actions identified by the Commission .
The Euromed Ministerial Conference on Migration will be held in November .
The aim of this Conference is to develop initiatives and actions for implementing migration-related issues .
In addition , special attention has also been paid to Africa by pursuing and intensifying the dialogue on migration-related issues that began in 2005 with the African countries .
Priority has also been given to monitoring the Ministerial Conferences on Migration and Development held in Rabat in July 2006 and in Tripoli in November 2006 .
These Ministerial Conferences , the first being regional and the second continental , identified a series of areas in which cooperation may be reinforced between migrants ' countries of origin , transit and destination .
The Council is actively working in this area in order to translate the joint programmes agreed at Rabat and Tripoli into concrete measures .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am most grateful to the representative of the Council for his description of the broad outlines of our joint action , and I should particularly like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mrs Gruber and Mr Moreno Sánchez , for the two reports we are discussing and commenting on today .
One initial observation is of course how far Europe has come in so little time , in other words a note of optimism .
We all remember that , until the Hampton Court summit of October 2005 , there were even doubts that Europe could have a common strategy on immigration .
Today , not only is this a watchword for all of us , but we are already implementing certain initiatives that have been decided on and have begun to bear real fruit .
This demonstrates that Europe has a role to play in managing the global , unstoppable phenomenon of migration ; national action by the Member States is no longer sufficient .
It also shows that European action is advantageous for Europe itself , for the Member States and for all of our partners , both those to the south - mainly the African countries - and also our eastern neighbours , because , as we have been reminded , the Commission proposed extending the global approach eastwards , that is , to migration flows coming from the east .
The Council was in full agreement .
We regularly speak about a global approach .
We all now agree that this means creating an absolutely inextricable link between the external dimension and internal immigration policies .
We cannot confine ourselves to governing immigration solely within our territory ; we must deal with the underlying causes of immigration , which , even today , is overwhelmingly made up of desperate people fleeing persecution , poverty or war , who have no choice whether to leave their own country or stay there .
They have to abandon their homeland in order to survive .
It is therefore clear that the underlying causes of immigration cannot be tackled purely through an approach based on security , for all that patrolling the Mediterranean has been , and will continue to be , essential to protect the area around the Canary Islands .
This cannot be our only strategy , and we must certainly take up a demand being made by the EU Member States : to govern legal migration .
That is one of the best ways to combat illegal immigration .
The greater our capacity to govern economic migration , which we must do , the more we shall minimise that grey , nebulous layer of illegal immigration .
That is why I wish to begin by speaking about legal migration , which we discussed at an important meeting in Lisbon a few days ago .
We talked about prospects for the future , and I gained the impression - which I hope this House will confirm - that there is positive political momentum for looking at economic migration in a non-ideological manner .
Quite frankly , we must do this in the knowledge that we need non-Community workers , and in the knowledge that we must not scaremonger by bandying about huge figures that could give the wrong kind of impression .
Some observers and even some major newspaper articles have said : ' we are prepared to take in 20 million regular migrants ' .
Such figures are frankly dangerous .
It is one thing to point out an obvious demographic trend : Europe is ageing and the number of European workers will fall as a result of demographic decline ; it is another thing to dream up as of now figures that might be the right answer in 50 years ' time .
Let us therefore govern all the facets of this phenomenon , beginning with demographic decline in Europe .
The second facet , however , is to implement the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy in terms of the European economy 's competitiveness and attractiveness .
To do this , we need manpower in all those sectors which , one might say , seem to have been somewhat abandoned by many of our fellow citizens of Europe .
The third factor is that immigration cannot be the only means of tackling demographic decline .
We must not forget , for example , that while speaking about immigration from non-Community countries , we still maintain barriers to the free movement of Community workers .
Some of our fellow European citizens do not have full freedom to work in all other EU countries .
This is known in technical jargon as ' Community preference ' , but it must be explained through political action and not with a bureaucratic term .
It means that Europe will enjoy real mobility of labour only once the barriers have been torn down for our fellow European workers , and I am of course referring to those from the new Member States .
This , then , is another element to be taken into account .
The fourth facet entails refusing to consider demographic decline as something to which we must surrender , saying ' never mind , workers are coming from Africa ' .
Our demographic decline , like our future , must be a cause for concern .
That is why , for instance , measures to assist families and the birth rate among Europeans are just as important in this context as governing the phenomenon of immigration from outside Europe .
Naturally we are adopting initiatives to achieve all of this , and some have already been adopted in the field of immigration .
I can tell you that we are launching the call for tenders for the European Immigration Portal .
I hope the call for tenders will be complete within a few months , red tape permitting , and that it will enable us to have Europe 's first unified Immigration Portal .
The portal will provide access to job opportunities , offers , searches , sectors where there is a demand for labour , and so on and so forth .
It will greatly enhance Europe 's capability in this area .
The European Integration Fund is a reality at last .
We have discussed this on other occasions , and you have expressed your support for it .
I have to say that the Council has slightly cut back the financial envelope I originally proposed , but it is at least up and running .
We have almost € 1 billion to tackle this major component of our migration strategy .
There can be no immigration without integration .
The European Fund now exists .
We are financing language and vocational training courses in countries of origin .
This is another of the preconditions for governing economic migration : if those who arrive here do not have the vocational training that we require in this sector or that , or do not speak the languages of the countries where they work , they are condemned to social isolation and we do not want that .
The European Union is already funding initiatives in this area .
As you probably know , the Commission will be adopting two legislative initiatives at my proposal within the next few days .
The Council representative has referred to these .
They will both be directives , rather innovative ones , the first of them relating to highly skilled workers .
It will certainly not be devoted to the numbers game : how many engineers are needed in Italy or how many doctors are needed in Belgium .
Such matters will be decided jointly by the governments and labour markets of the countries concerned .
What interests us is making Europe more attractive than competitors such as the United States , Canada and Australia , which attract 95 % of highly skilled non-European workers - those from African and Asian countries - when Europe as a whole is only capable of attracting 5 % .
That is too few !
The idea of a European ' Blue Card ' work permit is this : a highly skilled worker needed in a certain country obtains , after a certain period of time , the right to move to another European Union country - where he has a job , of course - without any complicated formalities or procedures .
That person is entitled to return to his own country if he so wishes , and then to come back to Europe again after another period of time , if he so wishes .
This kind of circular migration can also prevent a permanent brain drain from countries of origin .
The second directive , on common rights for economic migrants , will naturally be equally important , since we shall have work permits and residence permits in a single document for the first time .
The person enters Europe to work .
I am obviously not talking about asylum seekers or family reunification ; I am talking about people who enter Europe to work : economic migrants .
There should in principle be no split between residence and work , and this type of document must be transparent .
Clearly , this will bring about a harmonisation of rights .
In some Member States the right to medical care is not comprehensively guaranteed , while in others it is .
The proposal to be put by the Commission to the Council and Parliament will of course leave it up to Member States to go beyond the existing level if , for example , some national systems are already more favourable .
We obviously do not expect a more virtuous country to reduce its level of rights , but we are saying that less virtuous ones must raise the level of their entitlements to social , educational , medical and other services .
In 2008 I shall put forward proposals regarding other categories of migrant workers : seasonal workers , those who attend paid training courses , and so-called ' intracorporate ' transfers .
If for example a firm has offices in various European cities , the idea is to facilitate movement within that same firm without starting the procedures from scratch in every country .
It will then , of course , be the turn of unskilled workers : the largest category , for which a good deal of exploratory work is still needed .
Rather than formulating a legislative proposal as of now , I prefer to put forward options , or open-ended proposals - which I will do early next year - with a view to gathering comments and suggestions before formulating the best possible proposal .
We are talking not about limited groups here , but about the overwhelming majority of those who come to Europe without any vocational training .
Many aspects need to be addressed in this respect .
One key aspect - and I am citing Mrs Gruber 's report - is of course cooperation with countries of origin to prevent a brain drain .
I am particularly concerned about this aspect .
As I have already said , the idea of circular migration is intended precisely for this purpose : to avoid sapping energy on a permanent basis .
Cooperation with certain countries in sub-Saharan Africa has already begun , for example , specifically in order to assess how best to handle the most highly skilled workers who work in Europe for a while and then go back home , where they can be employed and deployed for the benefit of their country of origin .
This is an open dialogue that I plan to conduct vigorously over the next few months , partly thanks to the strong support that I am receiving from the current Portuguese Presidency , as I did from previous presidencies .
We have a great opportunity in this regard .
We have two ministerial summits coming up : the Euro-Mediterranean summit already referred to , and the summit of EU and African leaders .
I hope and believe that this summit will enable us to make progress , because I naturally expect the heads of government at the Europe-Africa summit to adopt a genuine declaration of partnership between Europe and Africa on immigration , mobility and employment .
If this happens , I believe that we will have taken a major step forward , partly because , as agreed with the Portuguese Presidency , the proposal that we discussed under the German Presidency , with the Federal Republic 's Employment Minister and Minister of the Interior , will now go forward to the first joint Council of Interior and Employment Ministers .
At the beginning of December , for the first time , tangible political action will be taken to bring together the various elements of our migration strategy : no longer just security , but also the economic and employment element which is so very important for all the reasons I have given .
Cooperation agreements with countries of origin are another issue .
The Commission has started to take action with certain countries on an experimental basis in this area .
Briefly , we have drawn up country profiles .
Every country is different from the next one , and we cannot govern the flow of migration from Mali in the same way as that from Senegal .
Each country has its own profile and must be regarded as distinct .
Having done that , we offer partnership opportunities as part of an overall agreement .
We have simply called these ' cooperation platforms ' .
They are agreements with a platform of topics to be agreed upon : jointly combating human trafficking , because human trafficking begins in the country of origin ; thus , stamping out the corruption that protects this trafficking in human beings , as well as managing job opportunities by providing information and offering vocational and language training .
We have opened the first job centre in Bamako , the capital of Mali , with European funding .
We have also said that we will provide information about European laws , job opportunities and training courses in that centre .
Indeed , we are already doing so .
Mali is the first country to have expressed interest , and we have already mounted this initiative with it .
We want to do the same thing with other countries as and when they approach us .
As far as integration in concerned , let me state very briefly that integration is a vital part of migration policy , and obviously the Fund will be used for all policies geared to the social inclusion of those who respect our rules .
Finally , illegal immigration also forms part of our political strategy .
I know , and am pleased , that the LIBE Committee has approved Mr Weber 's report on the European repatriation policy .
We shall discuss this in the future , but it is important too .
Combating illegal immigration means not encouraging undeclared employment , which attracts illegal labour .
As you know , a growing percentage of immigrants in Europe are losing their jobs .
This is a major cause for concern .
Initially there was work for many people - seasonal work , farming , tourism , public works - whereas now there is a regrettable surge in unemployment .
What are we to do with these people who lose their jobs ?
Therefore , let us not encourage illegal employment : let us punish employers who profit from illegal immigrants ; let us guarantee a repatriation policy that is respectful of fundamental human rights but is also very clear and very firm as to our goals .
We cannot tolerate unlawfulness and repeated instances of unlawful conduct .
The European agency Frontex has helped to halt thousands of illegal immigrants .
This summer alone it saved more than 1 200 people who would otherwise have perished , as have so many others , and we owe a debt of gratitude to the crews of the vessels , aircraft and helicopters engaged in Frontex missions .
However , Frontex has also been able to reduce the flow of illegal immigrants in the areas it patrols .
It has been , is , and will remain a key tool in this global approach .
I shall conclude , Madam President , by saying that immigration will be part of our workload for the next few decades , not for the next few months .
It is therefore a good thing that Europe realises it has an excellent opportunity to be a player on the world stage in this sphere as in others .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , immigration is neither an emergency nor a passing phenomenon .
There were 18 and a half million migrants in the EU27 in 2006 .
There are many reasons , as you know : wars , poverty , environmental disasters and ruthless dictatorships in many regions of the world .
The European Union is one of the world 's major players , so it must stop procrastinating and draw up structural policies to meet this challenge that involves us all .
We will get nowhere alone !
Much has been done in the battle against illegal immigration , but it is not enough .
The principal way to combat illegal immigration is to open up legal channels for entry into the European Union .
These are two sides of the same coin , and that is why Javier Moreno Sánchez and I have decided to present our reports together .
Our economies could no longer function without migrant workers , and without their social security contributions our welfare system would be paralysed , threatened as it is by the plummeting birth rate .
Eurostat 's figures are perfectly plain : in 2050 a third of the 490 million Europeans will be aged over 65 .
The Commission 's 2005 action plan was an important step forward because it set out practical proposals for opening up legal migration channels in a uniform manner at EU level .
Obviously the individual Member States are responsible for laying down entry quotas .
Of the five directives that you are to propose in the forthcoming months , Commissioner Frattini , our priority is the one guaranteeing a common framework of rights for migrants .
I wish you all the best , because we all know that the negotiations in the Council will certainly not be straightforward , but Parliament will be right behind you .
That is one reason why we need to switch to codecision and abolish the right of veto in the Council .
My report was adopted unanimously in the LIBE Committee , apart from one vote against , and I am extremely grateful to my colleagues from other groups for their staunch support .
In the report we ask for consistent and reliable statistics to be made available at EU level .
One cannot legislate on immigration without knowing its true scope ; without hard figures it can easily become a propaganda tool .
This phenomenon needs to be addressed without demagogy , without populism and without taboos .
I therefore believe that it is crucial for politicians and journalists to show a greater sense of responsibility when dealing with such a sensitive topic .
Both groups , as you know , play a key part in the integration process .
Integration is a two-way process of rights and duties for both parties , and active participation by immigrants in the economic , social and political life of the host country is of the essence .
I agree with you , Mr Frattini , when you refer to the principle of equal treatment as concerns socio-economic rights , because fundamental rights include equal pay and safety at work , but also the recognition of qualifications , transferability of pension rights , family reunification and guaranteeing women a legal status independent of their spouse .
Concerning the directive on highly skilled workers , the so-called Blue Card may well be an excellent means of attracting professionals whom Europe very much needs .
We should in any event like to know a little more about this Blue Card , Commissioner , given that today - as you have recalled - only 5 % of immigrant workers are highly skilled , as opposed to 95 % who are unskilled .
The directive on seasonal workers should make up for shortcomings in the rights of this last group of workers , and I believe that the seasonal workers who obey the rules should be offered the possibility of priority access to other forms of temporary and permanent immigration .
However , Mr Frattini , open-ended proposals or options , as you called them , on low-skilled and unskilled migrants are all very well , but how long must we wait before we get a directive in this area ?
My question is directed primarily towards the Council .
My time has run out , ladies and gentlemen .
We would call on the governments and the Council to be more realistic and more courageous .
A responsible policy is needed to counter the fears and uncertainties of our increasingly uneasy societies .
There are no sealed borders and we are not being invaded by immigrants !
Immigration is a necessity , and if handled judiciously it can be an asset for a civil society that is respectful of difference .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Gruber , ladies and gentlemen , imagining the future of Europe and of our societies with no immigration in the age of globalisation is a departure from reality .
Immigration is necessary and positive for the EU 's demographic stability , economic growth and cultural diversity .
What we need are legal immigrant workers with rights and obligations , not slaves .
The development and success of a legal immigration policy largely depend on a constant fight against the other side of the coin : illegal immigration .
Managing and controlling these illegal migratory flows surpass the capacity for individual action by the Member States , and there can be no doubt that this is the most delicate aspect of the common general immigration policy that must be developed by the European Union .
Recent social and economic imbalances , international conflicts and climate change will increase illegal flows to the EU .
The flows move faster than our political response , and they will not stop of their own accord .
We have to take action now .
We welcome and support the Commission 's approach .
It is essential for the development of a more coherent and effective policy by the Member States based on full respect for human dignity and fundamental rights , in a spirit of solidarity , shared responsibility , transparency and mutual trust .
First , we must have secure land , air and sea borders through integrated surveillance and monitoring , and here Frontex and RABIT are the path we must take : the path towards shared responsibility and solidarity .

Ladies and gentlemen , Frontex works .
Where operations have been carried out , lives have been saved and illegal immigration substantially reduced .
Illegal immigrants have had to seek out other routes , as has been observed recently in Spain and Italy .
However , Frontex is a new-born infant , a child of the EU that can only grow up and carry out its function with support from its parents , the Member States , whom we would ask to make good their undertakings by supplying the human and logistics resources required .
Furthermore , it is essential to establish , as a deterrent , a European return policy with full respect for human rights and to work on drawing up readmission agreements with third countries .
We wish to see a return directive adopted during the Portuguese Presidency .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need political courage and desire to tackle the greatest attraction of illegal immigration : illegal employment .
We must win the battle against the mafias and unscrupulous entrepreneurs who exploit illegal immigrants .
It is a business that involves enormous amounts of hidden interests and money , and this requires a firm and energetic response .
We must , as you said , Mr Vice-President , apply zero tolerance to illegal employment in order to reduce the underground economy that creates the ' call effect ' .
The psychological dimension is obvious .
If there is no chance of working illegally in the EU , there are fewer incentives for emigrating to it .
We also wish to ask the Member States to take decisive action with adequate financial resources to combat the trafficking of human beings through judicial and police cooperation , paying particular attention to the most vulnerable - women and children - and ensuring that they have access to health care and education .
External action requires dialogue and close cooperation with the countries of origin and transit .
We must continue along the path initiated at the Ministerial Conferences held in Rabat and Tripoli and the Brussels World Forum , placing the emphasis on the link between immigration and development .
We must make immigration a factor of development in the countries of origin and the host countries , and ensure that we use codevelopment to jointly tackle the deeper causes of illegal immigration .
We must also maximise the positive impact of funds sent back by immigrants as regards development in their respective countries and explore the potential of micro-credit .
Moreover , we must have a coherent external policy to ensure the compatibility of trade objectives and development aid so that less-developed countries can export their products and do not have to export their own nationals .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would not wish to end my speech without extending my thanks to all the rapporteurs , with whom I enjoyed close positive cooperation , as reflected in the broad consensus achieved in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Let us make no mistake , ladies and gentlemen , we must fight illegal immigration and tackle its causes and channels , but we do not have to fight illegal immigrants , for they are not criminals : emigrating is not a crime .
We must put an end to the populist xenophobic discourse that associates immigration with insecurity , crime , terrorism or unemployment .
No one emigrates on a whim : it is always out of necessity .
Let us act to eliminate this necessity and transform it into a personal choice .
( Applause )
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( EL ) Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate Lilli Gruber and Javier Moreno Sánchez on the excellent work that they have done and the cooperation we have enjoyed together in drawing up the two reports .
The settled position of the EU Commission is for a genuine common immigration policy to be adopted by the 27 Member States .
Immigration is indissolubly linked with development and , given the demographic problem faced by the EU today , legal immigration is now a part of the solution to many of Europe 's problems , instead of being just one more problem .
The opportunity of issuing an opinion allowed us at the Committee on Development , in the role of the European Parliament , to safeguard equal rights for both genders , to protect the most vulnerable groups such as female and child immigrants , as well as to provide information and language teaching to newly-arrived immigrants .
Furthermore , account was taken of the brain drain from regions of the world such as Africa where there is an acute demand for human resources in the health sector .
These areas suffer each time a doctor leaves his country to seek a better future in the EU .
To this end , we welcome the Commission 's proposal to strengthen circular migration .
Immigrants will thus have the possibility of returning to their home country after a period of one year and to take back to their country the knowledge and experience they have acquired in the EU Member States .
It is also vital for the Commission to provide more information on the legal framework that will cover the term ' circular migration ' .
On this point I would like to thank Commissioner Franco Frattini for the sensitivity that he has shown on the subject of immigration over the last two years and for his continuing efforts to get the 27 Member States to agree on a common immigration policy .
( Applause )
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the draftsman of the Committee on Culture and Education I have underlined the importance of considering the social , educational and cultural aspects in relation to immigration .
These factors make a vital contribution to economic growth , social cohesion . It is also important to facilitate the integration of these people in the host countries , thereby reducing mutual distrust .
With regard to education , I have proposed the introduction of policies for immigrants ' access to , and integration in , the education system , with recognition of academic and professional qualifications obtained in third countries .
With a view to preventing the brain drain , we have focused on the Commission 's proposal to encourage the hiring of ethnic labour in countries where the emigration of qualified professionals could destabilise the social and economic situation .
Finally , I wish to draw attention to the importance and responsibility of the media when broadcasting information in both the countries of origin and the host countries , in order to prevent a biased view of the migration phenomenon .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( EL ) Madam President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality regrets the fact that both in the communication on the draft strategy for legal migration and in the text which we are asked to vote on today very little reference has been made to the problem of the equality of women .
We therefore call on the Commission , the Member States and the various groupings of the Council with responsibilities in this area to step up their efforts .
The coordination of policies for legal migration must provide for special protection to be given to the right of female migrants who suffer from double discrimination .
Illegal immigration must be opposed ; it promotes networks of various forms of exploitation of vulnerable men , women and children .
We stress the importance of a global approach to legal migration policies .
Two-way action integration measures must be included to strengthen both acceptance by host societies and the readiness of male and female immigrants to integrate .
Women and their families contribute significantly to this , and family reunification should be facilitated by means of an independent status .
We need to combat discrimination , amputations , forced marriage , polygamy , honour crimes and violence of any kind in the society of origin , and to strengthen the legal development of women 's skills .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner Frattini , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the question of immigration is a political issue of special significance because it often involves human drama .
The Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats is aware of the serious nature of this debate and our thoughts turn to the hundreds of lives lost because the victims dreamt of living in Europe .
Respect for human life has to be at the forefront when we are drafting our immigration policy .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for their work and Commissioner Frattini for the willingness and political determination he has shown .
It is our duty to do everything we can to control the influx of migrants .
The cohesion of our society , our capacity to receive immigrants and our determination to combat racism , intolerance and xenophobia are all at stake .
In order to manage immigration it is vital to adopt an approach that is based on respect for human dignity , realism and a solid legal framework .
Ladies and gentlemen , when discussing the subject of immigration it is important to draw a distinction between asylum-seekers , temporary refugees and economic migrants , with the latter being by far the most numerous .
Within this latter category we also have to distinguish between illegal immigration , which is the European Union 's responsibility , and legal immigration , which falls within the jurisdiction of the Member States .
We are in favour of strict measures where illegal immigration is concerned .
Europe has to face up to its responsibilities and take on the scourge of the mafia gangs that are trading in human misery .
We recognise that some progress has been made , such as the setting-up of the Frontex agency , the European External Borders Fund , and the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams to police border areas .
However , this is all too little , for the manpower , material and financial resources deployed are still insufficient .
We are now about to provide these instruments with the additional resources that are needed .
Nevertheless , if we are to be more effective those Member States that act as guardians of our external borders have to operate using common standards .
It is vital that we draw up a real Community protocol for the protection of our external borders , complete with a system of monitoring .
Our Member States are not all faced with the same problems when it comes to migratory flows .
We need to be careful to distinguish between those states that act as guardians of our borders and the others .
The task facing those to the south and east of the Union is enormous .
Solidarity has to come into play here to maximum effect and technical , logistical and financial means have to be used to provide support to those front-line Member States that are faced with massive illegal immigration .
While the fight against illegal immigration requires measures to be put in place at our external borders it also requires efforts to be mobilised within the European Union itself .
Between 10 and 15 million people are currently residing illegally in our territory .
If the main guiding principle of our democracies is equality before the law , it is imperative that we adopt a policy that provides for persons who have entered the EU illegally to be systematically returned to their country of origin .
The European Union must organise the return of illegal immigrants in a way that maintains the strictest respect for human rights and human dignity .
We want Europe to remain a refuge for those who are fleeing persecution and for that reason we are opposed to the mass regularisation of illegal immigrants .
Far from being a solution this will only give illegal migrants and those seeking to enter the EU the illusion that they will be given legal status sooner or later .
Such amnesties would only perpetuate the activities of the criminal gangs that are engaged in illegal immigration and human trafficking .
We very much welcome the Commission 's proposal to penalise employers who hire illegal migrants .
As regards the current situation with legal immigration , our Group believes that the commitment displayed by the country of origin to control illegal immigration should be made a condition for our negotiations with third countries .
Of course the regulation of legal immigration is the responsibility of Member States , not the European Union .
Nevertheless , if we are to improve efficiency and coherence in this area we need to coordinate our efforts more effectively at EU-27 level .
We also need to explore the possibilities of introducing a common reception process that would enable highly qualified workers and those with certain specific skills to enter the European labour market .
The proposal for a European ' Blue Card ' should be developed and discussed further , along with the idea of a circular immigration project for unskilled workers .
Ladies and gentlemen , immigration is dependent on maintaining the right balance between a cohesive society that is strong and open to others , on the one hand , and respect for the rule of law , on the other .
Far from closing our doors we want to ensure that prospective immigrants are welcomed and incorporated properly into our society , as happens in other regions of the world .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to thank both of the rapporteurs for their work , which has been valuable and absolutely to the point .
I should like to begin with a picture that has been in all of our minds for some months : the photograph of 40 shipwreck survivors clinging to a tuna net in the middle of the Mediterranean for two days and two nights .
In that instance , saving the fish seems to have been more important than saving the lives of those desperate people : they were not taken on board the fishing vessel that came across them .
I am saying this because , as the Commissioner reminded us , we need a global but differentiated approach to the subject of immigration .
It must be an approach combining balance , solidarity and - as recalled by Mrs Gruber - an absence of taboos .
Immigration cannot be regarded merely as a security issue .
It is a necessary challenge for Europe ; it is an aspect of integration and social development that we have to confront .
Commissioner Frattini said that Europe has a part to play ; we agree .
Europe has a part to play , provided that it can deal with all the complexities of the issue .
In the few seconds remaining to me I should like to highlight the three fundamental principles contained in these two reports .
The most effective way of stemming illegal immigration is to open up legal migration channels , as long as the migrants and the countries receiving them have reciprocal rights and obligations .
On illegal immigration , I would like to say that a principle of solidarity must be established among Member States , provided that it applies to all Member States and not just those bordering the Mediterranean .
At the same time , as many of my fellow Members have already said , we must combat illegal immigration by creating conditions in the countries of origin that alleviate the causes of the deep despair from which these people are fleeing : the underlying causes mentioned by Mr Frattini .
Finally , Madam President , respect for human rights remains a necessary point of reference for our policies .
The process of European integration will be strong and meaningful only if we can prevent Europe from closing its doors to immigrants .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , what could better illustrate the need for a common European immigration policy than the case of the Tunisian fishermen ?
Everything about that tragic event - from the migrants on a rubber boat on the high seas , to the people smugglers who put them there and the authorities who jailed their rescuers - is testament to the failure of Europe 's approach to migration .
With every human tragedy , during a desperate do-nothing decade , Liberals and Democrats have asked one simple question : how many people must perish before governments see that lifting the drawbridge of Fortress Europe serves nobody 's interests ?
Managing migration is as much in our interests as in the interests of those seeking our shores or prepared to die trying .
While populism has propelled a policy forged in the furnace of fear , let us face the facts .
Fact number one : over the next 20 years , Europe will lose 20 million workers - workers who staff our service industries and whose taxes fund services for our citizens .
Fact number two : national governments are deterring the people Europe needs if we are to compete - indeed , to survive - in a cut-throat global market .
Eighty-five per cent of the best brains go to America and Australia , put off by our bureaucracy , our bloody-mindedness and our barriers to free movement .
Fact number three : of those migrants who reach Europe , only 3 in 20 are skilled ; most are unskilled , desperate and dispossessed .
Commissioner Frattini 's proposals address one half of this problem , building on Ms Hennis-Plasschaert 's ideas for a European Green Card to fill the skills gaps .
But his ' Blue Card ' plan has its own gaps : no mention , for example , of the workers that we need in the catering , healthcare or tourism sectors .
It could address economic and demographic challenges if accompanied by free movement of workers from the new EU Member States , but it does little to counter the challenge of illegal migrants along our southern borders .
Let us make no mistake : the Commission 's cosy calculation that we can take the best and leave the rest will not work .
Pushed by poverty , hunger , squalor and war , people will keep crossing the Mediterranean whether they fit our criteria or not .
Why ?
Because our agricultural and fisheries policies are out-pricing their products and raiding their natural resources .
Of course we must patrol Europe 's borders .
The Moreno Sánchez report is right to demand that Frontex be given the budget , the staff and the equipment needed to do its job - although suspending Gibraltar from Frontex , equivalent to leaving a hole in the fence , frankly beggars belief .
Longer term , however , only a comprehensive EU policy that punishes the people smugglers , provides legal routes in and creates hope where there is despair can counter prevailing trends .
The truth is we have only one choice in dealing with developing countries : we take their goods or we take their people .
If we want to let fewer in , then we must help more at home , as Ms Gruber 's report rightly says .
That is why the Portuguese Presidency must redouble its efforts to bring down Europe 's farm tariffs and bring Doha to a successful conclusion and why the Commission must develop a generous agenda for Africa , linking money and market opening to respect for human rights and the rule of law , to give people hope of a better life at home .
Mr Lobo Antunes , Mr Frattini , hold your next Council meeting in the immigration hall on New York 's Ellis Island .
Learn from our history of wandering westwards as you plan for the EU-Africa Summit in December .
Migration will not go away : it is driven by the heady cocktail of despair and hope , it follows the law of supply and demand , but it has the capacity , if properly managed , to enrich and energise Europe .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are already various Directives on legal migration and others are to be proposed , but the real unresolved problem is still that of preventing illegal and uncontrolled immigration , as well as unambiguously defining and ensuring respect for the laws and rules in effect in EU countries : this is a vital pre-requisite for civil coexistence .
I am grateful to Commissioner Frattini for the proposals he has put to us .
However , the problem still remains serious , in that there are rulings by magistrates - I am referring to cases in Germany and Italy - stipulating that the parents of a girl confined to the home cannot be prosecuted , or that the application for a divorce by a woman repeatedly beaten by her husband cannot be heard since , according to these magistrates , such conduct conforms to custom and practice in the immigrants ' countries of origin .
All of this is also serious in the light of the draft Reform Treaty : it does make provision for a common immigration policy but it will be a long time coming , whereas in order to stem illegal immigration we need a common policy immediately .
In February 2004 I was draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on Frontex , which came into being in 2004 and has been operational since 2005 but still lacks sufficient resources .
On many occasions it does not have the wherewithal to monitor not only the official frontiers but also our borders , since it is our countries ' borders that need more monitoring .
In order to build a fair society , without overt or covert conflicts , whose risks are obvious - including that of distorting our own and other people 's identities - we need a strong policy to combat unlawful conduct .
We call on the Commission and the Council not only to step up EU border controls , but also to introduce harmonised legislation to punish human traffickers speedily and resolutely , and to promote better agreements with immigrants ' countries of origin .
Safeguarding human rights and individual dignity is completely at odds with weak policies that encourage the threat of terrorism and social malaise .
This is one reason why we would point out that the lack of a common rule on the right of asylum exacerbates the situation , but we do not see much activity on the part of the political groups .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission , the Council and our two rapporteurs for recognising the complexity of the issues at long last and the need for a coherent approach .
We know that migration is a fact of life , we know it is a force for development and we know that many EU nationals also follow a path where they want to earn , learn or yearn for something better , just as those coming from sub-Saharan Africa do .
We welcome the move for equal rights for all groups of migrants here because we have been concerned that looking at this in a sectoral approach can lead to even greater complexity in terms of different rights for different workers .
But we are also concerned that we find a status for those who currently cannot return to their countries of origin because of conflict and are therefore left destitute , often on our streets .
We also welcome the call for greater honesty from Member States about the need for migrant workers in our current economies .
Globalisation has speeded up migration , and I would thoroughly agree with those Members who have talked about the need to change our trade rules .
As we were told , if you take our fish , you take our fishermen too .
In which case , I would urge those Members not to shed crocodile tears about the plight of certain migrants - and not to vote for fisheries agreements in this House and not to vote for the trade rules that devastate economies elsewhere .
We are also right to look at employment in this debate in terms of equal rights , equal pay , good inspection , which is good for all workers who need to know their rights .
If we are concerned about the brain drain , we also need to look at retention measures for our own skilled workers .
We need to use and develop the skills of those migrant workers coming to us , and EQUAL has given us some fantastic examples there which we must not lose .
And if we are going to attract the highly skilled , it is not just a question of free movement ; it is also a question of tackling racism and xenophobia , which also deter many highly skilled people from coming to the European Union .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Frattini has spoken to us today first about legal migration and then about irregular immigration .
If European Union policies followed the logic of his words I could agree with him , but unfortunately that is not the case .
In recent years EU policies have first and foremost used language such as refusal of entry , migrant criminality , repression , the spectre of invasion ; now , at last , we are beginning to speak of entry policies .
Therefore , we can all agree that a policy on legal migration is crucial in order to combat irregular immigration , to prevent human trafficking , to avoid sea crossings by the hopeful , and to stop the Mediterranean increasingly becoming an open-air graveyard .
We should also be logical , however .
Consequently , before proposing policies on refusal of entry we should discuss how to broaden legal entry channels and how to tackle the demographic challenge .
I did not really understand what Mr Frattini was referring to today , whether he was talking about press leaks .
In actual fact , the forecast of 20 million immigrants by 2030 has been made by the European Commission itself in its Green Paper , which explained that the demographic crisis in the European Union is such that we will need 20 million immigrants by 2030 .
However , 20 million immigrants does not mean 20 million skilled immigrants .
We are proceeding from back to front : first implementing policies on refusal of entry , then deciding how to bring in skilled immigrants and , finally , tackling the major problem of what to do about all the others .
I believe that we should take a closer look at the policies implemented in recent years and analyse them .
We also need to assess what kind of policy we want on refusal of entry .
To consider 18 months of administrative detention is in itself , I believe , an offence and a systematic violation of human rights .
We should also examine what Frontex is doing .
This year we have spent € 45 million ; Frontex has 90 staff and carried out four missions at sea this summer .
I do not think we can be satisfied with the policy pursued by Frontex .
Its policy has given refusal of entry precedence over saving life .
I would conclude on this point : saving life must be a priority .
At the request of our Group 's Chairman and others , the Commission was to report to us today on the affair of the seven Tunisian fishermen who are in prison in Italy for having rescued 44 migrants .
I hope Commissioner Frattini will be able to enlighten us on this affair , which is in keeping with the logic of criminalising immigration .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , poor Mr Frattini is still lost in the Hampton Court maze as we see the EU moving ever further from democracy .
Let us contrast our position - and not for the first time - with Switzerland .
Switzerland knows that local knowledge is the key to immigration policy .
The EU seeks to centralise immigration control above the level of national governments .
The Swiss , in contrast , devolve it downwards , wherever possible , to the level of their cantons .
In Switzerland the annual quota for immigrants is partly decided by the Federal Government and partly by the cantons .
Proposals for a federal migration agency have been rejected there .
The Swiss cantons and their long tradition of direct democracy have been the historic drivers of an immigration policy which works to the benefit of the national economy and ensures that immigrants are well integrated into Swiss society .
As Professor Windisch of the University of Geneva told the French Foundation for Political Innovation in its April 2006 newsletter , Swiss direct democracy had to - openly and very early on - confront issues involving immigration and integration by means - perish the thought ! - of referendums and popular initiatives .
He continued : ' Unlike an extremely centralist country such as France , the debate was led both at the federal level and on a canton and commune scale , calling for community-based responses , and involved initiatives such as setting up an integration office in every canton and the geographic dispersion of new arrivals . '
The lesson for those of us who , unlike the Swiss , have not had the good fortune to stay outside the EU is this : immigration policy works in Switzerland because it is decided according to local needs as well as national ones and because local communities , not faceless , centralised bureaucracy , are responsible for the integration of migrants on the basis of those needs .
In the UK , subject as it is temporarily to EU membership , immigration policy moves ever further away from that fount of local knowledge , and we in the UK Independence Party have been quick to point out the shortcomings of that approach .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking both rapporteurs for their excellent work .
Promoting and regulating legal migration is the only feasible solution , not only to combat the criminal behaviour connected with migration flows but also to protect and guarantee human rights .
Like all other European citizens , immigrants must be integrated and included within the respective communities and must comply with all the attendant rights and duties .
A year ago I was draftsman for the Committee on Development on the report about the crossing of external borders .
I would stress now , as I did then , the need for Europe to make sufficient resources available to provide decent reception centres , training for our staff , access for foreign citizens to information about their rights and duties , severe penalties for anyone who exploits illegal immigration and , above all , full cooperation among Member States .
Now that Frontex has been launched , it must receive adequate resources and involve other neighbouring countries affected by migration flows as actively as possible .
- ( ES ) Yes , Mr President .
Sorry , I was having some problems with the interpreting , and also , if you will allow me a few seconds , I merely wish to say that ...
( The speaker spoke in Basque )
I apologise : I merely wished to add a few words in Euskera on the European Day of Languages since , as has already been mentioned in this debate , we are not criminals ; we only wish to speak our own language .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have to pay tribute to Vice-President Frattini and thank him for having presented an action plan that at last provides us with a significant basis on which to debate and address legal migration in the future .
As concerns the report , I think it is a balanced text , the fruit of useful negotiations and important compromise amendments between the various political groups , enabling us to offer broad support for this text and therefore , as a Parliament , to support the European Commission 's future work on this topic .
I would stress that the PPE-DE Group 's position added much-needed balance and substance in the drafting of this report .
The key points of the position our Group has always taken on the phenomenon of immigration have been confirmed .
Among these specific points I would recall our commitment to firm , decisive measures to combat illegal immigration , support for a stronger link between legal and illegal immigration , and the search for more mechanisms for dialogue and integration for immigrants .
This report can without doubt be described as a European report , and not just for rhetorical effect , in that it views the phenomenon of immigration as something to be tackled jointly , in both its positive and negative aspects , by all European partners .
Everyone must show solidarity and thus confront problems with the same degree of attention and determination , even if they have a greater impact on certain countries than others .
Whether a vessel carrying illegal immigrants is shipwrecked off Sicily or the Canary Islands or elsewhere , it must be considered a shared problem .
A European-level policy to coordinate the phenomenon of immigration is necessary , to say the least .
This report takes us in the right direction to confirm this conviction , while clearly expressing full respect for national competence over the quantitative aspects and flows of migrants .
- ( ES ) Mr President , like everyone else I first wish to congratulate the rapporteurs on some excellent work .
Immigration is not a new phenomenon , as we are all aware , but what is new is its enormous increase in recent years , and this is due to rising levels of poverty and the fact that increasing numbers of countries are stricken by poverty .
Thus I feel that the main challenge now is to control migratory flows , structure them in accordance with real needs , and ensure higher levels of integration of these people in the host countries , as well as stepping up surveillance of our borders , with policies that provide for repatriation to the countries of origin .
Above all , we must deal with the mafias trafficking in human beings .
It is essential to find a response and put an end to the human tragedies relating to illegal immigration : we are in agreement on this point .
Border controls , however , ought to be common to Member States .
Shared responsibility and solidarity should go hand in hand .
Now I would like to say a few words on Frontex , which has done some fine work , and I am directing this at the Council , which has just read us out a long list of vessels and helicopters .
What I am wondering now is : where are they ?
It is not good enough for them simply to be on the list .
I also feel that the Council is acting in a schizophrenic manner when it requests more assistance for Frontex and cuts back the budget by 2.5 % at the same time , against a backdrop of credits already exhausted for the year 2007 .
In spite of Frontex , however , we are aware that the influx of immigration will continue regardless of whether we are completely willing to control it : it is our willingness and not legislation that we require , because the Commission and the Council have decided against a single directive on legal conditions for entry to the EU .
It is as though everything we hoped for in Tampere , everything our Socialist Group defended so vigorously , has simply gone up in smoke .
- ( NL ) Mr President , in a world in which we are facing more and more regional conflicts , where there are huge disparities of wealth and where there is growing mobility , the control of migration flows will become increasingly important and will , at the same time , be difficult .
Is the Union in a position to take up its responsibilities with a comprehensive package when it comes to migration , legal and illegal ?
We have been talking about this for some time now : the push factors that drive people to go , the pull factors that tempt people to leave , the importance of relief in the region , the often inhumane conditions in which people find themselves , the intended burden sharing between the Member States , the return of illegal migrants , the lack of opportunities for legal migration , the risk of brain drain not to mention the demographic changes facing us in the Union .
All of these aspects have been addressed after a fashion or will be in the near future through directives , action plans and other instruments .
In this respect , I would like to thank Commissioner Frattini .
Last Thursday you set out your objectives once again with great enthusiasm at the Shaping Migration Strategies conference that I organised with colleagues .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I admire the statements of Minister Socrates .
The countries of the European Union do indeed bear a historical responsibility towards those who are now travelling in the opposite direction .
You as President-in-Office of the Council have demonstrated far-reaching ambitions , and yet reality shows us that the EU still has a long way to go when it comes to taking global responsibility .
The migration debate is completely polarised in many Member States .
No distinction is made between asylum seekers and economic migrants , the latter often being illegal .
The debate is dominated by integration problems .
Social security systems are said to be at stake and if we are not careful the average immigrant will be equated with a terrorist .
Open , fair and transparent debate is far too often almost impossible .
Unfortunately , this is echoed in the exasperatingly slow decision-making procedures in the Council , when the Council decides to go for harmonisation , but ends up with the lowest conceivable minimum standards .
When concrete measures are decided upon , this is always on the basis of the lowest common denominator .
Yes , I am an impatient person by nature , but I just thought I would mention that .
The reality is , however , that many Member States lack ambition .
The lack of solidarity is shocking and I name Frontex , but there are many examples .
When are the Member States going to show that they support a long-term view , that they are no longer driven by fear , that they will no longer allow themselves to be ruled by a critical article on the front page of a newspaper or by the next elections .
We will not do it with fine conclusions of the Council alone .
My question , therefore , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is how are you going to make sure that this situation changes ?
Is the President-in-Office of the Council willing to give Parliament codecision powers with respect to the new directives on legal migration , such as the Blue Card , in anticipation of the new Treaty .
That , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , would be the right signal .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , President Doyle warns us about the risks of simplistic solutions .
The achievements of Frontex , which ought to be much better resourced , indicate that something is beginning to happen and results are being achieved .
France 's policy goes in the right direction and could serve as an example .
The same applies to some decisions taken by the judiciary , for instance in Italy where houses rented out to illegal immigrants are starting to be seized .
Such practical measures should be implemented Europe-wide .
What specious reasoning we are hearing from the well-meaning , open-minded Left , however !
I am sorry , Mrs Gruber , but I am amazed to hear an intelligent person like you say that legal migration can be promoted and illegal immigration combated by opening the door to legal migrants .
The very opposite is true !
It is by eradicating the plague of unlawfulness that we can open up to what is acceptable and tolerable , including in numerical terms , in other words regular , clean and transparent immigration .
Have you ever heard of the Mafia ?
True enough , the word is absent from your report ; so is the word terrorism , but the Mafia and terrorism feed on and get rich from the trafficking and deaths of poor illegal immigrants .
Even you should understand this ; it is not hard !
- ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to read to you from a research report that was funded by Parliament .
It states :
' One can reasonably conclude that the number of people who died at the European borders has increased significantly since controls were extended to the external borders in 1995 . '
( NL ) Mr President , in fact the number of people seeking to find a way into Europe has not increased , but the borders are guarded much better , so that people take more difficult and more dangerous routes .
This report also states that :
' The European Council 's proposals will probably increase human costs because of the intensified security and surveillance orientation . '
( NL ) Mr President , I would very much like to hear a response to this from the Commission and the Council .
I believe that we should not rely on such research , but that we should gather our own data on the fatal crossings .
Do you agree and who should gather the data then ?
Mr President , I am not arguing that there should be no border controls at all , but I am arguing that there should be more opportunities for legal migration .
With regard to that , I would therefore like to welcome the Commission 's proposal for a Blue Card .
The Blue Card : the name refers to the blue in the European flag , but it seems to be mainly concerned with the stars .
It requires supplementation .
I am pleased that the Commission has said that it is going to work on this .
I will eagerly await its proposals , because I think that it is a necessary complement to the proposals put forward up to now .
( SV ) Mr President , migration has taken place throughout human history .
It has been one of the most fundamental driving forces of that history .
When we speak of migration between countries , we are therefore addressing quite fundamental questions , existential questions of human freedom .
Do people not have the right to choose where in the world they want to live ?
None of this is actually up for discussion here .
The modern welfare state is irreconcilable with free immigration and hard to reconcile with more extensive migration in general because of different standards of living .
Immigration as a means of rejuvenating our own populations is practically dead in the water according to research .
Immigration by family members has very minor effects on the demographic structure .
It would require 50-70 % of all the people in a country to be immigrants if we were to rejuvenate the population of a country such as Japan .
Brain drain is a major problem for many developing countries .
Here it is effectively proposed that we should rob other countries of their educated populations .
A new approach is needed .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the latest figures given in the annual report on the activities of Eurodac for 2006 , which is the biometric tool that Europe uses for monitoring asylum seekers , show that the number of persons who illegally crossed one of the EU borders has increased by 64 % since 2005 .
This worrying development only proves , if proof were needed , that Europe is powerless to control its external borders and to contain the exponential growth in illegal immigration , especially from Africa .
The only crumb of comfort in the report is that Parliament seems to have woken up to the fact that the en-masse regularisation of immigrants who have illegally entered the territory of the European Union is not in itself a solution and will not solve the problem .
Well hallelujah !
Nevertheless , Spain , Belgium , France , Italy and the Netherlands first had to resort to this dangerous policy of regularisation , which inevitably gave rise to the so-called ' aspiration ' phenomenon and by this fact influenced the migratory flows of their European neighbours , before this awareness finally dawned on them .
Let us be positive , however .
We have at least made a start .
However , if we are to fight illegal immigration effectively there is one measure that has to be introduced as a matter of urgency : re-establish the European Union 's external border controls .
This gimmick that is Frontex , a real empty shell with insufficient men or equipment that is not even supported by some European countries , anxious as they are to preserve their sovereignty over immigration management , will never save Europe from this infernal spiral .
Europe itself is to blame for the continuing and exponential problem of immigration by having signed-up to the criminal Schengen agreements .
It must annul these , and quickly .
( SK ) The European Union has extensive legislation on migration policy .
We have the Geneva Conventions , the Dublin Convention , several Regulations and a large number of Directives .
However , there are major problems with their implementation and their large number render the entire system opaque .
In addition , the Member States ' legislation is frequently applied incorrectly and refugee and asylum-seeker status often merge .
Since time is limited , I will stick to the question of children who are not accompanied by their parents and who leave their country of origin to seek asylum in another country : 5 % of all asylum seekers are made up precisely of children .
We have statistics on how many of those children have applied for asylum but we do not know how many of them cross the border and do not apply for asylum .
We know how many are granted asylum but have no information on what happens to those whose applications are rejected .
Moreover , on arrival in a country children must be assigned a legal representative who will defend their best interest , but we do not know precisely what the definition of a child 's best interest is .
A child 's legal representative should not be an inexperienced volunteer , a student or a legal person with a conflict of interests .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I was pleased to read recently about the Socialist Group in the European Parliament calling for this morning 's debate not to become an electioneering exercise .
What is more , on listening to you this morning I find that your positions are becoming dangerously close to those of my own Group .
I agree with Mrs Gruber that Member States can no longer manage immigration by acting independently in their own corner of Europe .
I also agree with Mr Moreno that we wish to help countries with a high level of emigration develop so that their citizens are more inclined to stay at home .
I am also in agreement with Mr Fava when he says that Europe should take a firm stance towards those employers who unscrupulously exploit their workers .
There are those who associate immigration with violence and who claim that immigrants are the cause of all the woes affecting their country .
These people do not share the fundamental values of the European Union .
Fortunately , there are also those who fight humanely against illegal immigration , which only creates modern-day slaves , and who support legal immigration , which provides economic , cultural and intellectual opportunities for us all .
We in this House know one thing : this problem cannot be solved simply by acting at a national level .
The only way ahead lies in a concerted European policy .
We did not set up Frontex to fish drowned people out of the seas off southern Europe or to gather up children in the eastern territories who have died from hunger and thirst .
Frontex is not an impassable frontier , it is a means of preventing the arrival of excessive numbers of immigrants for whom we do not have sufficient welfare and material resources .
Controlling our borders is not a technical problem and it is not a military problem : it is a political matter .
Like you , I am seeking the most realistic and the most humane solution .
As we all know , that is to be found here around the European table , to be agreed between ourselves and those who run the countries that are the main sources of immigration .
It is up to us to initiate a new , more effective form of co-development that will provide for an intelligent regulation of migratory flows and the peaceful arrival of immigrants into the European Union .
Fellow Members , migrants often do not have any choice over what happens to them , but we do have a choice : we can choose to receive them with concern , dignity and understanding .
It is up to us to succeed where others have for so long failed .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , we indeed welcomed this joint debate because it is impossible today to have a truly effective and coherent European immigration policy without tackling these two issues together and on a Community level .
For a number of years our respective countries have adopted a restrictive policy towards immigration , yet this policy has not stopped migrants arriving .
On the contrary , they continue to come to Europe , at great personal risk , to find better living conditions and for many of them it is a question of survival .
The world is now a global village and we will never be able to stop those who are fleeing from misery and despair .
Some people continue to project the illusion that we can close our borders and they are being completely irresponsible .
It all comes down to a question of morals and of solidarity and it is up to us to help out all those countries that are in distress .
That is also why I want to see this debate extended to include more than just Frontex .
Certainly the European Council has to explain why Frontex was forced to suspend its operations in the Mediterranean in mid-August for want of operational resources .
However , the question we really should be focusing on is this : how do we enable those who want to come to Europe to do so in a properly regulated manner ?
We should of course look into the possibility of introducing a European Blue Card : this would allow migrants to move freely between Europe and their country of origin and to do so transparently and in safety .
At the same time it is important that the Commission should first put forward a proposal defining a common basis for the rights of migrants .
There are a great many people who are scandalously exploited in our different countries .
We need fully to realise that in today 's changing world it is now a matter of urgency that those countries where people are still living in misery are allowed to develop harmoniously .
This is nothing more than our duty .
Everyone should have the right to stay and live in their country of birth : the way things are at present they do not have this choice .
Finally , I hope that the Member States respect the mandate of the Intergovernmental Conference to put the matter of legal immigration to qualified majority voting and to codecision .
I would just repeat that this is absolutely essential if we are to adopt a coherent European policy in this area .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , at last we are able together to discuss the subjects of illegal immigration and immigration that is referred to as legal : these are two sides of the same coin without which no country today can really claim to have a successful immigration policy .
In truth , most have simply succeeded in creating electoral imbalances that only serve to aggravate the problems , which really do not need this if they are to be tackled effectively .
No Member State at the present time can claim that it wants to manage its immigration policy alone and the tragedy of this European Union is that many of its members are countries that historically , over two centuries or more , have known all about immigration , for they were the victims of it .
There will be some political posturing today , but I think the time has now come to move up a notch .
In an area that permits freedom of movement , such as ours , the decisions taken by one Member State will have an immediate effect on neighbouring countries .
By the same token , as external borders will henceforth be shared by all the countries of the Union we cannot expect those Member States located in the south and east of the EU to have to face , alone and helpless , the massive influx of migrants of the kind we are now witnessing in Malta , the Canaries and Lampedusa , in the eastern parts of the Union and even in the north west .
With solidarity clearly called for here we need to apply the kind of political will that I feel the Member States are not sufficiently prepared to demonstrate .
We cannot develop a proper European immigration policy if we do not put an end to the imbalance that exists in the current Treaties : the fight against illegal immigration has to be made part of a proper Community system and the present all-round paralysis affecting our policy on legal immigration can no longer be tolerated .
This is why I would again stress that for our policy on legal immigration and integration , as set by the mandate of the Intergovernmental Conference , we need to apply the principles of qualified majority voting and codecision with the European Parliament .
This is the only way in which we can effectively and democratically meet one of the greatest challenges currently facing the European Union .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am particularly glad that Parliament , in strengthening the Community approach , is also grappling with legal immigration issues in my country - Latvia - relating to the employment deficit in various sectors such as construction and catering services .
Yes , many people have left Latvia to work legally in these sectors in various EU countries , and citizens from non-EU countries are filling these jobs in our country both legally and illegally .
For those , however , who have a strong wish to strengthen the role of the European Parliament and to decrease that of the Member States , especially the small states , on immigration issues , I would like to change the emphasis .
We should make every effort to convince various Member States to stop restricting entry to the labour market for Member States that joined the EU in 2004 , not to mention the attitude to the 2007 Member States , which encourages illegal employment even for EU citizens .
Be consistent , ladies and gentlemen ! Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , in proposing legal channels of immigration , an idea that is essentially motivated by Europe 's economic needs , which are for the most part insensitive to the real needs of those who live in the southern parts of the Union , you are in fact deciding not so much on the number of migrants coming to Europe but rather on those among them who may enter our territory legally .
What about the others , however ?
For them there only remains the nightmare voyage .
Prevented from leaving their country of birth , intercepted at sea , unofficial channels , detention , rescue or drowning - and I would like to hear you say and say again that rescuing people at sea is a universal and fundamental duty , witness the case of the seven Tunisian fishermen , and that it is the very minimum that we should expect - and then possibly forced repatriation , endless wandering in hostile transit countries , plus serious violations of human rights and so on .
As the Commissioner responsible for justice , freedom and security , ensuring respect for human rights ought to be your main concern - as it is ours - and your powers in this area are very great indeed , in fact as we all know they are immense .
When Chechen nationals are refused asylum in Slovakia , and are expelled back to Russia via Ukraine , how can you guarantee that they will not be victims of maltreatment ?
What has been the outcome of the initial agreements on readmission that the EU has negotiated in this area ?
How can we guarantee that there will be no repression when we unceremoniously return people in this way ?
When Frontex patrols intercept boats full of migrants at sea how do you ensure that those on board are effectively able to apply for asylum and that the patrols in question will treat minors in a proper manner , and with their best interests in mind , as required under international law ?
In closing may I just ask you to explain clearly why you do not have a proactive policy requiring Member States to ratify the International Convention on the rights of migrant workers and their families ?
( PT ) In a one-minute speech , we can only stress that the repressive security-oriented policies which criminalise migrants , both men and women , who aspire to work and a dignified life , must be ended .
Detention centres for migrants must be closed and the inhuman policy of repatriation must be ended .
Xenophobia , racism and all policies and corruption which encourage these must be combated .
The situation of migrant workers must be regularised by guaranteeing their labour and social rights , which is a necessary condition for ending unacceptable situations of exploitation .
There must be an effective integration policy which specifically includes family reunification .
We consider that developing a common migration policy is not an adequate response to these issues and problems , as demonstrated by the results of other common policies .
The migration situation is different in each country making up the European Union .
The decisions made on this policy must respect the sovereignty of each state , which of course does not hinder the cooperation needed in this area at EU level .
Rather than a common policy , what we need is a different policy and different measures which will effectively protect the rights of migrants and combat the deep causes of migration .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , enough of all this political hypocrisy .
The right of asylum and immigration where similar types of civilisation are concerned is not the problem .
The question essentially concerns immigration from another civilisation and this benefits no one .
Immigration by job seekers is a double injustice : it robs the country of origin of the skills that it has paid for , while in the host country it drags the labour market down and takes job opportunities from the locally unemployed .
Immigration by benefit seekers is a mistake on two counts : it uproots poor people , hypnotised by the lure of the Western world , while in the host country it destabilises the social budgets that have been created and can only survive within the limited and protective context of the nation .
This means that , contrary to what was written on the walls of the Members ' restaurant in Brussels a month ago , the European Union does not need immigration .
In fact quite the reverse : what Europe needs is a proper family and demographic policy , sovereign cooperation between nations and frontiers , not Frontex .
The world needs to understand , for one thing , that peace does not come through immigration but through self-reliant development and , for another , that real proletarianisation sets in when people lose their cultural roots .
Mr President , the ability of a nation state to control its own borders and change its immigration policy as required is a tangible demonstration of sovereignty .
The fact that the United Kingdom cannot now rectify the grave miscalculation which it made in 2004 , with its open-door policy to Eastern Europe , is a telling indication of just how much sovereignty we in the United Kingdom have conceded to belong to this club .
I say ' grave miscalculation ' because , instead of the 13 000 predicted immigrant workers , we have had 750 000 , with the related massive drain on our welfare system of millions per annum in child benefit and tax credits for children who do not even live in the United Kingdom but qualify because their fathers work there .
Because of the rules of the EU , we are powerless to do anything about it , and yet some would have us concede even more powers to Brussels .
How foolish we would be to do so .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , the shortcomings of European immigration policy and the difficulties experienced so far surrounding joint action have now succeeded in undermining support within society for shared values such as the free movement of citizens within the European Union .
We have opened our internal borders , but we do not yet have a common policy on immigration .
This is completely absurd .
European citizens , meanwhile , feel that having open borders within the EU leads to unchecked immigration .
If we want to maintain peace in our societies and public support for freedom of movement , we need a strong Europe , stronger than it is at present , on the issue of immigration .
In this regard we should not forget , however , that citizens of the new Member States still face major restrictions in terms of immigration policy , despite the fact that they are European citizens .
The European People 's Party believes that the following are necessary for an appropriate and transparent common European immigration policy .
First : solidarity among the Member States , which would rule out unilateral decisions that affect everyone as a result of the open borders , as in the case of the decision by the Spanish government .
Second : human dignity must be the guiding principle .
Third : we must take resolute action against illegal immigration .
A fellow Member from the Socialist Group said a little while ago that immigration is not a crime .
However , ladies and gentlemen , any person violating European rules and Member States ' rules is indeed committing a criminal offence and this is why we refer to illegal immigration .
In order to take action against illegal immigration we need stronger protection of our external borders than we have at present , and statutory provision concerning return of immigrants to their own country .
Fourth : rules on illegal immigration must be reinforced and made more transparent - I am sorry , I meant to say rules on legal immigration - taking greater account of the types of labour needed in our countries .
Fifth : immigration policy must not begin at our borders .
It is astounding that although the European Union is one of the largest aid-providing organisations in the world , we do not set many conditions relating to corruption , respect for human rights and democracy in recipient countries .
This must be brought to an end , and conditions of this sort must be imposed on recipient countries .
Ceterum censeo : Europe needs a stronger immigration policy .
( EL ) Mr President , some decades ago millions of our fellow European citizens emigrated to America , Australia , South Africa and other European countries .
They were not rich , but were escaping from poverty .
We asked for them to be accepted and to be given rights .
The money they sent home supported our economies .
Thousands of Italian , Greek and Irish flags fly in those countries on the days of our national festivals .
They love the countries to which they went , but they are also allowed to love their countries of origin ; nobody feels threatened by this dual love .
They excelled and boosted the economies and cultural and democratic wealth of the host countries .
As a result , immigration should surely not be treated primarily as a police phenomenon , let alone as a likely source of terrorism , as it has ended up being discussed in Europe .
Immigration policy ought to be comprehensive and should cover a whole range of aspects :
firstly , improvement of legal migration channels ;
secondly , combating clandestine immigration , especially inhumane immigrant trafficking rings ; and upholding respect for human rights at detention centres . The only crime committed by these people is to have been born in poor or war-torn countries ;
thirdly , the reason for the surge of immigrants : wars , poverty , underdevelopment , dictatorships ; Europe must tackle these phenomena in its foreign and economic policy ;
fourthly , we should ask why Europe is so attractive to immigrants . At the same time , we must combat illegal employment ;
fifthly , the demographic , research , educational and economic needs of the European Union ; we must attract a much-needed labour force ;
sixthly , respect for fundamental rights ;
seventhly , creating a European bridge between peoples and cultures , thus strengthening our foreign policy .
Very few of the above require police action .
On the other hand , they require politicians with insight and boldness .
I am glad that , after its initial emphasis on a police-based approach , the Commission is now moving forward with a much better overall approach .
I congratulate Mr Frattini !
( DA ) Mr President , at the core of the problems that we are concerned with here is the demographic imbalance in the world .
Legalising illegal immigration will not solve any problems : managing immigration in accordance with a uniform set of rules even less so .
Only assistance with development and democracy will help .
The EU countries are so different that uniform rules are impossible to administer .
In Denmark over half of all immigrants from non-western countries are unavailable to the labour market and those who are on the labour market experience high levels of unemployment .
This is because the country has high minimum wages and high social benefits - so high , in fact , that few people in this Parliament can comprehend that Denmark quite simply cannot get people without qualifications onto the labour market , irrespective of the nationality of the person concerned and irrespective of an enormous financial support initiative .
The opposition in all Member States to increased immigration from foreign cultures should be enough to persuade the European Parliament to listen more to its electorate .
- ( ES ) Mr President , any debate on immigration must be based on at least four facts .
People will continue to risk their lives coming here no matter how many walls , prison bars or vessels we deploy .
People do not come to Spain , Malta or Italy : they come to Europe .
All the studies point to the fact that the immigrant population is necessary in the EU to guarantee the current level of the welfare state . However , there is still a disturbingly high level of abuse of many of these people by unscrupulous businessmen who take advantage of their vulnerable situation in order to exploit them .
If this is the case - and I would remind you that this has already been demonstrated and is not the result of prejudices or suspicions - if this is the case , what we must do now is develop a reasonable and intelligent European policy on access at our borders : stopping people crossing them does not help to control the process ; it merely makes the situation more dramatic .
We must likewise take a responsible attitude to our reception process , guaranteeing asylum and refugee status to immigrants , individual treatment of each person , and realistic solutions .
( EL ) Mr President , we have carefully read the reports of our two fellow honourable Members .
There are no proposals in them which differ substantially from the measures and policies proposed by the Council and the Commission .
Frontex , for which more allocations are being sought , is not just a mechanism for policing our borders ; it can also be used as a platform for the control of non-EU countries bordering the EU .
The solution for combating illegal immigration is not to set up repression and intervention mechanisms .
We should not establish detention centres , collect biometric data in central databases , or treat all those who attempt to cross our borders either as terrorists or as criminals across the board .
At the same time , nor is the creation of a framework of specifications for legal immigration a way to combat illegal immigration .
We should not continue to use this framework as a pretext for the promotion of measures that will serve the European Union as a whole without taking into account the rights of immigrants themselves .
The relevant explanatory statement does not criticise the use of biometric data ; it does not distinguish between controls and the management of immigration , nor does it consider those immigrants who do not fall into the categories of useful intellectual skills or vital manual labour to serve the needs of the multinationals .
Immigration is a two-way relationship of supply and dialogue , exchange and mutual influence , cooperation and respect for peoples and individuals , comprehension and the guaranteeing of equal opportunities .
It is therefore our duty to promote policies which take this approach , and this approach alone .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have spoken a great deal about migrants today .
I would now like to focus attention for a moment on what our citizens are asking us .
The question that citizens are asking us is this : we have millions of unemployed in the European Union , and yet at the same time , we are talking about the immigration of highly skilled workers .
As politicians , we will have to devote a great deal of energy to explaining to our citizens that when it comes to skilled workers , we need the best brains in the world .
The citizens are asking us another question as well : ' Are you taking our concerns about this issue seriously ? '
We are talking about circular migration .
Over recent decades , we have brought Turkish citizens into my own country and recruited them into the workforce .
In the Czech Republic , we have the Vietnamese .
Circular migration - in other words , these guest workers ' return home - has not worked in these countries so far .
Our citizens are asking : how do you intend to solve this problem ?
How does it all fit together ?
We will also have to make it clear to citizens that we consider that migrants have a duty to integrate , just as Mr Lambrinidis has said , which means learning the language and making an effort to integrate .
We will only generate citizens ' understanding for a European migration policy - for legal immigration - if we make it clear that when it comes to illegal migration , illegal migrants will have to leave Europe .
That is the only way to gain the public 's endorsement of legal immigration .
The most important element in the report , in my view , is the clear commitment to Europe 's citizens that we will leave quotas - in other words , the task of determining how many people enter the labour market - up to the Member States , just as before .
That is where there is much more confidence among citizens .
I would like to thank our two rapporteurs , who have submitted a good report .
On behalf of my group , the PPE-DE Group , let me say that we are pleased that our fellow Members from the left-wing parties in this House have also moved towards our position in many areas , notably on the issue of a robust policy on return , the issue of leaving quotas to national decision-making , and establishing effective border controls .
For me , it is extremely gratifying that as the PPE-DE Group , we have been able to assert our position here .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Europe needs a common immigration policy .
From Tampere to The Hague , from Claude Moraes and Patrick Gaubert , to today 's two excellent reports and all the Commission communications in between - these have been the various stopping points en route where we have already been able to establish that strictness in immigration policy is not an asset in itself .
Our task is to coordinate and differentiate .
We need to coordinate the complex phenomena that are factors in migration , including people migrating for economic reasons only , but also those who cross the border illegally .
From these we need to differentiate asylum seekers , those who infiltrate in connection with criminal activities , and those who may perhaps have been pushed into illegal action by the authorities themselves .
Up to now , we the new Member States have been transit countries , but now we will also be destination countries and our responsibility will increase , as we too need fresh supplies of labour .
It is not extra muscle power we need , however , or grey matter to exploit , but fresh labour for our labour market .
This is why I welcome regulations that indicate the place of immigrants in our labour market situation .
I also welcome the plan for common legislation and the instruments suggested in this common legislative plan .
Lastly , I would like to emphasise that cooperation with the countries of origin represents the real future with a human face , where legal and illegal immigration is not a decision that affects a whole lifetime , and does not mean fleeing one 's country and one 's home ; rather , it is a temporary period in which the conditions for return must be established through understanding and integration . Thank you , Mr President .
( MT ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner .
The Frontex Agency is making a great effort , but I must say that we are still far from achieving the required results .
Last July Frontex 's mission in the Mediterranean led to the number of immigrants arriving in my country , Malta , being decreased by half when compared to July of the year before .
Incredibly , in spite of this , the mission stopped at the end of July and in fact we saw the number of arrivals double in August compared with the previous year .
This month Frontex 's mission continued but we have still seen an increase compared with September of the previous year .
What does all this mean , Mr President ?
It means , firstly , that we need to strengthen Frontex further and that is why this Parliament is committed to increasing Frontex 's budget and not to decreasing it , as the Council is trying to do .
This means that the Member States that promised Frontex so many boats , helicopters and aeroplanes are not honouring the promises they made and I expect both Frontex and the Commission to work with this Parliament to make the Member States honour their responsibility .
This also means that there is a need for more work to be carried out so that third countries such as Libya cooperate with us in the immigration sector .
However , this also means , Mr President , that there is still hypocrisy to be found in European immigration policy .
Everyone agrees that the first priority should be to save the lives of people who are drowning in the Mediterranean .
Very well , that is how it should be .
However , when we ask , as Malta did , who will welcome the people that are saved from drowning , there is a profound silence .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is good that it has finally been recognised that it is not just about joint efforts to combat illegal migration but that comprehensive strategies are also required to manage and coordinate legal migration on a joint basis , especially in a Europe without borders .
However , this cannot only be the task of the Home Affairs Ministers , who quickly reach agreement on measures to deal with illegal migrants ; it is a task for the Ministers of Employment and Social Affairs as well .
I therefore welcome the initiative of the Council and Commission to involve the relevant specialised ministries , including our Vice-Chancellor , Mr Müntefering , for example .
The fact is that legal migration always means immigration into the labour market and therefore into the social security systems as well .
However , we must also combat the causes of migration more intensively and the reasons prompting so many people to seek a remedy to their situation by fleeing from their desolate countries .
We must create legal employment opportunities .
The ' Blue Card ' and circular migration are an initial step in the right direction .
I have one comment about Frontex as well : what some Member States are doing here is scandalous .
The solidarity which is always demanded must apply to all EU countries , not just to a few , and the refugees must , in my view , be allocated among all the Member States according to a formula , which has yet to be decided .
It cannot just be a matter for Malta or the Canary Islands or Greece .
Ultimately , Frontex can only be as good as Member States permit .
I would like to made a peripheral comment on Frontex : Frontex always takes the names of its operations from Greek mythology ; Nautilus is one example .
However , one forthcoming operation is called Hydra . This seems to me to be in poor taste .
In my view , the name of the operation should be changed , for anyone with any knowledge of Greek mythology knows what Hydra means .
( Applause )
- ( ES ) Mr President , I have want to make a few comments and highlight just a few statistics .
According to Eurostat , 45 % of foreigners entering the European continent chose to remain in Spain .
Between 21 September and the early morning of 24 September , 595 sub-Saharan nationals arrived on Spanish beaches .
Since the beginning of the year , 11 000 immigrants have reached the Canary Islands alone , and 9 000 of these since implementation of the Hera mission on 23 April .
Despite the Frontex , Hera , Hermes , Nautilus , Poseidon and Malta operations , figures show that mafias trafficking in human beings have the necessary means to dodge our control mechanisms and open up new sea routes .
One example of this is the large number of immigrants reaching the coast of eastern Spain , or more than 4 000 immigrants from Sri Lanka and Pakistan waiting to be taken to Europe from the beaches of Guinea Conakry .
Priority must therefore be given to the missions aimed at identifying and arresting members of the mafias , and stepping up police and international cooperation through the establishment of joint investigation teams .
Frontex must keep its missions in crisis areas on a permanent basis .
It is essential that the Council push the European Border Patrols Network forward to enhance monitoring and surveillance tasks .
The EU as a whole must support and encourage cooperation agreements and information campaigns , not only on a linguistic and professional basis ; the countries of origin and transit must also be made aware of the risks taken by immigrants and of their deaths .
Finally , there must be coordination of immigration policies at European level in order to prevent permissive laws and regularisation processes that have a ' call effect ' .
We must also encourage a generous and humanitarian asylum policy , and the necessary international protection .
I am finishing up now , Mr President : one cannot talk to the Council about 20 % solidarity .
Frontex supplies 80 % for charter ships , aircraft , fuel , everything except for material depreciation .
Therefore , the Council must encourage 20 % solidarity , and refrain from using double-speak in a policy that affects the entire European Union .
( SV ) Mr President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteurs for their very good work .
I am pleased with the plans to make life harder for employers and private individuals who employ people illegally .
Illegal employment , in domestic work and childcare for example , mostly involves women , often with an immigrant background .
This affects not only the individuals concerned , but also social insurance and finance systems , and competition in the countries in question .
I am also pleased that continued support will be available to combat human trafficking , especially involving women and children , which predominates .
I am grateful for the support given to halving the number of victims within ten years with a view to eliminating the practice completely .
On the other hand , I am disappointed that I did not get support from the Conservative Group in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs in helping women and children to break free and find a new life .
Voting for Amendment 29 offers a new chance to support women and children so that they can remain in the EU or to help them return .
Do this so that women can have a life - after people trafficking .
I am also pleased that we continue to say ' no ' to refugee camps outside the EU .
What I would warn against , however , is the labour force of economic migrants that we will get if we do not allow families , partners and children to accompany them .
Then it will be mostly young men who come , which is not a good thing for any society in the EU .
We talk about the EU 's borders .
It is important that persons who engage in human trafficking , crime , drugs , arms dealing and money laundering should be kept outside , while at the same time people in need of protection are welcomed into a humane EU .
They are the backbone of the EU and cannot be excluded from the EU 's common future .
Migration will be important , not just for us who live here now , but also for future generations , and we must achieve both global prosperity and our own prosperity .
( PT ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate is based on two reports which clearly represent two complementary approaches : the policy plan on legal migration and the priorities in the fight against illegal immigration .
To favour one and forget the other would be a serious mistake .
They are two sides of the same coin .
Migration is nowadays a huge phenomenon .
It is estimated that there are currently around 26 million migrants in the European Union , here both legally and illegally .
Migration is a phenomenon which clearly has a European dimension , not only because each Member State per se cannot manage this effectively , but particularly because any change to the migration policy of one Member State can impact on the migration flows and their development in other Member States .
Mr Vice-President of the Commission , I obviously support the idea of the Blue Card and also the creation of a European immigration portal providing information , on a large scale , on the conditions and options for legal migration in the European Union .
I welcome the strategy of abandoning the idea of a single directive , following a number of years of deadlock within the Council , and adopting a progressive method involving the presentation of four sectoral directives over the next three years .
I would stress the need for a development aid policy involving the signing of agreements with third countries to effectively manage migration .
Cooperation with the countries of origin is essential in the fight against human trafficking and illegal employment .
Finally , Mr President , we must also guarantee border control and the use of available resources such as Frontex and RABITs ( Rapid Border Intervention Teams ) , which must have access to the resources needed for their work .
( PL ) Migration is not only a problem for southern Europe .
It also affects the Union as a whole , including my country , Poland , which lies in the north-east of the continent .
Poland 's eastern border is the Union 's longest land border , and we are responsible for its security .
In addition , Frontex , of which so much is expected , is based in Warsaw .
We allocated certain duties and responsibilities to Frontex , and we should therefore also ensure it has the necessary tools and resources at its disposal , so it is able to take action and protect our borders effectively .
Almost three million of my compatriots have left Poland in recent years . They have travelled to other Member States of the Union , taking advantage of the principles of the common market .
We have , however , also received thousands of individuals from the Far East , for example from Korea and Vietnam . People have , of course , also arrived from Ukraine and Belarus .
We need these new arrivals . They are helping to build Poland .
That is why I welcome the reports by Mrs Grüber and Mr Moreno Sánchez , especially the report on immigration policy , because its premises civilise immigration by creating channels for legal immigration .
The two reports complement each other very well .
Taken together with the proposal for a directive providing for criminal sanctions against employers of illegal immigrants that the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs is currently working on , they represent a sound legal basis for the Union 's immigration policy .
I am glad Parliament is playing such a mayor role in this regard .
I should like to add a final comment . Immigration should not be seen as a problem .
We should perceive it instead as an opportunity for ageing Europe !
We should take advantage of the energy and enthusiasm of the people who come to us legally , and involve them in the creation of new nations and our common Europe !
( PL ) Mr President , it is worth considering where the emphasis lies in the report on illegal immigration .
The report focuses mainly on the Mediterranean Basin .
It also expresses undue confidence in Community action instruments .
We are all aware that responsibility for border controls rests with the Member States .
In this regard , however , much still depends on the preparedness of specific services of the Member State concerned , despite references to the principle of subsidiarity and the existence of Frontex .
The situation along the south-eastern land border also calls for attention , financial resources and common action , even though it is not currently a major route for illegal immigration .
In addition , enlargement of the Schengen area may exacerbate the problems related to migration .
That is why Union policy on legal migration is such an important issue .
In order to be able to manage legal economic migration , however , we must first deal with harnessing the potential and mobility of the workforce within the Union .
The existence of transitional periods for opening up labour markets to citizens of the new Member States , and of selective lifting of these arrangements by opening the labour markets only to highly skilled workers seriously disrupts all moves towards a Community migration policy for citizens of third countries .
The cultural and geographic factors involved in legal migration are also significant .
On the basis of their geographical location , cultural and linguistic similarities , Member States are obviously more inclined to adopt a migration policy in relation to specific third countries .
I refer to those countries whose citizens find it easiest to integrate with European culture and values on account of proximity and acquaintance , if only of the language concerned .
That type of legal migration therefore has double added value .
- ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Mediterranean is the world 's most unequal border .
In economic terms and in terms of income , the tremendous difference between the two sides produces a flow of people that cannot be controlled solely by police forces .
In the summer of 2006 I had the opportunity to congratulate Commissioner Frattini because he and some Spanish fishermen saved Europe 's honour by rescuing a group of people adrift at sea , and we then witnessed a disgraceful trade-off process as to what we ought to do with them .
One year on , Commissioner , are we in a better position to deal with this problem ?
We are moving forward very slowly indeed , and our rate of progress is incompatible with the gravity of the problem that lies before us .
It is a problem that we will be unable to solve without further development in the countries of origin .
We must get that into our heads .
We will not be able to solve the problem without development in the countries of origin because , although we need a large number of immigrants , we cannot cope with the entire demographic excess of sub-Saharan Africa .
Moreover , what is happening here is the terrible combination of hunger on one side and TV satellite dishes on the other .
The empty bowl in the kitchen and the satellite dish laden with expectations constitute the best possible breeding ground for illegal immigration , which we can only control by contributing to the development of the countries of origin and preventing the real ' call effect ' : illegal employment .
( Applause )
Mr President , the topic we are discussing today is undoubtedly one of the utmost importance to Europe and one where each Member State faces different challenges .
For this very reason , whether we are dealing with illegal or legal migration , we must not go down the path of a one-size-fits-all approach .
Migration matters must remain a sovereign right of each Member State .
However , I am in favour of greater cooperation between Member States where common ground can be identified and where it can work for the benefit of all .
And , like other speakers , I would particularly like to focus the House 's attention on the Frontex system , where we have recently released a further EUR 12 million to this organisation .
From the outset the system has suffered as a result of Member States who have pledged resources but who are not honouring their commitments .
If this project is going to be a success we must ensure that these promised resources are made available to the operation as and when needed .
However , this is only one tool in the struggle to stop illegal immigration .
We must look at new and innovative solutions at the very source where migrants start their journey .
We need to look at targeted campaigns in the states of origin , making it clear that Europe is not an open door .
Most of all , we must also target people traffickers .
The other side of this coin means our Member States having effective repatriation policies to deter those who both seek and organise illegal migration .
So finally can I sum up by saying that it is cooperation , not regulation , that is needed between Member States .
A one-size-fits-all approach cannot solve the problems of immigration , and we must not fall into the trap of thinking that ' more Europe ' is the solution .

- ( MT ) Mr President , it is true that in the past months the continuous commitment of Commissioner Frattini together with the priority that is being given by the Portuguese Presidency is producing some results , notwithstanding the formidable bureaucracy and the tangible lack of solidarity in some aspects , which delayed the efficacy of a number of initiatives .
However , this tragic issue deserves a common European policy that urgently addresses fundamental ' issues ' , including : the adoption of ' burden-sharing ' policies between all the Member States , the revision of Dublin II as proposed in paragraph 18 of the Sánchez report , adequate financial support or support of another kind , including capital provision for infrastructure projects , as well as an assessment of the viability , or otherwise , of developing centres such as job centres in countries of origin and transit , the development of a realistic return policy , the implementation of timely integration policy and the fight against organised crime involving trafficking in people , as well as xenophobia and racism .
Unfortunately we do not have a European agency based in the Mediterranean to develop this common policy on immigration and asylum .
Frontex can never fulfil the role if its terms of reference do not change substantially .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs who showed us in concrete terms how backward the Union is in this respect .
They addressed the rights and dignity of the immigrants that are frequently the victims of political repression , poverty and organised crime , as well as the difficulties faced by small Member States such as Malta that carry a disproportionate weight , frequently without any real solidarity .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Europe is facing two challenges .
On the one hand we see ageing and a demographic decline .
On the other hand hundreds of thousands , even millions of people from developing countries , anxious to enter either legally or illegally , are knocking on the southern and eastern gates of the Union .
This challenge has to be addressed in the European Union through joint efforts : no country , regardless of how big it is , can solve this on its own .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's efforts to seek and propose joint solutions , such as using Frontex to prevent illegal migration .
Another example is managing legal immigration through the Blue Card system or through cooperative agreements with the countries of origin .
I also welcome today 's repeated appeal by Commissioner Frattini to those countries of the European Union that have not yet opened up their labour markets to their fellow citizens from the new Member States to do so as soon as possible .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be brief .
This was certainly one of the fullest , most detailed and all-encompassing debates that I have had the honour of chairing , attending and participating in within the Council and this Parliament .
It was a debate in which I noted and from which I have naturally taken various suggestions , advice and proposals which in my opinion are extremely important and essential to the work that we must do in the future .
In light of all this , I feel that I can legitimately conclude that the European Union has a coherent and comprehensive strategy for tackling the issues of migration and that it is well on the way to implementing policies which will give physical and practical form to this strategy .
Of course there will be some hesitations , some doubts certainly and also of course the need to be a bit more ambitious but , I must stress , everything will be balanced within the context in which we live and according to the difficulties facing us .
I feel that we are on the right road and that we can , and must , move forward with determination to implement a truly global approach to migration .
In our opinion , two essential words form the basis of this policy , humanity and solidarity : humanity because this policy is based on the people and is aimed at the people .
This issue of humanity cannot be and is never forgotten by the presidency .
As has been said , we are talking about people who , by seeking to enter our societies , are legitimately striving for a better life for themselves and for their families .
This is a human desire and wish that we must fully respect .
The other essential word is solidarity because , as has been said , this is not an issue or a problem that can be solved by only one Member State , or even by two or three .
It is a problem that affects everyone and that therefore has and must have a joint response .
Fortunately , we believe that there is an increasingly apparent awareness of the need to bring together these two concepts - humanity and solidarity - when defining and implementing European migration policies .
We have already set up a joint instrument for fighting illegal immigration , an agency known as Frontex , which has been in existence for two years .
Over this period it has been taking its first steps and , in our opinion , despite some difficulties , has acquitted itself well .
Clearly we must increase our efforts to equip it with the instruments needed so that it can achieve the purpose for which it was created more effectively , quickly and accurately .
However , we consider that this collective instrument has so far given a good indication that its creation was necessary and right .
In the context of legal migration , mention has very rightly been made here today of the need to increase our dialogue with third countries , specifically those countries which are the source of migration flows .
This dialogue is absolutely fundamental and , as has been said , I fully agree that , without considering , analysing and in some way attacking the causes which , in these countries of origin , are at the root of these migration flows , we will never be able to find a permanent solution to this problem .
We have stepped up dialogue in this area with Africa and we hope that at the next Europe-Africa summit very important results may be achieved , and ultimately legal migration , in the context of migration and dialogue on migration with the countries of origin .
The Portuguese Presidency has put legal migration high among the action priorities of its agenda for its six-month term .
The Commission has also been active in this area and has tabled proposals we regard as very interesting .
These will be discussed during our presidency , when we hope , as I have said , to be able to make significant progress .
To sum up , despite the difficulties , despite the tough problems that we must face , we feel that we are on the right road .
Here and there perhaps , we must be a bit more ambitious .
Here and there perhaps , we must be a bit quicker , but I feel that no one of good faith can deny that a great deal has been done in recent years .
Of course the Council welcomes and encourages this debate with the European Parliament .
The issue of codecision and the Reform Treaty was raised here today .
As you know , the Reform Treaty has its roots in a mandate that was approved by the European Council and therefore by all the Member States .
Decisions of this type must be taken by all the Member States , not just the presidency of course .
In any event , I believe that the Reform Treaty , like the Constitutional Treaty , takes extremely important steps towards extending the codecision process to many legislative initiatives within the EU .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too am grateful to everyone who has spoken in this extremely important debate .
I believe that Europe must be truly united in its approach to this global phenomenon which involves millions of children , women and men and affects all continents .
First of all , it has been said - and I agree - that we must combat unlawful conduct by taking action against traffickers and those who exploit illegal immigrants , and by means of a repatriation policy that is both credible and fully respectful of individual rights , of the dignity of every human being .
The European Union has already undertaken some repatriation activities and may continue to do so .
I would recall that repatriation initiatives are often delegated to the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , so as to ensure maximum transparency in our respect for human rights .
I believe that a European policy has to link aid , respect for human rights , trade policy with Africa and immigration .
I very much agree with Mr Watson 's wise words about those countries : ' we take their goods or we take their people ' .
We must reflect on this , especially because the strategy must be a global one and cannot exclude trade relations or our policy of development aid to Africa .
External border controls are also vital .
Some of you have referred to them ; some have expressed doubts .
I believe that Frontex deserves support .
It deserves support because , as happened this summer , not only have human lives been saved that would otherwise have been lost , but the Frontex officials have arrested a large number of people : 400 people , members of trafficking organisations , have been caught and handed over to the authorities .
This is a large number because it relates only to the past summer .
I therefore hope that this House will recognise the need to give Frontex additional resources in the 2008 budget .
I know there is an amendment seeking to freeze as much as 30 % of Frontex 's operating costs with immediate effect .
I do hope this proposal will be reconsidered and that the budget will instead be increased , subject to monitoring and a fully responsible attitude to expenditure .
There have of course been many references to economic migration .
The detailed proposal I shall make about a European work permit certainly does not mean that we will decide in Brussels how many immigrants are needed in each country .
That will remain the responsibility of each country 's national government and national market , so I wish to reassure all those who have questions or concerns about this .
In other words , each Member State will be free to decide how many of each category of non-Community workers it needs .
However , ladies and gentlemen , one thing Member States will not be able to do is to say ' we do not need any at all ' and then carry on tolerating illegal immigration and the exploitation of undeclared employment .
That is not possible because there will be European rules .
Immigration naturally brings us to a universal value , which some of you have mentioned : mobility among peoples .
I believe that there are opportunities , but also rights .
Rights are always accompanied by duties .
A policy relating to rights but not duties would be unthinkable .
We cannot and would not wish to impose our European laws or funding on anyone else unless our counterparts agree .
This is something we must make crystal clear : our idea , our policy , is partnership .
It is that of a large-scale pact with the countries from which immigrants come and through which they transit .
Such a pact should include - and this is a key component - total respect on our territory for our laws , for fundamental rights and for our most absolute and universal values : life , the dignity of every woman and every man , respect for the individual .
This brings me to integration .
Integrating immigrants means showing respect for their background and religion , because they are a source of enrichment for every one of us , but it also entails respect from them for our traditions , our background , our culture and our religion .
That is why , as I see it , integration means participation .
Quite frankly , we cannot integrate by law those who do not wish to integrate , those who are not prepared to move forward , those who think that Europe can still tolerate forced marriages or polygamy .
Such things are not acceptable because we have our laws and our universal values .
This , then , means education , it means language-learning , it means vocational training , and it means regular employment and the rejection of anything unlawful .
It means taking a firm stance on unlawfulness .
Someone expressed this thought , with which I particularly agree : immigrants who commit crimes are the worst enemies of honest immigrants who work and earn their living normally .
The reason is that we have to explain this policy to our citizens who are full of concern : they should not be afraid of immigration as such , but of those who commit crimes .
It is our duty to ensure that people who commit crimes are punished , because otherwise we do not draw a distinction for our citizens and we fail to address this fear , this concern which then turns into racism and becomes xenophobia , a dreadful but growing phenomenon within the European Union .
To conclude , Mr President , politicians have to make choices .
I believe that our choice must be to establish a global pact of rights and duties among equals , among counterparts .
There should not be one side laying down conditions and the other accepting them ; nor should anything be imposed on us that we find unacceptable .
This is what is needed because we are talking about the dignity and rights of human beings .
We are talking neither about an economic remedy nor about a bureaucratic remedy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 noon )

Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Illegal immigration is a somewhat paradoxical notion .
I grew up under a political system in which certain terms were deemed to be a priori positive or negative by those in power and their propaganda . For instance , international was classed as positive but cosmopolitan as negative .
We must guard against falling into a similar semantic trap .
Since xenophobia is bad , one can hardly consider that it is a very good thing for a country or the European Union to protect itself against illegal immigration .
It is surely more of a necessary evil .
I saw the words ' Nobody is illegal ' painted on a wall in my home town of Poznań .
It is sometimes worth pausing to consider whether a human being can actually be illegal .
It is not only on the Atlantic and the Mediterranean that people put their lives at risk attempting to cross the Union 's borders .
Last week a Chechen woman and her three young daughters died on the border between Ukraine and Poland . They were fleeing from the tragedy that has befallen their homeland .
It is hardly surprising that people are trying to escape from Chechnya , and are even prepared to risk their lives to do so .
The presence of several million immigrants in Europe , who entered the Union illegally , is a very real problem .
As we strive to resolve it , however , we must keep in mind the universal values that underpin European integration .
We must also remember that immigration itself is not a negative phenomenon , for the very simple reason that no human being is a negative phenomenon .
in writing . - ( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , 85 % of unskilled immigrants from the developing world live in the European Union and only 5 % go the USA , while a mere 5 % of highly skilled immigrants arrive in the countries of the old continent , and more than half are snatched up by the US economy .
I am delighted that Mrs Gruber 's report seeks , among other things , to halt and reverse this process .
I think we must find ways of attracting highly skilled labour , but at the same time we must also prevent the ' brain drain ' from developing countries .
The term ' highly skilled labour ' should therefore be defined and common criteria for training should be standardised and established within the European Union .
This time I do not support the Commission in its application of the principle of ' the more the merrier ' , and I agree that the five directives should merged .
Less bureaucracy will also prove more attractive to skilled workers .
Prior to drafting the directive ( s ) I suggest that an initial impact assessment should be carried out that also takes social factors into account .
This assessment could help to ensure that by representing the real interests of citizens , the legislation being devised will save the European Union millions of euros .
The proposal by Mr Frattini concerning the introduction of packages of legal-entry quotas could , I think , facilitate a reduction of illegal migration within the European Union , but it could also result in more effective control over illegal migration in third countries .
Instead of the EU green card proposed in the report , I believe the new blue card scheme is more likely to succeed in achieving what we hope for concerning legal immigration .
Welcome
I would like to welcome His Holiness Satguru Baba Ji and his delegation , who are seated in the official gallery .
His Holiness is the spiritual leader of the Sant Nirankari Mission , also known as the Universal Brotherhood .
The Mission is founded on the belief that true religion unites , never divides .
His Holiness is visiting Europe and spreading the Mission 's message of humanity as the only religion .
His visit to Parliament today and his meeting with President Pöttering are part of his current mission to build harmony and understanding between cultures and religions .
We welcome him and wish him every success .
( Applause )
The need for measures to protect the Roman Catholic Cathedral of St Joseph in Bucharest , Romania - an endangered historical and architectural monument ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
( DE ) Mr President , President Pöttering asked us yesterday to be on time for the vote .
Many of us tried , but the lifts here in the building are not capable of bringing our colleagues down from the upper floors in time .
Perhaps something could be done about this , or the bell could be rung a bit earlier .
Well , Mr Rack , do not worry : we did begin again at exactly 12 noon and it is now 12.04 p.m. , so we are not doing too badly .

Verification of credentials of new members of the European Parliament
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Legal Affairs has authorised me to give a very brief oral report .
During the part-session on 10 and 11 September we verified the credentials of the 18 Members from Bulgaria , plus another seven who were nominated by the competent national authorities owing to the resignations that occurred .
We have ascertained , by checking all the customary documents and the annexed minutes , that the statements on incompatibility are in order and the statements on financial interests have been signed by the Members .
I therefore believe that I can speak for the entire House in welcoming the 18 , plus the other seven Members from Bulgaria , thus completing the coverage of this Europe of ours .
We therefore wish a warm welcome as from today to those who are joining us in the work of the European Parliament .
Thank you , Mr Gargani .
Those mandates are thus ratified .
We wish the new Members every success .
1 .
European Institute of Technology ( vote )
- Report : Paasilinna
2 .
Right to vote and stand in elections to the European Parliament for EU citizens residing in a foreign Member State ( vote )
- Report : Duff
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , the report supports the Commission 's proposals to streamline procedures for those citizens who wish to stand or vote at an election to the European Parliament in their state of residence .
It fully respects national law and practices , and it pushes forward the argument for the future about extending cross-border democracy .
Would Members please support the committee resolution without amendment .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Duff , for his report , which is full of ideas .
Some of the amendments being put forward by the European Parliament go well beyond what the Commission is proposing in order to resolve certain administrative difficulties in the application of the Directive , as were identified in its report on the elections of 2004 .
However , I fully understand the motivations behind some of Parliament 's amendments - and moreover the Commission supports these too - particularly the need to improve the degree of citizen participation in European elections and the European make-up of elections to the European Parliament .
This is all linked to questions concerning the exclusion of dual candidacy , which one of the amendments seeks to do away with , and the automatic process leading to loss of rights to stand as a candidate .
The Commission is therefore in favour of a more detailed examination of these issues , if necessary by conducting a proper study , and the European Parliament will obviously be involved in this process .
These questions could also be discussed , if necessary , by the interinstitutional information group , which is currently exploring all possible ways in which the dissemination of information on the 2009 European elections can be made somewhat more effective .

Mr President , on a point of order , I see that the ALDE Group has requested a separate vote on every single amendment in the context of this report .
Under our Rules of Procedure , only a group can table an amendment .
I wanted to check whether this has really been done in the name of the group or whether it is just one of their members claiming to act on behalf of the group .
Mr Corbett , we have here the proof that it was the group who asked for that , so everything is OK .
I am sorry , but everything is OK !
( Laughter )
3 .
Set aside for year 2008 ( vote )
Proposal for a Council Regulation - Set-aside for year 2008 ( C6-0302 / 2007 )
4 .
Dangerous toys made in China ( vote )
- Resolution :
5 .
Towards a common European foreign policy on energy ( vote )
- Report : Saryusz-Wolski
6 .
Legal migration ( vote )
- Report : Gruber
- After the vote on Amendment 19 :
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to speak before the vote .
I am speaking under Rule 150 of the Rules of Procedure .
Given that our Amendment 19 is the same as Amendment 1 from the PPE-DE Group , the UEN Group withdraws its amendment and would like to co-sign Amendment 1 of the European People 's Party and European Democrats .
7 .
Policy priorities in the fight against illegal immigration of third-country nationals ( vote )
- Report : Moreno Sánchez
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I did not support the proposal to establish a European Institute of Technology .
Of course I wish , like most of you , that the European Union would adapt and would produce more inventions and patents .
However , having listened to the debate on this proposal I do not believe that setting up another institution is a step in the right direction .
Our universities and research institutes will get no extra money ; if anything , they will have another institution to compete with for research grants .
Nor has the vote of our venerable institution created a new body of super-scientists .
The Institute will be managed by scientists who will leave the universities where they are now .
I therefore believe that it would be better if we channelled the available funds , if can find them , into the existing top scientific teams through research grants .
( SK ) If we actually want to overtake the US , Japan and other world leaders in science and technology and if we want Europe to set the tone , then the necessary preconditions must be created .
Centres of excellence must have all the conditions and preconditions in place .
The European Institute of Technology is a step in the right direction .
It is a shame that this decision has been delayed for so long .
I believe that the problems surrounding sufficient funding for the EIT will be resolved satisfactorily .
I also support the idea of cofinancing according to the Public Private Partnership principle , as is the case , for example , at research centres in the United States .
I would like scientists and researchers from the new countries also to be selected for , and involved in , the scientific teams , and the governing board to be subject to monitoring by the European Parliament .
The research objectives should mirror the Seventh Framework Programme for science and research and only research on embryonic stem cells should not be funded by the taxpayers of those countries where such research is illegal .
( CS ) Mr President , allow me a remark concerning the vote on the establishment of the European Institute of Technology .
I voted for the proposal since this is the first time that we have had a system linking research , education and the business sector .
This is a fundamental project in the area of European innovation and like other similar projects it is accompanied by problems , in this case financial problems in particular .
That said , the proposal to establish the Institute and to give it enough space to justify its future existence deserves our support .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to say a few words regarding the European Institute of Technology .
Firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur Mr Paasilinna .
He has done some excellent work .
I know that he is an expert in education and research and other such areas .
This a very ambitious project , but I would nevertheless like to point out that if we in the European Union establish new institutions it might be very important that , before we do so , we ensure that existing institutions can obtain adequate funding .
Consequently , we should also ensure that the network of universities which now exists can obtain adequate support and thereby produce new research .
In the vote I voted in accordance with Mr Paasilinna 's recommendation , but I would ask Parliament to consider that existing research communities should be able to obtain their funding and that this new institute should not eat up the money set aside for them .
I ask that this should be recorded and taken into account when the decisions are being taken .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Paasilinna report on the European Institute of Technology because I consider that this will make a decisive contribution to increasing the competitiveness of the European economy , by reinforcing synergies between innovation , research and education .
I therefore support the proposals made by the rapporteur which aim to clearly define the sources of funding of the future European Institute of Technology so that this can start work as soon as possible and successfully fulfil its mission , contrary to the objectives set out by the Lisbon Strategy .
in writing . - ( PT ) Our position on the creation of the European Institute of Technology is highly critical as a result of the position taken by various research organisations .
For example , last year the League of European Research Universities presented a study which concluded that the plan for the European Institute of Technology was ' misconceived and doomed to failure ' .
Euroscience , a European organisation of scientists and political experts , called it ' a politically motivated idea , starting from a wrong premise ' .
The United Kingdom 's science adviser , Robert May , said that ' it is based on a misunderstanding ' about innovation .
This Institute will be virtual , composed of scientists based at EU universities , research laboratories and companies , and will not grant qualifications , contrary to what was originally proposed .
Following pressure from various countries that wanted to host the Institute , this became virtual , a type of gateway for consulting scientific communities in different areas .
The European Parliament has just adopted several amendments to the Commission proposal , but in our opinion these are insufficient to straighten something which was born crooked .
As for the funding , one of the options is the Community budget , including appropriations intended for research , which may end up being just another way of supporting the developed countries and thus worsening the inequalities .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the concept of a European Institute of Technology has changed in the course of the lively debate on how to promote innovation within the European Union .
Initially , the Institute was to be a European equivalent to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , within the framework of the Lisbon Agenda . In other words , it was to be part of our strategy to compete with the United States .
In the current fast-changing global environment , we are thinking instead in terms of a network of Knowledge and Innovation Centres , the so-called KICs , coordinated by a central body .
This was reflected in the separation of two budget lines in the amendments tabled by the European Parliament to the draft budget for 2008 ( separate financing for the network and for the coordinating body ) .
We seem to be closer to finding a solution to financing this enterprise since the European Commission proposed reviewing the 2007-2013 financial perspective , in particular , raising the limit for Heading 1A , whilst reducing it for other headings .
This confirms , once again , that Parliament was not mistaken when it highlighted the unduly low level of budgetary resources allocated to the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
I also wish to support Wrocław in its bid to host the headquarters of the European Institute of Technology .
I must point out , however , that better financing of R & D and the creation of a new institution is not enough to ensure that Europe becomes competitive and innovative .
That will be determined by the development of a business culture , a willingness to take risks and by practical links between research and development circles and private entrepreneurship .
in writing . - ( DE ) In my view , the decision to retain the idea of an EIT is a mistake .
None of the arguments presented is convincing as they start from false premises .
1 .
Even the original idea put forward by Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission , to launch the EIT as a European response to America 's MIT ignored reality , and the proposal presented for the vote today further worsens the original concept .
MIT evolved with a great deal of money and diverse support , and in Europe numerous ' mini-MITs ' are already carrying out world-class research .
Europe 's dilemma is the inadequate financial and moral support for innovation and top-class research .
2 .
The proposed EUR 309 million in funding from a reserve budgetary source blocks other parliamentary initiatives such as the strategically important Galileo project .
The funding proposal amounts to just an eighth of the estimated budget and therefore does not offer any incentive for serious additional private initiatives .
BP has invested USD 500 million in the biofuels sector in Berkeley in the United States alone .
3 ) With its own generous sources of funding and grants to the top-class European institutes already in existence , the EIT would have a prospect of success .
For example , the EU could follow the Canadian model and set up an innovation fund financed from monies left in the EU budget at the end of the year .
4 .
The planned network infrastructure is a virtual supranational institution without any real significance in the European and international research landscape .
It is an unhappy and bureaucratic compromise .
I have therefore voted against the proposal .
in writing . - I welcome in principle the idea of a European Institute of Technology .
However , I abstained on the resolution because I do not think we have yet sorted out the objectives , management and finances of the Institute to a satisfactory level .
in writing . - ( FR ) On Tuesday , 25 September I supported my colleague Reino Paasilinna by voting for the establishment of the European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) .
This report reflects a real desire to converge towards a knowledge society .
Arranging for tools to be put in place , within the European Union , to promote the integration of innovation , research and education will eventually help stimulate competitiveness within the European economy .
The activities of the EIT will be steered by a Governing Board of scientific and administrative personnel .
This Board will designate the Knowledge and Innovation Communities ( KICs ) that are responsible for implementing the strategic priorities of the EIT .
At the same time , however , it is a matter of regret that the financial resources being earmarked for this project are somewhat lacking .
This could in the long term prove to be the undoing of this promising initiative .
We all need to be aware of the absolute necessity of providing the European Union with Community projects that will ensure its development within the context of the Lisbon Strategy .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Union is now at a real crossroads in terms of its competitive capacity with regard to the rest of the world .
Despite enjoying many attraction factors , whether historic and cultural or economic and tourist-related , we cannot escape the major challenges of global competition with the new emerging Asian economies .
Our capacity to be an attractive environment for knowledge and innovation is under question .
I believe that the vote on the European Institute of Technology marked an important step in the construction of a framework of European actions to help our economy grow and develop , based on the triangle of innovation , research and education .
I believe that it should not be low wages or cheap labour that make the EU attractive to investment and the growth of our companies .
The future is companies which understand that they need to invest in making the population highly skilled , by helping society to interact with industry and companies in order to develop high-quality and highly innovative responses to the dynamic and demanding needs of the markets .
in writing . - ( FR ) When the European Commission proposed establishing a European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) the idea was to create a new centre of excellence for higher education , research and innovation .
This ambition is now being thwarted by the difficult question of funding and no satisfactory or permanent answer has yet been found to this problem .
This is extremely worrying because it diminishes the credibility of the EIT even before it has been established .
The idea of the EIT issuing an EIT mark could help solve the problem of visibility from which European research has been suffering , while at the same time providing real recognition for projects whose excellence and quality has merited such a label .
It appears to me that such a flexible system , which lends itself well to the diversity that exists within Europe , would stimulate healthy competition between universities and between research projects .
Another imperative , I believe , is to involve the private sector in the EIT project .
The role played by public authorities should be restricted to promoting and structuring the various instruments that are required .
All the rest should come from the private sector , namely the funding , organisation and management of the EIT .
Above all I do not want to see the EIT become just another in a long list of EU agencies .
In spite of these reservations , however , I support the report in order that the EIT may have a chance to succeed .
in writing . - The EPLP have chosen to abstain on both the Amended Proposal and Legislative Resolution for the Report : European Institute of Technology .
While in favour of the general objectives of the proposal and its focus on innovation , EU and Member States money would be better spent on existing Universities and EU research framework programmes .
We believe that the EIT administrative structure should be as least bureaucratic as possible , and therefore smaller than the proposed 21 appointed members .
There are also still serious concerns regarding the private and public financing of the EIT .
Given that the Commission 's proposal to finance the EIT suggests the reopening of the financial perspectives , we cannot support the report .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to take a moment to explain why I voted against the Duff report , although the Duff report is not really a controversial report as such .
It is because I am opposed to the European federal philosophy that underpins the report .
In short , I am opposed to a European federal state and so I am also automatically opposed to EU citizenship , and this right to vote and right to stand as a candidate for election for EU citizens in Member States other than their own is an integral part of that .
I believe that the Union must remain a community of national democracies , where the right to vote and the right to stand for election , whatever type of election , must continue to be reserved for the citizens of the states concerned .
It is actually a mark of the evolution of the European Union that EU citizenship is systematically confirmed and expanded , including now making the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union binding .

( PL ) Mr President , we have today voted on and adopted Mr Duff 's report on the exercise of the right to vote and stand as a candidate in elections to the European Parliament for citizens of the Union residing in a Member State of which they are not nationals .
I cannot support this report , because contrary to the intentions of the rapporteurs in my view , this method of voting and standing in elections to the European Parliament will not promote good neighbourly relations between countries , especially if they share a border .
Over many years , countries with significant national minorities have developed standards for avoiding conflicts of a nationalistic nature .
The voting method adopted may re-ignite such conflicts , which will run counter to the spirit of peaceful coexistence between the nations of Europe .
This is because it will be possible for individuals to stand for election and vote when they are not nationals of a particular state .
There are bound to be abuses of the system , for example by providing a fictional domicile simply in order to reduce the voice of a particular country , and to engineer an impact on the outcome of the elections .
Checking the relevant information is difficult and expensive .
In addition , this voting method will strengthen separatist movements , which is surely not what we wish for contemporary Europe .
I regret that for somewhat unclear reasons , we are imposing our will on the Member States from above in this regard , thus interfering in national electoral procedures .
Mr President , of all the claims made by supporters of the European Constitution , perhaps the silliest is that EU citizenship does not prejudice national citizenship .
One by one , the entitlements once bestowed by nationality have been eroded : the right of residence ; the right to elect your own representatives ; increasingly , too , the right to claim welfare .
Any neutral observer would conclude that EU citizenship is becoming the primary legal status of our constituents , with their national citizenships a secondary , almost folkloric category .
I accept that this is where the majority in this House wants to go but , for heaven 's sake , be honest about it !
Let us hear no more nonsense about the status of my constituents as British subjects being unaffected .
in writing . - ( ES ) I feel that adopting this report is a serious mistake and extremely irresponsible , and so I am voting against it .
Above all , we must remember that there is no European election system .
Things would be different if this were to be established at some point ( and I would support it ) .
Meanwhile , European elections must be in line with the election systems in each Member State .
The Duff report proposes the scrapping of dual or multiple candidacies in European Parliament elections .
The same candidate could stand in a number of states , and after the elections could choose which of the seats he or she wants to retain .
In addition to the obviously complicated arrangements this would involve , it is evident this is defrauding the electorate , and is adding nothing to the respectability of the Parliament we wish to construct .
Moreover , the proposal put to the vote today eliminates compulsory recognition of legal decisions ( both civil and criminal ) in relation to the capacity to stand as a candidate , making it possible for someone who has been banned from standing by a court in the state of which he or she is a national to stand in another state .
This is a contradiction of European justice and home affairs practices , and we can easily imagine the shameful situations it could create .
in writing . - ( RO ) Due to the heavy system of information exchange between Member States , in practice , very few citizens know how to use the right they hold under the Treaty to vote in the elections for the European Parliament if they are residents of another European country .
The voice of these people needs to be heard and their access to the political life of their country of residents needs to be facilitated ; this is why I support the replacement of the current system with the requirement of filling in a sworn statement .
For the residents who wish to candidate in the European elections , the obligation to obtain a national attestation is disproportionate to the general objective of the EC Directive 93 / 109 .
In practice , obtaining such an attestation from the institutions of the country of citizenship is very difficult and time consuming .
This formal obligation actually results in the cancellation of the right granted by the Treaty .
A future proposal of the European Commission should also deal with the issue of the establishment of political parties of non-national citizens .
Electoral laws of Member States must not discriminate between national parties made up of nationals of the given country and other parties .
Political representation in the European elections is a very important matter for countries with a large segment of population residing in another Member State of the European Union , such as Romania .
If the people of Europe do not vote in large numbers in their country of residence and if the level of participation in the European elections fails to match the aspirations of the Eurocrats it will not be because the application of voting rights and eligibility for the European elections has been overcomplicated by the need to exchange information between the Member States .
It will simply be because your bureaucracy and policies appear to them at best pointless and incomprehensible and at worst harmful , and because many European citizens not residing in their country of origin prefer to participate in the parliamentary elections being held in their own country .
As for the report , it uses this technical pseudo-simplification in an attempt to authorise multiple candidacies , in other words the appearance of the same candidate in several countries , something that would give an inordinate advantage under common law to foreign residents only , and it tries to bypass the laws of the Members States where ineligibility is concerned .
This is absolutely unacceptable .
We believe that citizenship is indissolubly linked to nationality and the rights , particularly electoral , that it generates can only be exercised within a national setting .
If European citizens want to participate in the democratic life of their host country then the option is always there : naturalisation .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which should reduce the burden on electoral authorities and individuals as regards the right to vote in the European elections .
I support scrapping the current information exchange system while keeping the individual declaration not to vote or stand twice .
( DE ) Mr President , the ending of set-aside is absolutely the right course of action for us to pursue .
The demand for food and feedingstuffs as well as for renewable raw materials is constantly growing , and it is therefore absolutely essential to have these areas in production .
Set-aside was a measure which farmers never wanted but which they had to go along with because it was necessary .
Farmers want to produce !
I hope that the abolition of set-aside will not only apply for one or two years but on a permanent basis .
It also gives the agricultural sector the opportunity to make its contribution to the EU 's ambitious targets for the reduction of its CO2 emissions .
in writing . - ( PT ) We not only agree that the cultivation of set-aside should be permitted for agricultural purposes for 2008 , we in fact consider that the derogation should apply for longer .
We therefore tabled a proposal for 2009 and 2010 and it has been agreed to include 2009 .
As a result farmers will be able to plan better in relation to the situation of exceptionally high prices in the cereals market .
However , this measure does not resolve the fundamental issue of the need to increase the production and supply of each Member State and employment in rural areas .
We must also draw attention to the shortage of cereals on the European market and to the negative effects of gambling on biofuels , as was decided by the Council , in terms of both the offer and price .
Once again we repeat the need for an in-depth review of the CAP ( common agricultural policy ) to take account of the soil and biodiversity characteristics in each country , to adapt the rotation of crops and to guarantee farmers sufficient income without threatening consumers ' interests in terms of healthy and high-quality food .
in writing . - ( FR ) Would you have believed that after years of accusing the common agricultural policy of all kinds of wrong-doing , of costing too much and especially of producing milk lakes and grain mountains that could not be sold on the market , we would now be discovering that we have to stop cutting back our production capacity in these areas ?
I am pleased to see the Commissioner 's immediate response following the surging prices , which have certainly been lucrative for our farmers : put an end to set-aside to encourage our farmers and growers to produce more grain in order to take the pressure off the market .
She should also react just as quickly to increase milk quotas and abolish the surcharges for exceeding quotas at national level .
Moreover , I hope that this will serve as a lesson to the Commission , which has also been trying to reduce wine production capacity by 200 000 hectares without any regard for the opportunities that European wine producers would have for exporting to emerging markets such as China and India .
in writing . - Given the changing market conditions I understand and support the Commission 's proposal for a zero set-aside for agriculture in 2008 .
Ending set-aside is expected to increase output by at least 10 million tonnes of cereals .
This should take pressure off the rising grain prices .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Commission in Brussels has been telling us since 1992 that there were grain mountains , to say nothing of the oceans of milk and other larders full to bursting .
The agricultural land of Europe therefore had to be put on set-aside and production had to be scaled back .
The southern hemisphere and the US were calling on the WTO for a monopoly on wheat and oilseed .
Remember that as part of the Uruguay Round , and with the Blair House Accord of 1992 , the European Commission agreed to limit our oilseed growing areas to 5 million hectares .
What was supposed to happen happened .
Agriculture is subject to the vagaries of climate .
In the Bible Joseph explained as much to Pharaoh .
Drought in Australia , falling production in Ukraine and no end to the growing demand in China , India and Africa : all of these factors are driving up the price of grain and maize .
After having paid our farmers not to produce from 1993 on , even after having removed aid to production and after having put millions of hectares on set-aside when one third of humanity is going hungry , the Commission in Brussels now discovers that there is a shortage of grain and that stocks have collapsed .
They are thus going back on their decision on set-aside .
It will be the same for wine .
It has already happened for butter and meat .
Confusion and Malthusianism are running the show .
in writing . - One of the great mysteries to the population of the European Union is how we can devise a system that pays farmers for leaving land idle .
Now whilst I understand that some reputable organisations like the RSPB in the UK use this system to fund their excellent work , nevertheless it cannot be right that we leave good land idle and pay farmers for keeping it that way .
That is why I support a zero per cent set-aside , but we must also in tandem ensure that our farmers and others are encouraged to keep land in good order and by making the land productive by helping them from other sources .
If we are serious about fundamental CAP reform then an end to set-aside payments has to be at the forefront of any reform procedure .
That is why I will support the Commission 's proposals .
Mr President , I would like Members to take some note of how I voted .
The bottom line is that we must and will protect children .
We should be uncompromising on chemicals and pollutants that can in any way affect their functioning and development .
Companies must be held to account .
But we cannot stop there .
We have to take a serious look at the kind of pressures companies are under .
Companies functioning in China face these pressures from the Chinese Government .
The rules of the game in China are far different from the rest of the world .
If a company is to operate there , it must surrender most of its decision-making and operations procedures to the Government .
China puts incentives into place which control the vertical operations of manufacturing .
The tools used by Mattel to produce those 21 million toys are Chinese made and owned .
The moulds used to form the plastic and put in the machinery to push out all those toys are owned by China .
The reason for this is that the Chinese subsidise companies ' parts if they remain in China , and to break with this system increases their costs by 20 % .
So we see that China controls businesses far more than perhaps we realise , and we need to take a lesson from this in toy safety .
We must not tolerate this , just as we must not tolerate any of the human rights and environment practices of China any longer .
in writing . - I have repeatedly called on the European Commission to press forward with legislation which would require all imported products to have a country of origin label .
This is extremely important as it has been found that in 2006 , 17 % of all detected unsafe products , including toys , were of unidentified origin , while 58 % are of third country origin .
While 48 % of detected unsafe products had their origin in China it should not be assumed that the fault lies solely with quality control deficiencies of Chinese manufacturers .
It has been shown for instance that of the 21 million toys recalled over the past 3 months , by the US Mattel Company ( which also markets its products in Europe under the Fisher-Price brand ) , 18 million were because of Mattel design faults , and not defective manufacture .
It has been clear for some time that tougher penalties are needed for both manufacturers and importers , to ensure that they take their responsibilities to consumers seriously ; in this case to defenceless children .
But some Member States continue to resist change at the behest of importers and companies which outsource manufacturing .
Globalisation of trade and the lack of transparency and information on the origins of the various products being marketed across the European Union means an increased risk of acquiring dangerous , defective or counterfeit goods .
The joint resolution on product safety , especially that of toys , which I voted for on Wednesday , has been adopted by almost all the groups .
It is another example of the commitment being shown by the European Union , and especially by the European Parliament , towards consumer protection .
By calling for requirements to be imposed in respect of product safety , the integrity of the CE mark , the exclusion of counterfeit goods and the introduction of traceability this resolution will provide more effective protection for consumers , especially children .
However , the call for better cooperation with the third countries concerned must not be allowed to overshadow the responsibility that falls on those companies that are placing the orders , for it is up to them to ensure that their product specifications comply with these health and safety requirements .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on ' Dangerous toys made in China ' because I consider it essential to take all necessary legislative and administrative action to ensure that consumer goods that are marketed within the EU not only comply fully with existing EU standards but also do not put the health and safety of consumers at risk .
I therefore feel that Directive 88 / 378 / EC on the safety of toys should be revised as quickly as possible and that it should include efficient and effective requirements for product safety .
in writing . - ( PT ) Ensuring product safety , particularly the safety of toys , is a priority in the protection of public health and children 's health in particular .
The necessary checking and quality control of products is an essential mechanism in achieving this objective .
Companies and competent national public authorities should carry out this control and certification as a preventative measure .
As legislation defines all the safety rules with which products must naturally comply , it is up to the company or companies designing , producing and marketing these products to assume their responsibilities .
The initial reaction to unsafe products or products harmful to health , particularly toys , being imported from third countries is to try and shift the blame onto others , to the point that the Financial Times noticed that the Mattel company had formally apologised to the Chinese Government and people .
It should be stressed that many imported products are made in third countries but their owners are large EU-based multinationals , which , greedy for profits , transfer their production elsewhere .
Furthermore , focusing the discussion of poor quality on imported products only obscures the fact that many products made in the EU also do not comply with the standards in force .
in writing . - The resolution of the Parliament , approved today by a large majority , rightly concentrates on the immediate issues of ensuring the safety of products under existing EU directives .
The EPP-ED group has insisted throughout that the resolution should concentrate on practical proposals that would reinforce consumer safety , without delay .
We have , in addition , proposed the evaluation of a European Consumer Safety label , to be applied on a voluntary basis by providers of consumer goods .
We are pleased that the Parliament has endorsed this proposal .
We will take an intense interest in the future Toys Directive , and will examine the Commission 's proposed reforms with an open mind .
In our view , the attempt to introduce very detailed and specific requirements for this future Directive in this resolution was entirely unnecessary .
We have therefore voted against these proposed additions , but this in no way diminishes our interest and concern to bring about an effective and workable directive when we receive the Commission proposal in 2008 .
Parliament 's resolution only contains a few proposals for putting an end to the import of dangerous products , half of which come from China .
It focuses on toys , yet fails to mention clothing containing toxic dyes , dangerous medicines , foodstuffs containing ingredients unfit for human consumption , electrical goods that catch fire , toothpaste made from antifreeze : the list just goes on .
It also makes do with feeble measures that are based on cooperation and certification and points the finger of responsibility at the Member States rather than at China , at European companies rather than at others .
This is just not enough in this particular instance .
It is time to apply exemplary sanctions against any country that , after becoming a member of the WTO , continues to engage in dubious commercial practices , whether this be dumping , counterfeiting or forced labour .
It is true that the few trade protection instruments available to the European Union fall within the competence of Mr Mandelson , who has quite rightly been cited for his passivity in this area .
If at the end of the day we are then to approve this document it is because , in spite of everything , it is better to have some derisory measures in place than none at all .
At least that is some form of reaction .
in writing . - I welcome the overwhelming vote in favour of this resolution .
We have sent a clear message to toy manufacturers and to China that failure to ensure the highest safety standards for children 's toys will not be tolerated .
China is on notice that it must improve its inspection of goods and detection methods to dramatically reduce the flow of unsafe goods on to the European market .
in writing . - ( FR ) Children in Vietnam , Africa and elsewhere are standing on land mines .
In Europe our own children are being suffocated and poisoned and are developing allergies because of Barbie dolls and toys .
The cinema has already sounded the alarm bells with the film ' Le père noël est une ordure ' .
It is now up to us , the Members of this Parliament , to react and to do so on safety principles as well as to protect the demographic future of our continent , which has already been afflicted by the games played by adults at large .
It is time to do this now .
Even yesterday was not soon enough , for how many faces with skin as smooth as a Brancusi sculpture have been ravaged by celluloid dolls that burst into flames at the slightest hint of a match .
Toys kill and the children of Darfur do not know how lucky they are in not being able to play at eating .
in writing . - ( FR ) Following the large-scale safety recall of Chinese-made toys by the US manufacturer Mattel the European Commission is now taking stock of its product safety legislation , especially where imported toys are concerned .
The European system of regulation in this area is solid enough , with RAPEX and the CE mark , but it needs to be strengthened .
The European Parliament is therefore going much further and , as part of its resolution on the safety of toys , wants to see adopted a common regulatory framework for the marketing of products and the surveillance of the markets .
For me restoring consumer confidence and protecting the health of our children is an essential condition .
In continuation of the REACH regulations , which impose strict controls on the use of chemicals in our consumer goods , I have therefore voted today for an unconditional ban on the use of any toxic substances in the manufacture of toys .
Moreover , in support of Amendments 8 and 6 , I am in favour of a total ban on the use of dangerous phthalates in any toys that can be put in the mouth .
The chemical safety of toys is not just a regulatory matter ; it is also a hygiene issue and as such is vital for the safety of our children .
in writing . - ( DE ) Today 's resolution underlines the urgent need for the revision of the Toys Directive .
CMRs - in other words , substances classified as carcinogens , mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction - must be banned under the new Toys Directive .
Commissioner Verheugen endorsed this demand during yesterday 's debate .
It will also be necessary to end the confusion over the CE marking .
European consumers assume this marking either to be a statement about product origin or a seal of quality , neither of which is denoted by the CE marking .
( SK ) Energy security and energy form the axis around which both the domestic and foreign policy of every union revolve and are a vital factor in maintaining prosperity and , where in critically short supply , a matter of survival .
We need to take immediate steps to free ourselves of our raw material dependence on Russia , which may subsequently become a political dependence .
I find it alarming that we are allowing energy to be used as a means of exerting political pressure on countries of transit and destination .
I support the development of the Black Sea dimension , cooperation with the countries of the Southern Caucasus , and stepping up our involvement with Norway , the Maghreb and Mashreq countries , and the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
Energy market predictability must be ensured through agreements with China , India and Brazil and a partnership should be established with the US Government .
Black-and-white-thinking environmentalists should realise once and for all that burning ' eco ' fuels and biomass massively increases the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere and that a reasonable , decisive proportion of nuclear energy is necessary .
The influence of the fanatical Greens , who have even managed to get a ban on nuclear energy included in the constitution of a Member State - something which will not certainly affect its economy and even that of its neighbours - is of tragicomic proportions .
( FI ) Mr President , energy security is one of the crucial factors in European security generally .
Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report responds to this challenge to Europe 's future .
The EU 's problem is that its level of self-sufficiency in energy is on the decline .
The EU already imports half its energy needs from outside and by 2025 dependence on imports is estimated to exceed 70 % .
To deal with this problem we need a firm common voice , a new kind of energy diplomacy and , to engage in it , a special EU High Representative for external energy policy .
Making external energy policy more the mandate of the Union , however , cannot mean weakening the sovereignty of the Member States to decide their energy production means and structure .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for this especially .
The report allows for independent decision-making by the Member States on their energy supply structures .
in writing . - Transparency , reciprocity and the rule of law are cornerstones of European energy policy and consequently in our foreign policy .
It is however not the right time to add new institutions and I am therefore against the creation of the new position of a High Official of Foreign Energy Policy which also threatens the influence of the European Parliament when it comes to foreign energy policy .
in writing . - ( FR ) I have voted in favour of this report , which is aimed at putting in place a common foreign policy on energy .
The solutions applied need to be international in scope and the European Union must play a leading role in this .
It is clear that energy has become a real weapon in today 's international negotiations .
Ever since the gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine in January 2006 the European Union has been aware of its vulnerability where energy supplies are concerned .
In order to develop a foreign policy on energy the report essentially proposes to appoint a High Official for Foreign Energy Policy , who would be responsible for coordinating the EU 's activities in this area .
This High Official for Foreign Energy Policy would wear two hats , as the person in question would be acting under the authority of both the newly created High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy ( CFSP ) and the Vice-President of the European Commission .
I welcome this positive development , which in particular will help to promote the dialogue between the producer countries - witness the Euro-Mediterranean partnership - and the consumers .
This will enable the EU to defend its interests in the area of energy security when negotiating with external suppliers .
in writing . - ( PT ) Energy is currently a central strategic issue .
The various EU countries , due to their high energy dependence , aspire to dominate the exploitation of existing energy resources , hence the proposal to create an energy strand within the common foreign and security policy .
If adopted , this would also form a way of overcoming the contradictions existing between the main powers .
To do this , the EU should announce its ' market ' , its ' competition ' and its enlargement to other countries in the framework of the so-called ' energy communities ' , the ' Energy Charter Treaty ' - ensuring ' security of investment ' and guaranteeing a ' right to compensation in the event of expropriation and / or nationalisation ' - or the inclusion of an ' energy security clause ' in commercial agreements .
All of this can be controlled , hence its fear of the creation of a ' gas version of OPEC ' .
The majority of Parliament also defends ' establishing an Energy Security Partnership with the US ' and , of course , a ' critical and constructive dialogue ' with the countries in the South Caucasus , Caspian and Central Asia regions ' which balances the EU 's interest in diversifying its oil and gas supplies and the goal of achieving political reforms in those countries ' .
More words for whom ?
Iraq , Afghanistan , Africa ... ?
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the European Union is a major consumer of energy and is dependent on external sources of power .
The latter are characterised by uncertainty and potential destabilisation . In the specific case of Russia and those countries of the CIS that are rich in natural resources , an additional factor contributing to the uncertainty is a tendency to use energy as a weapon for political purposes , as we have already witnessed .
This should have mobilised the European Union to close ranks and stand shoulder to shoulder in crisis situations .
Such a response has been very slow to develop , however , because of the diverse national interests of countries that are not as likely to be the victims of energy blackmail as the post-Communist countries .
Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report is a step in the right direction .
It represents a call to base the EU-Russian relationship on the foundation of mutual trust and respect for the principles laid down in the Energy Charter .
The context of the current debate is defined by the parallel efforts of the European Commission to liberalise the Union 's energy market , with Gazprom in the background .
This leads to stronger pressure for implementation of the principle of separating production and distribution .
The countries that are reluctant to liberalise are the same ones that are inclined to resort to bilateral energy contracts with Russia and to cooperate with Russian State-owned companies regarding capital .
It is no coincidence that this involves the remnants of the public energy monopolies in continental Europe .
The effect is to delay the desired free choice of energy suppliers and the development of a Community policy based on solidarity for this strategic sector .
in writing . - Clearly the European Union needs to co-ordinate its approach to external sources of energy much better than at present .
However , I can see no value in the proposal for a High Official for foreign energy policy believing it would only cause confusion with the role played at present by Mr Solana , and I therefore voted against this proposal .
I did on the other hand vote in favour of the reference to unbundling energy production and energy transmission and distribution .
in writing . - The report advocates a ' common European foreign policy on energy ' .
Although so far there is not even a legal base for such a policy , it aims to push ahead with it even before it can be inserted in the new reform Treaty .
Instead of solving the problem of expensive and polluting energy , the report wants to shape the EU as a hegemonic , global actor .
Such an expansive geopolitical approach of the EU would create more tension and conflicts worldwide .
A strong anti-Russian current is seen as a red thread in the text .
Almost every idea which could hinder the normal development of relations between Russia and EU Member States has been included .
Critics therefore speak of a touch of cold war .
By the inclusion of a so-called ' energy security clause ' in all agreements with producer and transit countries the EU will define its interest far beyond its borders .
We are concerned about the foundation of an EU energy foreign policy that would be founded on geopolitical pressure , a background of military threat .
The report calls for a close partnership with the USA on energy security , being aware that the USA is waging war in Iraq to secure cheap energy resources .
in writing . - ( PT ) Given the growing importance of energy in modern society , on the one hand , and the growing international interdependence which is also now a common characteristic , on the other , it is impossible to exclude energy policy from the external dimension of the EU 's policy , either at Member State level or in terms of the common foreign policy .
I therefore agree with the resolution where it states that ' whilst the Member States should retain their sovereign right to make strategic choices concerning the energy mix , to exploit their energy resources and to decide on the supply structures , there is a need to [ promote a common approach and not necessarily a single policy ] covering security of supply , transit and investment related to energy security , and the promotion of energy efficiency and energy savings as well as clean and renewable energy sources , particularly in relations with countries whose energy consumption is growing rapidly ' .
However , as for the idea of a High Official for Foreign Energy Policy , this dimension must be included within the work of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , as I do not believe that a more specific approach than this makes any sense .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the adoption of Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report on a common European foreign policy on energy .
Pursuant to the action plan on energy policy adopted by the Council in March 2007 , we must make every effort to develop a common European foreign policy on energy for the European Union , equipped with the instruments required to ensure its effective operation .
I would like to draw attention to the need for solidarity and cooperation between Member States , the diversification of energy sources and ongoing development and better cooperation in this area .
I agree it is necessary to decide on a detailed road map , laying down the various stage of the introduction of such a policy .
The Commission should present its proposals in this regard at the earliest opportunity .
It is also important for the Member States to consult amongst themselves and with the European Commission on issues concerning strategic decisions on contracts with third parties in this area .
The proposal to appoint a High Official on Foreign Energy Policy is very appropriate and deserves further consideration . This person would be responsible for coordinating all policies related to all external aspects of energy security .
Such a post should help to enhance the protection of the interests of EU Member States during negotiations with foreign partners .
in writing . - British Conservatives recognise the need for the 27 Member States to show more solidarity in terms of external energy policy as all Member States in the coming years become increasingly dependant on imported oil and gas from third countries who could otherwise pick off the more dependant and vulnerable states to the detriment of the Union as a whole .
This does not mean that we endorse a common energy policy , in particular , that the EU for instance can determine individual Member States ' energy mix such as the proportion of fossil fuels versus renewables .
Broadly , Conservatives support the aims of this report although we reject the need for a single powerful co-ordinating figure to speak on this matter .
Neither do we see the need for a new legal basis to be created within the Treaties to address this issue .
Attempts to add new EU competences instead of making proper use of existing ones are unnecessary .
Conservatives also believe in a market-oriented approach , not further EU institutionalisation .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party supports much of this resolution , in particular the priority given to supporting renewable sources of energy , promoting energy as one of the cornerstones of the European Neighbourhood Policy and calling for increased safeguards against pollution .
We abstained on citation 12 due to the abandonment of the Constitutional Treaty , which makes the proposed citation irrelevant .
We abstained on Amendment 2 and on paragraph 13 as we feel that the position of a new High Official for energy policy could lead to unnecessary confusion .
We voted in favour of paragraph 62 maintaining the reference to unbundling of energy production as we wish to be consistent with a previously stated position which considers transmission ownership unbundling to be the most effective tool to promote investments , fair access to the grid and transparency in the market .
( SK ) I voted in favour of Mrs Gruber 's report .
I welcome the drawing-up of a general framework directive and the directive on the entry conditions for highly skilled workers , the directive on the entry and residence conditions for seasonal workers , and the directive on the entry and residence conditions for remunerated trainees .
It is glaringly obvious that the European Union must lay down precise rules and actively regulate who will be admitted to work in the EU .
We all know that Europe is already experiencing a ' demographic winter ' and urgently requires manpower from non-member countries .
However , it is absolutely vital that we admit only skilled labour and I propose that we select professions which are in short supply on the labour market in Europe .
We must be consistent in this regard ; otherwise if we willingly and thoughtlessly inundate the European Union with unskilled labour we could see problems arising from the idle lifestyle of unemployed immigrants , who subsequently commit crime and engage in illegal trade and the grey economy outside the law and are often involved in drugs and people trafficking .
They create ghettos and often end up as members of terrorist groups .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report because it was made clear in Parliament that it will remain a matter for Member States to decide which and how many labour migrants will be accepted into their sovereign territory .
If the ' Blue Card ' is introduced , it is important to ensure that it is applied as a control instrument for highly skilled workers residing in the EU , allowing temporary - not permanent - residence in the European Union as a whole .
I would like to address a proposal to Commissioner Frattini - who unfortunately is no longer present - from the European People 's Party : that the ' Blue Card ' be marked with an additional national symbol , such as the flag , so that it is apparent which of the Member States has issued the work and residence permit .
( EN ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleagues Lilli Gruber and Javier Moreno .
As someone who is temporarily disabled , I have had to use an auxiliary contract for an immigrant and I have understood better , if that were possible , what Mr Lobo Antunes was saying today about the need for solidarity and humanity , although I also understand Mr Frattini 's explanation concerning complete respect for the rule of law .

In my times of solitude I have often thought that Don Quixote , the famous character , the greatest literary figure of all time , would not have existed without Sancho , and today Sancho would undoubtedly be an emigrant coming to his aid .
Therefore , at all times there must be respect for the rule of law and respect for human beings .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I did not indeed approve the Gruber report on the policy plan for legal migration for two main reasons .
Firstly , I do not think it is wise to encourage a brain drain from the poorer countries into Europe to an even greater extent than is already happening now in any case .
I do not think that it is helpful to anyone , and certainly not the poorer countries .
Secondly , I continue to be amazed at the naivety with which immigration is looked upon in this Parliament , as a kind of solution to Europe 's undeniable demographic problem .
In any case , not a word is said about the huge cost of immigration for the receiving countries , nor about the fact that , more than ever before , we are having to be vigilant to preserve our European culture , our values and standards , which are increasingly coming under pressure due to the massive number of immigrants from other cultures .
As well as all the other problems , this also has an economic cost .
Today , in our European capital , Brussels , about 53 % of the inhabitants are of what you could call non-Belgian origin ; by 2050 that threatens to be 75 % .
We do not need new mass immigration , but the exact opposite .
- ( NL ) Mr President , in the Gruber report , Parliament is following the particularly one-sided quantitative economic approach to the immigration problem .
I emphatically reject the assertion that only a new wave of immigration can guarantee the economic future of Europe and I want to point out that immigration is about far more than just figures and tables .
The proposals in this report will only make the already serious integration problems worse .
You have to have read it to believe it .
While some of the immigrant population do not want to work and do not want to retrain , some people actually want to set up an information and management centre for migration in Mali .
It is undeniably the case that many so-called temporary workers will disappear into illegality when their permit expires , as happens now .
Experience , for example in Switzerland , clearly shows that family members of seasonal workers continue to come in illegally .
Last but not least , the fact is that more legal immigration of highly educated persons will undeniably lead to a further brain drain from the developing countries with all the consequences that brings .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the Gruber report because it took on board so many issues raised by the PPE-DE Group and by myself .
However , although I realise that integration is important , I believe it must occur with the consent of our citizens .
Therefore , as well as integration there needs to be firm , decisive law enforcement .
For example , Member States must enforce the rule stipulating that if immigrants cannot demonstrate their ability to support their family they must be repatriated after three months .
This is not happening in some countries , and if it does not happen the dissatisfaction felt by citizens will render any European initiative on integration meaningless .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite containing important points on migration issues which we have been defending for a long time , the report not only does not denounce the EU 's current guidelines and policies - which are criminalising and repressive towards migrants - but in fact forms another aspect of these .
To be specific , the report adopts as its own the concept of the existence of different ' categories ' of migrants - such as the ' most highly skilled ' , ' seasonal ' and others - and their management according to the labour needs of the various EU countries , particularly through the creation of a Blue Card : what a dehumanising view of migration and migrants .
Furthermore , the report advocates creating a common migration policy which we consider to be inadequate and unrealistic , given both the results of other ' common ' policies and the differing situations existing in the Member States .
We reiterate that migration policy is the responsibility of each country and its democratic institutions .
As we have said , a common policy is not necessary , but another policy is , in a framework of cooperation between the Member States , which will promote the rights of migrants , particularly through the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families .
In considering that ' the future situations of the European Union labour markets can be broadly described as in demand of [ ... ] legal immigration ' , Mrs Gruber , like Mr Sarkozy in France , is seeking to give economic justification to the immigration policies being applied in our various Member States .
However , the labour force coming from those countries that have been slow to develop is for the most part ill-equipped for the jobs that our economies need doing .
Moreover , it has to be remembered that legal immigration is essentially the immigration not of workers but of people .
This policy that is bringing us nearly two million additional immigrants every year is in fact turning into a colonisation of Europe .
Between now and 2050 the non-European population , which already stands at some 40 million people , will have tripled .
With the accession of Turkey the Europe being constructed by Brussels will include 220 million Asians and Africans , most of whom will be from the Muslim world .
This colonisation of population constitutes a lethal threat to the Christian and humanist values of our civilisation .
If we are to protect the legitimate rights of the peoples of Europe to self-determination and to remain themselves , we have to restore our borders , reverse the flow of migrants and introduce major policies that are pro-family and pro-life .
We need a new Europe , a ' European ' Europe , a Europe of sovereign nations , for that is the only thing that can guarantee our rights to defend our culture and history .
in writing . - ( DE ) The fact that around 18.5 million third-country nationals are living in the EU clearly demonstrates that Europe needs a common immigration policy .
We must assuage our citizens ' concerns and fears about immigration and show them that regulated and sensible immigration is entirely necessary in some sectors in Europe .
However , I do not share the view , apparently put forward as an article of faith by the conservatives in particular , that the issue of demographic change must be linked to the issue of maintaining the European social model .
What is needed instead here is the launch of a debate about the extent to which the substantially increased wealth generation throughout the European economy , which must be considered separately from demographic change , should make a solidarity-based contribution to the European social model .
I have abstained from voting on Amendment 8 , since while I do recognise that the problem of a brain drain from developing countries into Europe is a very serious one , I distrust the motivation of the ITS Group in tabling this amendment .
We must strive to prevent highly educated people from leaving their own countries in massive numbers , thereby causing economic damage , but it should certainly not be about opposing immigration into Europe by definition .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which is designed to make life easier for legal migrants .
Despite their status , legal migrants are often intentionally and unintentionally discriminated against .
The rapporteur calls for a range of measures for legal migrants including improved employment rights , transfer of pension and welfare rights , recognition of qualifications , long-term and multiple-entry visas , all of which I support .
in writing . - Our vote today reflects our wish to see an efficient , humane and rights-based approach to immigration in Europe .
Immigrants of all types must be treated equally and in accordance with the highest human rights standards and decency .
Furthermore , as a general principle , European Member States should accept immigrants on the basis of the need of the immigrants in addition to the needs of the economies of the countries of Europe .
Immigration policy across Europe must not add to the loss of vital skills , the ' brain drain ' , in developing countries , Member States and the EU Commission must not pursue policies which undermine development .
in writing . - We have voted in favour of Amendment 8 .
In general our views are very far away from the group which tabled it , especially in the case of refugees , immigrants and ethnic or religious minorities .
ITS tries to block the admission of refugees who are in danger , and , on the contrary , we try to help those victims of suppression , catastrophes , and poverty .
So we understand very well that the majority in our group doesn 't like to support ITS amendments on migration .
Unlike the situation of refugees and traditional forms of immigration , in the case of the proposed attraction of highly skilled workers the EU Member States are creating a problem for their countries of origin .
People who are skilled in countries like India , South Africa or Brazil are highly needed there for the necessary development .
We now see that such problems are even arising inside the newest EU Member States , Romania and Bulgaria , who are losing their medical and engineering people at a rapid rate to more wealthy countries .
Privileged countries and companies are stealing the brains of those people .
As we don 't want to support this brain drain , we voted in favour of this amendment .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Gruber report views immigration , in some parts , solely in terms of the usefulness of the immigrating workers as capital .
For example , the report stresses ' the importance of establishing stable and lawful labour relations between businesses and workers to increase productivity and EU competitiveness ' and ' calls , hence , upon the Commission to consider the effects circular migration could have in this regard ' .
Whereas the repressive measures against migrants and asylum seekers encounter no opposition , ' any measure designed to increase the attractiveness of the EU to the most highly skilled workers , so as to meet the needs of the EU labour market in order to ensure Europe 's prosperity as well as to respect the Lisbon targets ' are to be supported .
While the ' risk of a brain drain ' is to be averted , ' return ' is envisaged for migrants who can only enter Fortress Europe illegally .
As regards the endorsement of the Policy Plan on Legal Migration , a key focus is on admission procedures ' capable of responding promptly to fluctuating demands in the labour market ' .
Immigration cannot be regulated according to the criterion of its usefulness as EU capital .
Instead of immigration for the benefit of Europe 's businesses , fundamental and human rights for migrants and asylum seekers must be the priority .
I reject any categorisation of people based on usefulness criteria .
in writing . - ( PT ) The debate on migration too often focuses on issues of illegal flows and therefore frequently forgets legal migration , which makes an important contribution to our economy and to our cultural enrichment .
In this context , we agree with two fundamental concepts : a clear and effective policy on legal migration is one of the keys to solving the issue of illegal immigration , and a generous welcome based on common principles promoting the integration and adaptation of those arriving is essential .
However , it is also necessary to recognise that migration flows , migrant communities and host countries have different traditions , customs and memories and that these differences cannot be ignored .
Another issue in this debate is qualified migration .
The idea of a Blue Card facilitating entry and movement could prove interesting , although it seems rather too complex .
In any event , the central issue must be the attraction factor , particularly at academic level .
It is therefore essential to make educational institutions aware of the need to attract students from other parts of the world .
I of course support this objective .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Swedish Green Party supports and wants a liberal immigration policy .
There are many good things in the report which pursue this aim .
However , I believe that a framework directive in this field will reduce the possibilities for people to migrate , not the other way round .
In addition , the proposal poses the risk of intensifying the brain drain which is afflicting the developing countries and is cynically exploited by the EU for its own development .
I am therefore abstaining in the final vote .
in writing . - It is a dangerous fallacy that demographic change in our domestic population requires large-scale immigration of people from different , often hostile , cultures and societies , with all the implications that this has for our national cohesion and identity , the full integration of our settled immigrant population , the impact on our public services , as well as on public health , safety and security .
I wholly oppose the transfer of powers or responsibility from national authorities to the EU in relation to our national border controls and immigration and asylum policy .
I therefore voted against this report .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report because the European Parliament has agreed a comprehensive strategy here to combat human trafficking and illegal immigration .
As the European Parliament , we have thus sent out a clear message that ' illegal ' means the same as ' not legal ' and must be dealt with accordingly .
In my view , it is particularly important to have clarified that there will be no quota-based allocation of illegal immigrants across all Member States and that mass legalisations of the type witnessed in recent years will no longer be permissible .
This ensures that there is no ' pull effect ' and also allows human trafficking to be tackled indirectly .
- ( NL ) Mr President , the report on policy priorities in the fight against illegal immigration of third country nationals that we have just approved is certainly not the worst report that has ever been passed here and it does , in fact , contain a number of very interesting recommendations , but I still think that the report fails to clearly tell the whole story and so I have not approved it myself .
The immigration problem in Europe threatens to be the problem of this coming century - it may already today be the problem of the coming century - and illegal immigration is an important part of that .
We might , therefore , have expected a much firmer standpoint to be taken , especially against the successive waves of regularisation in the various countries of Europe .
After all , these have the effect of sucking people in that will eventually roll out over the whole Union , over all Member States .
It is simple actually , and we should have had the courage to put it into words .
Illegal immigration cannot be tolerated .
Illegal immigrants must be tracked down and we must be resolute in sending them back to their countries of origin in a humane manner .
Those who dare not say that , and thus will certainly not dare to carry it out , will create enormous problems that will eventually cost our prosperity and our civilisation dear .
- ( NL ) Mr President , going through the Moreno Sánchez report automatically brings to mind the Dutch saying ' zachte heelmeesters maken stinkende wonden ' , which means that desperate times require drastic measures .
As my colleague Mr Vanhecke already said , although a few of the proposals in the report represent a step in the right direction , in general Parliament is still taking a half-hearted approach , which does not bode well for an efficient and firm European policy to combat illegal immigration .
Parliament has failed , for instance , to make clear that the regularisation measures being implemented in many European countries really are one of the most important , if not the most important , causes of illegal immigration , because of the ' pull effect ' that they create in the immigrants ' countries of origin .
Illegal immigrants should not be regularised , but they should be actively tracked down and deported in a resolute but humane manner .
Contrary to what Parliament insinuates , the explicit proclamation of this political message has nothing to do with so-called xenophobia .
In addition to a firm deportation policy , tight border controls , and agreements with states to take back their nationals , refugee centres in the region of origin should offer some relief , but this has also been rejected by Parliament .
For these reasons I voted against this report .
We Social Democrats want a humane immigration and refugee policy in the EU based on solidarity , which seeks to increase mobility across borders responsibly and which guarantees protection to all who need it .
However , we do not want a permanent EU-financed border control force .
The Member States are responsible for guarding their own borders .
Community deployments should be subject to need and based on inquiries .
We therefore chose to abstain in the vote on paragraph 37 .
As regards paragraph 18 on a review of the basic principle of the Dublin II Regulation , we think that a discussion of the principle is justified but that it should be conducted in a wider context and as part of a discussion of the common immigration and refugee policy as a whole .
in writing . - ( FR ) I fully support this excellent report and would like to add three comments of my own on the subject .
Firstly , we have to rid ourselves of the illusion that an active policy on legal immigration will put a stop to the illegal flow of migrants into our countries .
An active policy on legal immigration will , by definition , be determined by our own needs , whereas illegal immigration will correspond to the needs of those - and there are currently tens of millions of such people , mainly in Africa - who want to move here to escape war , persecution , poverty or , quite simply , the lack of future prospects for themselves and their children .
Secondly , the control of the EU 's external borders and the fight against networks of illegal immigrant smugglers will unfortunately remain a political priority for many years to come because in reality the trade in human misery is in the hands of criminal gangs .
The fight against illegal immigration is therefore not directed ' against ' the illegal immigrants as such : it is part of the battle against organised crime , which is something we have to win together .
Thirdly and finally , we must at the same time maintain our relentless efforts to combat poverty and this can only be done through co-development in Africa .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption of this report , which presents a balanced and realistic view of the issue of immigration and has achieved a broad consensus , as the rapporteur hoped .
The report has come just at the right time when you look at the latest events and see the Member States try , one by one , to adapt their legislation to cope as best they can with the influx of migrants .
In reality we all know that the scale of the migration phenomenon exceeds the capability of the countries concerned to control these events individually and that a global and coherent approach is therefore needed at European level , as the report rightly states .
The text sets out a number of priorities : combating the trafficking of human beings , respect for the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms when applying measures to prevent illegal immigration , strengthening cooperation with third countries , taking the firm steps that are required to combat illegal employment and , finally , the need for a responsible return policy .
For these reasons I supported the adoption of the report during the final vote in plenary .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite containing certain points with which we agree , this report also assumes the repressive security-oriented view of ' illegal immigration ' .
Although less so with regard to certain aspects , the report advocates developing the main axes of the current EU guidelines and decisions on immigration , including : the so-called ' European return policy ' or , in other words , repatriation ; the activity of Frontex in terms of border patrol and control ; the so-called ' temporary reception centres ' ; the development of biometric tools , or the so-called ' readmission agreements ' .
The report also proposes setting up ' European patrols ' , a ' European monitoring system ' at the sea borders and even a system for ' automated checks on persons entering or leaving Union territory ' .
In other words , the report aims to reinforce the EU 's security-oriented policy of criminalising ' illegal immigration ' by turning it into a common European policy which is repressive , involves sinister information systems and includes measures and infrastructure for the detention and expulsion of immigrants .
We wholeheartedly reject this .
It was the application of a repressive policy like this which led to the authorities of a Member State prosecuting seven Tunisian fishermen for having saved 44 people at sea , despite this action complying with international maritime law .
in writing . - ( FR ) The official figures are evidence of it : Europe is being inundated with illegal immigrants .
It has proved to be completely incapable of controlling its external borders .
The annual report presenting the activities of Eurodac in 2006 , which is the biometric tool that Europe uses for monitoring asylum applications , shows that the number of persons recorded as having illegally crossed one of Europe 's external borders is up 64 % on 2005 .
The report presented by Mr Moreno puts forward a number of approaches that are supposed to put an end to this phenomenon , which is growing exponentially .
I think they are all as useless as each other , not to say counterproductive .
For example , how can we be happy with the idea that to encourage legal immigration , and to do so mainly by means of the European Blue Card , which would essentially be a European work permit for immigrants , will reduce the level of illegal immigration ?
That is idiotic .
If you open the doors to some , you are opening them to everyone .
What is the point of setting up a biometric database to combat illegal immigration ?
Why plan to allocate more manpower and resources to the European border control agency , Frontex , when the borders in question , whether internal or external , are still not being properly protected by the Member States ?
Once again the European authorities have succeeded in identifying a problem but have proved incapable of resolving it , carried along as they are by an ideology based on ' immigrationism ' and internationalism .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , immigration , both legal and illegal , has been recognised as one of the main challenges confronting the European Union .
Quite apart from the procedural and legal issues , the tragic human dimension of this phenomenon is becoming increasingly manifest .
I have visited centres for African refugees in Malta , and discussed matters with the services patrolling the Mediterranean and the responsible officials .
It was while I was there that the news of the tragedy that befell that Chechen family in the Bieszczady region came to light , confirming the universal nature of this phenomenon .
Hailing as I do from a country that was for centuries a source of political and economic emigration , it is hard to remain indifferent to the tragedy of refugees for whom the Union is a promised land .
It is from that perspective that I consider the two reports on which the debate in the European Parliament is based .
These documents provide an overview of the scale of the problem of immigration and of the current state of Community policy in this regard .
I agree with the premise that because of its demographic situation , Europe needs controlled channels of immigration that could compensate for the shortfall in the labour force and also reduce the scope of the underground economy and its associated problems .
All these issues have been recognised by Frontex , the Union 's specialist agency .
The proposed solutions , namely the so-called ' burden sharing ' merit serious consideration .
The advent of a Community immigration policy with a sound legal and financial basis is long overdue .
Better late than never !
I voted for the report on political priorities in the fight against illegal immigration of third-country nationals and I want to stress that controlling the influx of migrants to Europe , especially from third countries , is one of the greatest challenges facing European policy-makers .
In this 21st century trafficking in human beings is totally unacceptable and we have to find a way to eradicate this appalling activity and end the personal tragedies that sadly accompany it .
To do this it is essential to tackle the problem of illegal immigration on a European scale , for if one Member State is open to clandestine immigration then it puts pressure on all the others .
The implementation of a policy plan for legal migration has to include the fight against illegal immigration , for the two are closely linked .
What this report lacks are concrete proposals that would allow us to draw up a solution that will put an end to large-scale clandestine immigration and discourage the traffickers .
In Italy , for example , the introduction of quotas for economic migration has not reduced the level of illegal immigration into that country .
In fact quite the reverse , for the announcement of annual quotas has triggered an increase in the number of illegal immigrants who are prepared to risk their lives to enter the territory of the European Union .
in writing . - I welcome this report which in essence calls for a firm policy to fight illegal immigration based on solidarity between Member States and co-operation with third countries in full respect of the fundamental rights of the person .
in writing . - ( DE ) Despite millions of euros in funding , the countries of origin are not willing to cooperate .
However , taking back illegal immigrants must become an obligation at last .
The EU is also acting extremely negligently , however , if it fails to provide adequate resources to secure its external borders or accommodate apprehended illegal immigrants in reception camps , in order to ensure that they do not go underground , until they can be returned to their home countries , to say nothing of a border protection agency which closes down during the main migration season !
Brussels has also slept through the potential threat posed by Islamic immigrants .
If the EU does not wake up soon and put a stop to the influx of radical Muslims and the immigration and naturalisation of citizens from Islamic countries , we will not only be forced to live in permanent fear of terrorist attacks ; we will soon be strangers in our own country .
The present report pay far too little attention to these issues , which is why - despite the sound approaches it contains - I am unfortunately compelled to reject it .
in writing . - ( PT ) Effective political intervention in the area of illegal immigration must act on two points of the problem , on the origin and on the destination : in other words , as stated in the adopted resolution , ' the authorities of the countries of origin , as well as the strengthening of the criminal legal framework to fight trafficking rings , combating illegal employment and human trafficking ' form essential elements .
Without firmness in these areas , the response will be inadequate , even though this response involves other dimensions , such as development cooperation and action in the area of legal migration .
Furthermore , as we stated in the report on the European maritime strategy , any immigration policy which aims to be effective within the European Union ' requires ' , as stated in this resolution , ' that Member States abide by the principles of solidarity , shared responsibility , mutual trust and transparency ' .
We fully agree in this respect .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am voting against the report in the final vote because I am opposed to FRONTEX and an EU border police , for which it would be difficult to secure accountability .
The report shows enthusiasm for expensive and ineffective biometric data in passports and visas , which are moreover a threat to personal integrity .
The EU is cynically exploiting the difficult situation of refugees to gain power over our borders .
in writing . - British Conservatives voted against the reports on migration , as the issue of migration is solely a matter for Member States and intergovernmental cooperation .
References to the Draft Reform Treaty and the extension of qualified majority voting are the wrong way to deal with the problems the EU is facing .
A ' one size fits all ' approach does not work with immigration .
in writing . - By insisting that non-EU spouses of EU nationals must have lived in another EU Member State before being entitled to residency in Ireland , the Government is I believe in breach of the 2004 directive .
Furthermore , singling out the spouses of non-Irish EU nationals for the issuing of deportation orders is contrary to EU legislation which bans discrimination based on nationality .
I would remind the Commission that they informed the European Parliament in 2006 that the 2004 directive on residency should be interpreted by Member States in accordance with the European Court of Justice decisions in July 2002 ( Case No C / 459 / 99 ( MRAX ) ) and again in April 2005 ( Case No C / 157 / 03 ) .
These decisions established that the right of entry and residency in the Community of a third-country national who is a member of an EU citizen 's family arises from that relationship , and depends neither on the legality of their previous residence in the Community nor on the presentation of a residence permit or other permit issued by another Member State .
Ireland 's actions clearly breach those court decisions .
Consequently the Commission is obliged under the Treaties to take action against the Irish Government .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers involving member states of the Council of Europe ( reports Fava and Marty ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers involving member states of the Council of Europe ( Fava and Marty reports ) .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , in December 2005 the European Parliament 's resolution requesting the formation of a Temporary Committee on the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners reaffirmed , and I quote : ' its determination in the fight against terrorism but stresses that this fight cannot be won by sacrificing the very principles that terrorism seeks to destroy , notably that the protection of fundamental rights must never be compromised ' .
Previous Council presidencies had the opportunity , in this House , to express their agreement with this sentiment .
I cannot start my speech without underlining that the current presidency shares this same determination and resolution .
I would reiterate that the fight against terrorism cannot compromise our values and principles on the protection of fundamental rights .
This is , in our opinion , a crucial issue .
In the fight against terrorism , we will only be victorious if we remain free : free from fear and any abuse or manipulation in the name of fear .
Our most powerful weapon and our most effective protection are our values and principles on the protection of our fundamental rights .
Although the Council as such does not have the competence to express an opinion , there will not be a single Member State of the European Union that does not recognise the importance of the efforts made and initiatives taken to get to the truth .
We should remember that we are talking about fundamental principles on which our European democracy rests .
Discovering the truth will allow the climate of suspicion to be eliminated .
It is therefore essential that the investigations in this area shed light on the issue and do not lead to further confusion .
The previous presidencies that had the opportunity to come before this House , the Secretary-General and High Representative and the EU Anti-Terrorism Coordinator did not fail to cooperate with the European Parliament 's Temporary Committee in this respect .
I therefore believe that it would be totally unfair to suggest any lack of commitment on the part of the Council or the Foreign Affairs Ministers .
In fact , I must highlight the numerous initiatives , both parliamentary and legal , that the various European countries took following these reports .
It was therefore absolutely appropriate to act in the spirit of the principle of subsidiarity .
As you know , in many of the areas investigated by the Committee , the European Union does not itself have any power to act .
I am thinking in particular in this respect of the supervision of intelligence services .
This is a fact which the previous Council presidencies and the High Representative , Mr Solana , pointed out to this Parliament and its Committee .
It may of course be regretted that this is the case , but the fact is that the current Treaties limit the Council 's scope of action in these areas .
However , for our part , I can assure you that the Portuguese Presidency will not fail to cooperate actively and constructively .
I would remind you of the full and transparent cooperation offered by the Portuguese Government , both during the investigations made by this Parliament 's Temporary Committee , which completed its work in February of this year , and in relation to the initiatives of the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe under Article 52 of the European Convention on Human Rights in relation to the alleged CIA flights and illegal detention centres in Europe .
As is generally known , although the Council has not taken a position as such on the reports by Mr Fava and Mr Marty , respectively under the aegis of this Parliament and the Council of Europe , this does not mean that it is ignoring them .
In fact , the Council has actively and positively defended human rights and international law in the European Union 's foreign policy .
We have consistently argued that the protection of the fundamental values of international law requires a serious and in-depth dialogue on human rights in the context of the fight against terrorism .
In this respect , the EU has stressed that human rights , the rights of refugees and international humanitarian law must be respected and preserved .
The Council will continue to monitor closely the developments occurring in respect of human rights in the fight against terrorism and will take appropriate measures to ensure their protection .
The EU also continues to be firmly committed to the total ban on torture and cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment .
Our actions are governed by this objective and we will always raise with third countries the concern that this problem causes .
The EU and its Member States have clearly indicated that the existence of any secret detention centres where detainees are kept in a legal vacuum is not consistent with international humanitarian law .
The EU Guidelines on Torture clearly stipulate that Member States must ban secret places of detention ensuring that all persons deprived of their liberty are held in officially recognised places of detention and that their whereabouts are known .
The EU Guidelines on Torture also state that no one can be forcibly returned to a country where he or she risks being subjected to torture or ill-treatment .
It is generally known that the issues in question , which involve competence for airport control , inspection and intelligence services , essentially fall under the responsibility and control of the Member States .
It is true that Sitcen conducts periodic analyses using information provided by the Member States but it has no operational jurisdiction over so-called ' intelligence ' activities .
It should be noted that the EU Member States were also faced with the complexity which , in this respect , typifies the system of sorting and processing requests for overflight , landing and on-the-ground inspection authorisations .
This is a new challenge for everyone .
For our part , the Portuguese Government has not only carried out this sometimes difficult and very slow process of data collection , but has also set up a working group to assess the numerous procedures and propose improvements , the importance of which was duly recognised by the final report adopted by this Parliament in February .
I must point out that we regarded the work carried out by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe as particularly important and we took due note of the reports produced by Mr Marty .
The questionnaire and recommendations developed by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe under Article 52 of the European Convention on Human Rights also allowed , both in Portugal and I believe in other Member States , an unprecedented assessment of the national legal frameworks , guarantees and control mechanisms as a whole , including the analysis of procedures for sorting , verifying and inspecting requests for authorisation for aircraft overflights and landings on national territory .
In the case of Portugal , they have certainly led to institutional , technical and operational improvements .
As regards the recommendations made by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe on control guarantees , the predominant understanding of its members was that the initiatives in hand should not lead to unnecessary legislative duplication or the assignment of new powers to the Council of Europe .
On the other hand , it seems to be agreed that there is room for more effective application and more scrupulous monitoring of the existing mechanisms .
I believe that if these investigations were conducted with more rigour and composure , their conclusions would be more effective .
Despite rigour always being recommended and without confusing facts with allegations , but trying to observe some restraint in the language used for the importance of the values in question and the good name of the European democracies , the truth is that all these initiatives have scope and meaning .
They must therefore be pursued , particularly at a time when it has become essential to analyse , in a serious and straightforward manner , the new dilemmas posed by the terrorist threats , for example the dilemma of security versus freedom .
Furthermore , there is an increasing need for a response from international law to the difficult issues raised by the fight against an unprecedented threat .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , consolidating the area of freedom , security and justice , based on the Hague Programme and respective action plan , is one of the main priorities of the 18-month joint programme of the German , Portuguese and Slovenian Presidencies .
The fight against terrorism is , in this respect , one of the main challenges for which the three Presidencies have defined the objective of intensifying cooperation in this area through continued implementation of the EU Counter-Terrorism Strategy .
As you know , Mr Gilles de Kerchove was recently appointed as the new EU Anti-Terrorism Coordinator , and like his predecessors he will be available to give this House all the information it requires .
I must also take this opportunity to stress that the issue of respect for human rights in the fight against terrorism has been specifically raised in the transatlantic dialogue , notably at the last summit between the European Union and the United States in April , when the conclusions of the European Council of 11 December 2006 were raised .
Portugal , while holding the presidency of the Council , has clearly stated its commitment to continuing and expanding this dialogue , which it regards as key to both sides .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank the Council representative .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission - and I myself - have from the outset followed and supported the work of the European Parliament 's Temporary Committee on this well-known topic and on the serious accusations and serious events concerned .
The seriousness of these events as such , even the very fact of imagining that they may have occurred , obviously makes it essential for all three institutions , Commission , Parliament and Council , to cooperate .
We should of course repeat once again - and I am happy to do so - that the war on terror must be waged with full respect for fundamental rights and the rule of law .
These are the two necessary conditions for democracy to function .
In this spirit , I believe that unlawful prisoner transfers , and the hypothesis that more or less secret places of detention exist - if such events were to be demonstrated in the appropriate manner - would undoubtedly constitute a serious violation of international law and fundamental human rights .
We are all aware that the members of the European Union , all of them , are obliged to comply with the important principles of the Convention on Human Rights , especially Articles 5 and 6 .
We hope of course that these events will be thoroughly investigated in the Member States .
These investigations must obviously be conducted by the competent judicial authorities .
One point must be clear , but it has been clearly stated several times , both in the report by Mr Fava and in the Council of Europe report : a parliamentary report can set out facts , but Parliament naturally has neither the power nor the duty to conduct a judicial inquiry .
Obviously , when evidence from unknown sources is cited , the rule of law - which we must respect - dictates that investigations be entrusted to free , independent courts .
It is they that have a duty to reveal the sources lying behind an accusation .
Clearly , accusing a Member State or individual without revealing the sources for that accusation is a principle which is admissible in a parliamentary report but not in a judicial investigation .
That is why I hope the judicial investigations will continue , as is happening in some Member States , including my own country .
However , the report evidently needs to be followed up , so I shall list the initiatives that I believe can contribute to its follow-up .
On 23 July I wrote to the Polish and Romanian Governments , reminding them of their duty to hold a full , in-depth investigation and asking them for detailed information about whether the investigations had begun and what the outcome had been .
I hope that both governments will reply , and I shall of course inform you of their replies , especially because I believe that transparency and truth demand that when one is accused of something one must have every legal means of explaining and demonstrating that the accusation is untrue , or else of entrusting the inquiry to an independent court .
It is in the interest of an accused party , in my opinion , for there to be a very clear answer .
My second point is this : I have drawn up a questionnaire on terrorism for all Member States , as I mentioned at the last part-session .
The questionnaire asks each Member State what measures it has adopted to combat terrorism , what the results have been in terms of the effectiveness of national laws and , in particular , what level of protection for fundamental human rights is afforded by national legislation .
My intention is to analyse the responses and then draw up a report for the Council and Parliament on the effectiveness of the Member States ' counter-terrorism measures and their suitability and compatibility with the principle of respect for fundamental rights .
My third point relates to air traffic . I made a commitment to the LIBE Committee , promising to look into an extremely important legal aspect that is not covered at present : where does the borderline lie between the definition of a civil aircraft and a government aircraft , in other words one not subject to normal controls on civil aircraft ?
Well , this work is underway , as promised , and the European Commission is to produce a communication on general aviation .
The communication will be adopted by the Commission before the end of this year , very soon therefore , and we shall of course put forward a proposal for a better definition of this concept of government aeroplane , which clearly is often interpreted in a way that circumvents the necessary controls .
However , there is another initiative concerning air traffic .
It is part of a general solution introducing common rules for all Member States on every type of aeroplane that enters the European Common Aviation Area without a flight plan .
You no doubt know that as from 1 January 2009 the rules implementing the so-called single European airspace will introduce common requests to all Member States for flight plans , so in this context we shall harmonise the rules on the flight plans of all aircraft whether they pass through or enter European airspace .
This will be of enormous benefit because it will eliminate the differential treatment that we have noted in Member States concerning overflight and landing .
The other topic is ratification of the extradition agreement between Europe and the United States .
If there had already been , as there should have been , a European agreement - which we have signed but not yet ratified - then the rules on the extradition of prisoners from and to the United States would have been a lot clearer .
We are talking here about prisoners under investigation for , or suspected of , terrorism .
This agreement has yet to be ratified by certain Member States , fortunately only a few .
I have made another formal appeal to all the Ministers of Justice to ratify this European extradition agreement with the United States as soon as possible .
Then there is the subject of supervision of the intelligence services .
This subject is covered in both reports , but it is a sensitive matter .
I think what counts above all else here is the national response , although certain common requirements can be highlighted .
The first requirement is to strengthen parliamentary scrutiny in the Member States .
Some countries have adopted , or are adopting , national laws to tighten up substantially their national parliaments ' powers of scrutiny over the activities of their secret services .
This is the road along which we should be going , in my opinion , because , as you will appreciate , I cannot imagine a future common European law governing the secret services , though I do think it is extremely useful to discuss the topic .
To conclude , Mr President , I think that this is a topic that we must continue to discuss , bearing in mind the rule of law as a principle and of course respect for fundamental rights ; but fundamental rights also include the right not to come under accusation except on the basis of evidence gathered according to the proper procedures .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my Group has expressed valid criticism of the Marty report and voted overwhelmingly against the Fava report .
It is a shame , because at least on subjects like terrorism and human rights this House ought to be able to overcome its internal divisions and produce a common position .
If we have not managed to do so , it is because unfortunately the Fava report started from a preconceived view : the United States is guilty !
We thus wasted a year seeking not the truth , but proof of that guilt , omitting and even concealing any facts that would run counter to this view .
Let me give just one practical and , I may say , scandalous example .
One reason why we went to Poland was to interview a journalist who had been among the first to report , a year before , on the existence of CIA prisons in Poland .
When we met her , she had unfortunately changed her mind ; when I say ' unfortunately ' I mean it ironically .
She was no longer certain ; she told us that she would not have written that article today .
Well , there is no trace of her change of mind in the report , whereas it is full of testimonies by journalists who share the rapporteur 's thesis .
We have wasted a year for nothing , spending taxpayers ' money without discovering anything more than we already knew from the press and from official and unofficial US sources , and if President Bush himself had not revealed the existence of CIA prisons , we would not even have been certain about that .
You told us , Commissioner Frattini , that you have written letters to Poland and Romania asking for explanations but have not received replies .
It is always bad form not to reply , but I am not surprised because the accusations are unfounded .
You yourself refer in your letter to presumed information , not to concrete facts , and both countries have already stated at the highest level that they have investigated and that , in their opinion , no CIA prisons exist .
That may or may not be true , and everyone can think what they like about it , but as you yourself said , Mr Frattini , we cannot make accusations until there is evidence .
The fact is that the Fava and Marty reports are too full of phrases such as ' it is highly likely ' and ' one cannot rule out ' , on which basis firm conclusions are then drawn .
Let no one come and tell me , to justify the lack of evidence , that we are not a court and that ours is a political document .
It is no longer political when we are invited to consider whether or not circumstances are sufficiently extreme to invoke Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union .
Now , given that I sense a mood in this House in favour of putting together a new CIA report , I have a recommendation to make .
Let us stop producing tendentious interpretations of the past ; let us stop investigating this matter about which we have discovered nothing .
Let us leave it up to the courts - as the Commissioner said - and to journalists who have the wherewithal to investigate , and can do so better than us .
Let us concentrate on the future , on politics and on the ' recommendations ' part of the Fava report , which is the only acceptable part .
The United States has undoubtedly made mistakes ; in some cases it has violated human rights , but it is very easy not to make mistakes when one does nothing to combat terrorism .
Terrorism is a new phenomenon not countenanced in our laws , and legislation now has to be adapted .
Let us try to enact laws on conduct to prevent any further human rights violations , so as to avoid a repeat of past errors , and to adapt our rules and regulations to a new type of global threat .
It is fair that the Commission should attempt to carry out an overall assessment of measures adopted by the Member States ; the other initiatives announced and launched by Mr Frattini are equally acceptable .
Nevertheless , a good deal still remains to be done if the problem of terrorism is to be tackled in a global , forceful and coordinated manner .
I am thinking of the Internet and measures to prevent and prosecute criminal offences , so as to avoid the paradoxical situation where , while governments operate separately at national level , terrorists for their part act at global level through the Internet and cells located all over the place .
Our future depends on our ability to defeat terrorism .
Let us unite in order to win this battle .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my report was adopted seven months ago , and since then the only signs of anything new happening have come from the United States .
One such sign was recalled by Mr Gawronski : President Bush decreed on 20 July that his administration would continue to have recourse to unlawful CIA activity in the form of extrajudicial seizure and detention of suspected terrorists in willing third countries .
The other important sign is that the US Congress has opened its own independent inquiry into extraordinary rendition .
This tells us that we are dealing not with a chapter of history but with current affairs .
Judicial inquiries are underway in four European countries : Spain , Portugal , Germany and Italy .
Thirty-nine provisional detention orders have so far been issued against as many US secret service officials and agents .
The inquiry by this House documented facts , not opinions .
It is a fact , for instance , that some of our governments and security services cooperated with the CIA in carrying out extraordinary rendition .
I would remind Commissioner Frattini that our sources in this case were not anonymous .
Our sources , as the report says , were statements by the UK and German Governments .
We put forward 48 recommendations , above all to the Council , and we should like to know from the Council whether even one of those recommendations has been followed up over these seven months .
We made two requests in particular : we invited the European institutions - including the Council - to shoulder their respective responsibilities under Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty , and we expected the Council to exert pressure on all the governments concerned to provide full and exhaustive information , with the possibility of arranging hearings where necessary .
This has not happened .
It is not true that the Council has no powers , Mr Lobo Antunes ; the Council has the powers conferred on it by Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty .
Our request certainly could have been acted on by the German Presidency and now the Portuguese Presidency .
We appreciate Mr Frattini 's initiatives , but we are not satisfied by these two six-month presidencies which have in effect consigned to oblivion a year of work by our committee of inquiry .
Given that public opinion in our countries is calling for truth , the silence of the Council - and , I must say , of many of our governments - constitutes a missed opportunity for Europe .
Nevertheless , this House does not intend to give in .
I am sorry for Mr Gawronski , but we shall come back to this topic .
An own-initiative report in the Committee on Civil Liberties will be our contribution to combating terrorism in a way that is respectful of human rights always , everywhere and for everyone ; the number-one human right , as Cesare Beccaria taught us centuries ago , being the presumption of innocence .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Parliament adopted a resolution on this issue , the Council of Europe adopted another text on this same issue , clear and explicit in all areas , but those of us with some legal knowledge are aware , and it comes as no surprise to us - I say this with a certain amount of irony - that there is a rule of law , especially criminal law , whereby no one is obliged to make self-incriminating statements .
This is what surprises us : that the Council and all the governments are applying it to themselves .
In this case , instead of taking action they have decided to remain silent , like the man in the dock who does not defend himself but refuses to accept the charges by simply remaining passive and silent .
It is shameful to see the Council as an institution and all its members acting in a collective fashion , collectively availing themselves of the law used by defendants in court .
Institutional silence concerning responsibility , whether active or passive , through actions or through negligence , through conviction or the fear of causing problems following pressure from an ally nation : this silence is one of the major disgraces of the democratic context we live in today , and it affects all those involved .
It is likewise difficult to apply mechanisms of responsibility in the European Union , because the mechanisms are not intended to be used against all Member States acting to protect themselves in a reciprocal fashion .
Certainly no one imagined when the Treaty was drawn up , when Articles 6 and 7 were being drafted , that we would find ourselves in a situation where we would not be discussing infringements of fundamental rights , or passiveness concerning the defence of fundamental rights by a government , but by a European institution : the Council as such remaining a passive accomplice , with the complicity of all Member States .
That situation was never envisaged , and this truly affords it protection .
We have no legal mechanisms to take action against this , but I wish to tell the Council representative that History will clarify matters , because History will always bring to light the shame of this time when , on the pretext of protecting our freedom , all the concepts on which this European Union was founded have been jeopardised .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) The Fava report was based on circumstantial evidence and instead of firm conclusions it simply created a feeling of suspicion towards Member States .
The Marty report was drafted in an even less responsible manner .
All of its findings are based on anonymous sources and are therefore impossible to verify .
This approach cannot provide any assurance that Mr Marty 's work was not the subject of manipulation by services and organisations reluctant to engage in transatlantic cooperation in the interests of overcoming terrorism .
I am very grateful to Mr Antunes for pointing out that international law does not make sufficient provision for the problems associated with terrorism .
None of the reports under discussion has contributed anything in this regard .
The official investigations and explanations submitted by Poland comply with our principles of civilian control of the secret services .
Furthermore , our principles comply with the relevant European standards in this regard .
I therefore do not see the point of repeating this debate .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Fava report was adopted by this House in February 2007 , and it contains a long list of recommendations which relate both to the legal and the political aspects .
I would have liked to see the Council refer to these recommendations and give details of what has happened since then .
If the Council does not have Mr Fava 's report available , we will gladly supply it with another copy .
However , we would then be very keen to hear what has been done in respect of the recommendations made in this report , notably as regards the cooperation with the Member States but also with regard to the Council 's own role , to which attention is drawn in this report .
Mr Dick Marty , the Council of Europe rapporteur , also presented a second report in July this year .
I would like to confine myself to two points .
In this report , he says that some European governments have not only obstructed the search for the truth but are continuing to do so by invoking the concept of ' state secrets ' . This is nothing other than the abuse of secrecy in order to protect those who have broken the law .
I am sad to say that he applies this criticism to my own country , the Federal Republic of Germany , and to Italy , in particular .
On the other hand , he cites the positive examples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Canada , which holds observer status with the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe .
In a second point , however , he makes explicit mention of Poland and Romania and refers to these countries in relation to the secret detention facilities .
That is also a point on which I wish the Council would provide us with an account of what has happened .
Invoking the subsidiarity of Member States is not enough in this case , for we are dealing here with common European values .
I draw your attention to Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaties .
They apply in all Member States irrespective of subsidiarity .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would describe what we have experienced during the so-called ' war on terror ' as a method of ' outsourcing ' human rights abuses .
People are being detained in Guantánamo , where they are deprived of their most fundamental rights .
People have been handed over to torture regimes because others obviously don 't want to get their hands dirty .
Secret prisons have been operated , as President Bush himself has admitted , and Europe 's governments have simply looked away as the CIA has committed systematic human rights abuses on their sovereign territory .
The Council of Europe and this House have not remained silent in the face of these monstrous events ; instead , they have gathered the facts , investigated the abuses and criticised them clearly and unequivocally .
Dick Marty has worked with very great commitment here , and I would like to express my thanks to him .
The report by our colleague Mr Fava , which was supported by my group , calls , as a matter of urgency , for a shift away from the practices which have now come to light , but what is happening instead ?
In the case of Khaled el-Masri , for example , my own government kowtowed to the US Government only a few days ago .
It is refusing to forward to the US administration the Munich prosecutors ' request for the extradition of the 13 CIA agents accused of abducting Mr el-Masri .
Why ?
Simply because merely submitting this request would annoy Washington .
I have no objection to my own country and the EU joining forces with the US to combat the threat of terrorism , but does this mean that kidnapping and torture are no longer crimes ?
Surely CIA agents cannot be given carte blanche to do whatever they want ?
Is this really the kind of transatlantic security zone that the German Minister of the Interior has just been talking about ?
Our fundamental values - and above all the comprehensive protection of human rights - cannot be put up for grabs in this so-called war on terror .
The European Parliament and the Council of Europe have rightly underlined this fact , and I expect the Council and the Commission also to uphold this principle without restrictions and , above all , to be guided by it in their actions .
Let me say that what I have heard from the Council today is far from adequate .
I really do expect the Council to act in accordance with the principles it itself has formulated and to follow up on the recommendations made by the European Parliament .

Mr President , it is almost two years since Parliament decided to set up a Temporary Committee of enquiry ; a decision that was pushed through despite strong opposition and substantiated objections .
Now , two years later , the objections of the time are being raised again .
Today we are debating two reports : Mr Marty 's report and Mr Fava 's report .
The latter report does not add anything new to the report by Mr Marty that we were already familiar with at the time .
The Council of Europe 's report was balanced and cautious in directing accusations at Member States .
Unfortunately , that cannot be said of the report in this House .
The fact that we are today debating both reports can be said to be progress .
That progress in the field of cooperation is fortunately also taking shape in the agency for fundamental rights .
The Conference of Chairmen of the political groups has rightly called for good cooperation between Parliament and the Council of Europe .
Where fundamental rights are at stake , cooperation is essential , because the protection of fundamental rights is extremely important .
If that is the purpose of enquiries into the actions of the American security services on European territory , the Council must also address its efforts to that .
Can agreements be made in transatlantic relations on combating terrorism or is it to remain at the level of unilaterally imposed measures ?
With all measures against terrorism , the attention given to rights is often inadequate .
After two enquiries , it is time to look forward and to work on restoring relations with the United States as equals .
I would very much like to hear from the Council what it plans to do in concrete terms to restore relations .
Are we going to continue to put pressure on the United States to clear up the question of whether there were secret detention camps on EU territory or are we going to try to prevent it from happening again ?
Finally , I have a question for the President .
In the debate on 14 February I asked whether we could be given an indication of the costs of the enquiries carried out by the Temporary Committee .
To date no information has been forthcoming on that .
Mr President , can you arrange for a financial report in addition to the enquiry report and is it also possible for the Council of Europe to also provide some information on the costs incurred by Mr Marty 's enquiry .
Mr Gawronski is right : this is about spending tax payers ' money .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I wish to make a number of remarks on behalf of my group .
It really is a pity to have to conclude today that the Council has not really responded to the questions that Claudio Fava 's January report raised partly on behalf of Parliament .
What has the Council actually done with the findings , both our findings and the findings of the Council of Europe ?
Has there been no real consultation to prevent the practices described in these reports from happening again ?
We are more positive about the Commission 's response .
The Commission has embarked on an evaluation of anti-terrorism measures and how they are implemented .
I am very pleased indeed with the Commissioner 's announcement just now about what can be done to prevent aircraft landing at European airports in the future , which are carrying people to be transported elsewhere unlawfully ; we have to have a system of control for these so-called ' State aircraft ' .
The next point is that we are , of course , pleased that another terrorism coordinator has been appointed and we wish him great success .
We were somewhat surprised at the sudden departure of Mr Gijs de Vries , who never gave the impression that he was really very keen on his job .
Hopefully the new coordinator will be , his position as coordinator will be strengthened and in future the new coordinator will be able to answer questions from Parliament if required .
I now turn to Mr Marty 's report on the possible secret prisons in Poland and Romania .
I agree with the remarks already made here about the fact that the last report was based on anonymous witness statements .
Mr Marty still has to explain what the criteria are in the Council of Europe , when you can cite anonymous sources , and so we are not really satisfied with the way Mr Marty approached it .
A number of people were put in the dock and no new facts emerged .
I think that it is time for Mr Marty to say whether that list of names can be deleted , especially as two of our colleagues are on the list .
I said this before some time ago , when we spoke to Mr Marty in the committee .
I have one final point . It is , of course , important to make clear to the citizens that the practices that have taken place in some EU countries , such as the abduction of people by secret services from outside the European Union , cannot happen again , that the CIA cannot be allowed to operate in Europe without any supervision by national authorities .
The Americans seems to operate under different rules from us .
Once again the recent examples of the refusal by the Americans to extradite people or to agree to deportation requests from Italy and Germany are a sign that we evidently operate under different standards .
These two examples give us food for thought about the manner of cooperation between the European Union and the United States when it comes to the fight against terrorism .
Do the Americans want to observe the same balance when it comes to security and human rights ?
Mr President , the President of the Council threw up his hands and said the EU had no power to act , that torture flights and secret prisons are ' nothing to do with us , Guv ! ' .
Then he said that the Council had been involved in the active promotion of human rights outside the EU .
I really am getting quite sick of hearing presidencies endlessly parrot European values but claim that they cannot deliver accountability for human rights abuses inside the EU .
Here are two things that you could do .
Why have only 12 Member States signed the UN Convention on enforced disappearance , notable absentees from signature being the UK , Germany , Spain , Poland and Romania - a funny list that - as well , of course , as the US ?
Secondly , you could get EU Member States to volunteer to take Guantánamo prisoners who have been cleared for release .
The UK had to be taken to court before it bid for five UK residents to come back to the UK .
If the EU calls for the closure of Guantánamo , which we more or less did , then let Member States put their action where their mouth is .
I agree with Commissioner Frattini that a parliamentary inquiry is insufficient .
We did not have the powers and the investigatory techniques of the police and judicial inquiry , but firstly I would say that the weight of testimony from victims and others that we received and published was weighty , consistent and persuasive .
Secondly , it is a bit rich to reproach a parliamentary report when Member States refused to instigate police or judicial inquiries .
The UK Intelligence and Security Committee , which is appointed by and reports to the Prime Minister - not to Parliament - reproached British security services for not realising that information they passed to the CIA would be misused for abduction , disappearance and torture .
Well , if we have such naive British intelligence services , it does not make me feel very safe .
It is certainly good to hear that Commissioner Frattini is shutting the stable door somewhat after the horse has bolted in terms of stopping abuse of European airspace , with private planes evading controls on state aircraft or not filing flight plans , but that is no substitute for accountability for past permission or tolerance for torture flights through , or secret prisons on , European territory .
( PL ) The Fava report and the report by Mr Marty for the Council of Europe share a common feature : they are devoid of all evidence .
They amount to a series of vague irrelevant reflections by the rapporteurs on the rendition of terrorist suspects and the supposed secret CIA centres in Europe .
The Fava report has been discussed on a number of occasions and it would be a pity to waste time on further debate .
I should , however , like to offer my sincere congratulations to Mr Marty .
From the very beginning he set out to make his name known and he has certainly been successful in that regard .
Both his reports are of a lamentable standard , and cast him into ridicule as a lawyer .
Mr Marty obviously came to the conclusion that it was worth paying such a price in order to make his name known in political circles .
Inter alia he did not allow individuals who had come forward voluntarily to be heard , including the Members of the European Parliament he slandered in the report but could not spare time for .
Mr Marty failed to respond to repeated invitations from the Polish authorities .
He was unable to offer an explanation for such behaviour when he appeared before Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Mr Marty has serious difficulty distinguishing between facts and speculation .
I can appreciate that to do so would endanger the tactical approach and strategic target he set himself from the outset , namely political self-aggrandisement .
It is unfortunate that he exploited the good name of the Council of Europe to achieve his ambition .
( FR ) Mr President , Amnesty International has set the tone of our debate in a statement issued today .
It says , in effect , that Germany is refusing to demand the extradition of certain US citizens , members of the CIA , who are suspected of having organised the abduction and detention of Mr Khaled-el-Masri , and of subsequently having tortured him .
Restrained by a political decision , the legal system therefore does not have the wherewithal to dispense justice in cases involving the alleged breach of human rights , committed in the name of the fight against terrorism .
This is precisely the situation that is at the heart of this debate .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you tell us things and you make hypothetical statements such as : ' the fight against terrorism has to be conducted with respect for basic human rights ' .
We agree with you .
However , the debate we are having today shows that the real facts have now been confirmed : Member States of the European Union have been complicit in the programme of secret detention and return that has been set up within the territory of the European Union by the CIA and in doing so have broken the law .
This has now been proven .
The question that we are now asking is this : what initiatives are you now going to take ?
What lessons are you going to learn from this situation ?
When are you going to condemn these illegal activities in clear terms and in the name of the Council ?
When are you going to start putting pressure on Member States to provide full and accurate details of what has been going on to the national parliaments and to the Members of this House ?
When are you going to get Member States to reject the whole business of giving diplomatic assurances ?
I welcome the announcement by Commissioner Frattini that there is to be a report on the effectiveness of anti-terrorism measures and on respect for human rights .
I believe that Parliament will be very interested in receiving this report and I look forward very much to being able to discuss it with you .
I would like to invite you here and now to such a debate .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think this House did a remarkable job of work in approving Mr Fava 's report .
Similarly , I think the General Assembly of the Council of Europe made a significant contribution to ascertaining a truth that has now been proven : there have been thousands of flights , there have been dozens of kidnappings , and there has been direct involvement of European governments and EU intelligence services .
We have witness statements and we also have the minutes of the special European Parliament committee , testifying to the fact that European governments sat down with the US administration and discussed extraordinary rendition .
This is a proven fact and public knowledge , which I believe deserves to be respected even by those colleagues who voted against this report .
There is only one black hole in this affair : the silence of the Council .
It is rather embarrassing here , given that everyone else has spoken out .
However , there is one anomaly : while the Council remains silent the governments are acting .
It is not true that the governments are turning a blind eye ; they are doing whatever they can to prevent clarification of the truth .
For instance , the Italian Government is currently avoiding seeking the extradition of the CIA agents involved in the judicial measures and has even invoked official secrecy to slow down the judicial activity on the case of Abu Omar .
Thus the governments are indeed acting while the Council maintains its silence .
In my opinion this is wrong !
The excellent work done by this House deserves respect , and surely a sign of respect should come first and foremost from the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Committee have done our work .
It is a proven fact that the CIA has kidnapped and abducted people in Europe .
The public prosecutors in Milan and Munich have established and proved this beyond doubt .
What kind of policy is in place , however , when responsible people in Berlin and Rome are now refusing to pass an arrest warrant - that is the correct term - to the US Government ?
The kidnappers - and that is exactly what the CIA agents who abducted Khaled al-Masri in Skopje are - must be handed over .
In a state governed by the rule of law - which is what we have , surely - no one can be exempt from the law .
This is true even if , as certain high-ranking security officials in Berlin claim , relations with the US Government are being soured by the work of the Munich public prosecutors , who are simply doing their job in the prescribed fashion : this speaks volumes about these people 's mentality and their attitude to the rule of law .
Yes , international terrorism must be combated by every means , but please , with the means available under the rule of law , not with Wild West methods according to the country-of-origin principle , which is what the CIA has done here .
It is all well and good for the Federal Chancellor , Angela Merkel , to urge the Chinese to respect human rights and for her to receive the Dalai Lama , but that is not enough .
We have homework to do here in Europe as well .
We cannot have a strong à la carte rule of law , a rule of law which is only permitted to be strong when it fits in with the system .
When I hear the questions about what the Committee cost , what democracy actually costs , let me just say this to those people : my dear people , a dictatorship is much cheaper , but tell me the price of that !
It is a price we are not willing to pay !
- ( NL ) Mr President , I agree with the previous speakers .
The Member States acted collectively , both in the Council and in NATO , and so we must also account for our actions collectively as the Council ; you cannot hide behind the argument of powers and subsidiarity ; it is not a matter of making two particular Member States into scapegoats .
People keep saying that there is no conclusive legal evidence .
That is not necessary , firstly because we have a witness , Mr Bush himself , who said : yes , there are renditions , yes , there are black sites .
I will go further than that : we think it is an excellent idea .
Furthermore , the facts have been proven in court cases in both Germany and Italy , in addition to all the other facts on the table before us .
Besides , Parliament is not a court of law - Mr Frattini is right about that - but the Member States not only have a legal , they also have a political and moral duty to account for their actions , not only before the court but also to their citizens .
Can the Council , can the ministers look their citizens directly in the eye and say that human rights violations in Europe will continue to go unpunished ?
Because that is what it amounts to .
The allegations are extremely serious and if , according to the Council , there is no truth in them at all , then the Council must refute them .
If , however , there is a grain of truth in the allegations , then the facts are serious enough to warrant an enquiry .
Finally , I also agree with those who say ' yes ' to extradition between the United States and the European Union ; not , however , just for those whom the United States considers to be suspects , but also when countries of the European Union request the extradition of CIA agents .
( PL ) Mr President , the previous speaker referred to President Bush .
I would point out that the latter made no mention of Europe and we should therefore not invoke him .
I shall not refer to the Fava report , as much has already been said about it .
Let us focus instead on the Marty report .
We might just as well be discussing abstract painting today . I say this because abstract painting exists , even though it is sometimes incomprehensible .
There is no way of verifying whether the allegations concerning CIA operations and the presence of detainees in Poland have any foundation , just as the circumstantial evidence regarding the existence of the Yeti in the Himalaya and the Loch Ness Monster in Scotland does not provide grounds for belief in the existence of those two creatures .
Parliament 's report refers to the CIA prisons that might have been located in American military bases in Europe . Entire squadrons of UFOs might have landed on Parliament 's courtyard this evening .
They might and could have landed but have not done so . Of course , if we were to set up an investigative committee , the latter might well find otherwise .

- ( ES ) Mr President , listening to the Council and some of our colleagues , I get the impression we are still in January 2006 , as if nothing has happened since then , and yet since then we have had a committee of inquiry , a number of reports and , most importantly , we have had an admission by the US President that these practices did in fact occur .
What more do the governments and the Council need to issue a plausible response to the European citizens and chalk up a little prestige and credibility on this issue ?
It is obvious that there is a huge gap here between practising and preaching .
All due rigor is called for , and I agree , but it must be said that rigor commences with the facts and the evidence , facts that have been borne out time and time again , and here what we want to know is not merely who is responsible , but just how far this responsibility reaches .
Therefore I wish to ask Mr Lobo Antunes very directly indeed : what are you waiting for to demand that the European governments and the US Government put an end to this practice that we have condemned on so many occasions ?
What are you waiting for to retrieve the prestige and credibility that the Council and the European Union as a whole are losing on a daily basis ?
( SV ) Mr President , as we all know , our report documents 1 245 cases of illegal CIA flights , 21 illegal abductions and numerous cases of torture and abuse .
We demanded that prison camps such as Guantánamo be closed and that the EU guarantee that these abuses would never be repeated .
What did we get ?
Very little unfortunately .
The USA continues its abuses in the so-called war on terrorism .
It was depressing to hear the Council 's response to our important demands .
I want to hear a European Council say that we are to put pressure on the USA , that their kidnappings must cease and that all prison camps must be closed .
I want the EU - not just us in the European Parliament - to say that we are standing up for human rights .
I want the EU to say that the fight against terrorism can never be waged by illegitimate means .
It is clear that human rights must be fought for all over again every day .
Let us continue to act as watchdogs and ensure that not a single innocent person becomes a casualty of the so-called war on terrorism .
( PT ) Before the day in September 2006 when President Bush confirmed the existence of secret prisons in third countries , the Portuguese Government had regarded as reliable the guarantees given by Washington that the sovereignty or legality of its European allies had not been violated .
However , after this date , once it had been proven that various renditions had taken place across Europe , it became essential to investigate whether Portugal or Portuguese agents had been involved and , in particular , to prevent their continued involvement .
To my sorrow and shame , however , the Socialist Party , my party , the party in government , voted against the formation of a parliamentary committee of inquiry on 10 January 2007 .
However , it has now been proven that over 100 stopovers were made at Portuguese airports by aircraft involved in the rendition programme .
The passenger and crew lists of the most suspicious flights that the SEF ( Portuguese Foreign Nationals and Borders Service ) has managed to identify have never been provided by the Portuguese Government to the national parliament or to this Parliament , despite repeated requests .
Nor did the Portuguese Government permit the director of the secret service or his predecessors from 2002 to be heard by the European Parliament mission that went to Lisbon in December 2006 .
The Portuguese Government did not provide the national parliament or the European Parliament with the oft-requested list of civilian or military flights to and from Guantanamo that passed over Portuguese territory .
Until December 2006 the government denied the existence of such flights .
However , they were recorded and the list compiled included 94 overflights and 17 stopovers specifically by US civilian and military aircraft between January 2002 and the end of June 2006 .
There is evidence that several of these flights were carrying prisoners from the Incirlik base in Turkey to Guantanamo , including the ' Bosnian Six ' .
Once the list reached the European Parliament , the Portuguese Government did not deny its authenticity , but instead alleged that the Guantanamo detention centre was not the same as the Guantanamo military base and that flights to this military base were supposedly ' normal ' and under the auspices of the United Nations or NATO .
The Secretary-General of NATO subsequently denied this in writing .
In January 2006 I obtained evidence that chained prisoners had been sighted at the Lajes base in the Azores during their transfer to US aircraft .
This evidence was confirmed by journalists and reports were published including photographs of the buildings .
Mr President , a judicial investigation is currently being conducted in Portugal .
Unfortunately this was not instigated by the Portuguese Government , but on my initiative .
However , the truth must come to light given the worrying facts discovered by this Parliament dating from the time of Mr Durão Barroso 's Government to the current one .
( PL ) Mr President , in my speech I , too , would like to focus on the Marty report which has been frequently referred to in the House .
This is because that report is characterised by a high degree of confusion between objective truth and subjective assessments .
I represent a party that is in opposition to the present government and was also in opposition to the previous one .
Supporters of my party did not vote either for the present president or for his predecessor .
Our party is a strong advocate of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
We would find it extraordinarily useful to have ammunition of this sort available to us as we strive to overcome our political opponents in Poland .
Unfortunately , however , we do not have such ammunition at our disposal , because it simply does not exist . Under the auspices of the Polish Parliament an investigation was also carried out by a permanent committee , on which the opposition is represented .
It did not uncover anything ; nor did the enquiry by the Ombudsman .
We must not , therefore , confuse subjective assessments with facts .
No such facts exist .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many months have passed since Parliament 's well-documented denunciation of the serious unlawful acts committed or condoned by various European governments in complicity with the US secret services .
We noted at the time that those same European governments did little or nothing to cooperate with the parliamentary committee in seeking the truth and those responsible .
In the light of the statements made by the Commission and the Council , we can say that things have barely moved on from where they were at that time .
Little or nothing has been done to make Member States provide adequate information about the activities of their secret services , apart from the commendable letters referred to by Commissioner Frattini .
Nothing at all has been done to redefine the role and independence of some countries ' secret services in view of the obvious supremacy and command exerted by those of the USA .
Given what we now know about Italy , Poland , the United Kingdom and Germany , for example , it has to be said that some of the vital nerve centres of European security are subordinate to the United States .
Surely , not even if our principal ally were to respect European laws and principles could we agree to forfeit European sovereignty !
This becomes quite intolerable , however , once we discover that our principal ally is behaving towards us in an imperial fashion , ignoring or flouting our laws on our territory .
I therefore wish to express my dissatisfaction with the statements made by the Council and the Commission .
I believe that Parliament must keep up its good work .
Mr President , turning a blind eye to torture and breaches of human rights by a state will not defeat terrorism .
It will deepen a sense of grievance and create new recruits for terrorist activity .
That is the bitter lesson from 30 years of strife in Northern Ireland .
Turning a blind eye to breaches of human rights and to torture is not an option for a democratic state .
On the contrary , in working to end terror , it is supremely important that we demonstrate the strength of our commitment to justice .
The lack of response by Member States to the recommendations of this Parliament is quite appalling .
It is equally sad , I have to say , to see some on the Right of this House continuing , ostrich-like , to deny the obvious .
The US has admitted illegal detentions , transfer and torture of suspects , and they may , in fact , still be under way .
We do not know .
Some EU Member States connived with that breach of human rights .
I regret to say that Ireland facilitated the landing of 147 CIA-operated planes in Ireland , some of which we know were involved in the rendition of prisoners .
There has been no parliamentary inquiry in Ireland ; there has been no parliamentary scrutiny of the security services in Ireland and there has been no inspection of CIA planes .
The Irish Human Rights Commission has announced that it is reviewing its contacts with the Irish Government on this matter and is bringing forward proposals at the end of this year for dealing with it .
Finally , let me respond to Mr Blokland , who demanded to know the cost of the inquiry of this Parliament .
It is a legitimate request , but could I ask him what price he puts on human rights ?
What price does he put on the prevention of torture ?
I believe we cannot put a price on those things .
We have to spend whatever it takes to reveal what is going on and take action to stop it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) I will be as brief as possible , but this debate involved many contributions and various questions have been raised .
As you will certainly understand , Mr President , some of these questions must receive my full attention and a response .
Of course , during this debate , the Members of this House have expressed many points of view , not all of them uniform .
They all of course deserve my full respect , even though I cannot agree with all of them .
In particular I cannot agree with the speech made by one Member from my country who , in her speech , referred exclusively to the situation in Portugal .
I cannot of course subscribe to this speech in any respect .
However , despite these differences of opinion , I am sure that we are all agreed on the essential point , which is that we are engaged in a war against terrorism in the name of freedom and that we can only win this war in freedom .
As I said at the start of my speech , the fight against international terrorism can only be won through a joint effort and with respect for the values and fundamental principles shared by the European Union and the United States of America .
It is true that the Council was urged to act but , as I said and as previous presidencies have also said , the Council in itself does not have any competence in this area .
You may lament this but that is the truth of the matter .
Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaties have been invoked here today .
As you know , these articles lay down principles and establish values but they do not assign competence .
The institutions , in accordance with the so-called ' principle of conferral of competences ' , can only exercise those competences which have been effectively , clearly and expressly assigned to them by the Treaties .
This is how the institutions of the Union function .
However , the Commission has presented here today a series of proposals and initiatives , some of which have already been implemented and others which will be implemented and which naturally will merit the Council 's full attention and effort .
The Commission 's proposals will of course be welcomed by the Council .
Furthermore , I should also like to say that numerous initiatives have been taken by the Member States , mainly through their parliaments , with investigations being conducted in line with the recommendations made by the European Parliament 's report .
In this respect , with specific reference to what is happening in Portugal , I am here today representing the Portuguese Government , a government created by the Socialist Party , a party which in Portugal was famed for and exemplary in the fight for democracy and freedom in our country .
Of course neither the Government nor the Socialist Party agreed , agrees or will agree with violations of human rights .
As I have said to you , the efforts and initiatives to discover the truth of the matter are welcome .
It is therefore essential to be rigorous and the basis for a rigorous analysis is not to allow any confusion or to accept mere supposition as fact .
As regards the transatlantic relations which have been mentioned , the Council reiterates that , in general , in the fight against terrorism , generalised internal security measures , not limited to one Member State of the European Union , can only be put into practice in the framework of very strict cooperation with the US .
This cooperation must of course be developed , as noted , from the statement made at the last transatlantic summit that took place during the German Presidency .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think anyone in this House can have any doubt that these actions are unlawful .
The added value that I see in Mr Fava 's report is that it commits everyone , all three institutions , to ensuring that such events never happen again .
This urgent entreaty comes across to me from the conclusions of the Fava report and is the political point that I believe needs to be emphasised .
Thus there are two aspects here , I believe .
One is strategy , in other words looking to the future and seeing to it that such events never happen again on European territory , and then trusting our judges to investigate the past .
As others have said , no one believes that we can replace our judges who , in accordance with the rule of law , have to investigate with all the evidence to hand and with due respect for the presumption of innocence , as Mr Fava has reminded us .
The past and the future : these are the two levels requiring attention .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe and the United States undeniably share a tradition and a constitutional background of guaranteed fundamental rights .
I therefore believe that torture , unlawful detention and the seizure of individuals - even if suspected of terrorism - in themselves run counter to our shared transatlantic background of democracy and rights .
So the political conclusion I draw is that we need ways of strengthening our Euro-Atlantic links in order to provide more security along with more rights .
It would be quite wrong to point the finger at the United States when , on the contrary , we should be seeking a way to wage a joint war on terror based on respect for the rule of law and fundamental rights .
This is the lesson that I personally learn from many of these recommendations .
Then there is the question of how to bolster our sovereignty .
This is a serious matter .
How can Europe strengthen its own area of sovereignty so as to be a stronger ally , and no longer a weak one , in Euro-Atlantic cooperation ?
One preliminary example is the reference that I made to the single European airspace .
Once we have , as from January 2009 , a common rule valid for all 27 Member States on overflight rights , the definition of aeroplanes and powers of control over this single European sky , Europe will have bolstered its sovereignty .
Moreover , at that stage the Commission will undoubtedly have coordinating and supervisory powers , because the rules will then no longer be national but European .
Finally , Mr President , this debate gives us one more reason to introduce the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the future constitutional treaty or institutional treaty , whatever it may be called .
It is one more reason because that inclusion , that institutional reference to the Charter of rights , will give the EU institutions powers - including that of supervision and of taking action before the Court - in sectors which are absolutely crucial to all of us in our everyday lives .
The debate is closed .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to know whether it is possible to have Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty annexed to the minutes of our debate .
We have just heard from the Council that Articles 6 and 7 are confined to a statement of principles .
As you know , Article 6 sets out principles , while Article 7 sets out actions to safeguard those principles .
I believe it would be worth reminding the Council and also my fellow Members of this fact .
We will check whether that is possible in procedural terms .
ESDP operation in eastern Chad and the north of the Central African Republic ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the ESDP operation in eastern Chad and the north of the Central African Republic .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Thank you , Mr President .
The Portuguese Presidency appreciates this opportunity to exchange thoughts on the possibility of an operation being conducted in the framework of the ESDP ( European Security and Defence Policy ) in eastern Chad and the north-east of the Central African Republic .
The Darfur conflict remains one of the main priorities of the EU 's foreign policy .
We are pleased with the recent progress made and , in particular , and firstly , the announcement that discussions will begin on 27 October , under the auspices of the United Nations and the African Union Special Envoy , to find a peaceful solution to the conflict that will increase the prospects for peace in Darfur .
Secondly , we also regard as positive the unanimous adoption of Security Council Resolution 1769 creating the UNAMID ( AU / UN Hybrid operation in Darfur ) , which will add a new dynamic to the efforts made to resolve the conflict in Darfur .
However , in order for these efforts to produce results , the Darfur conflict must be tackled within a wider regional perspective .
The conflict 's negative impact on the humanitarian and security situation in neighbouring countries , in particular Chad and the Central African Republic , is cause for very particular concern .
In our opinion , a lasting solution to the conflict in Darfur cannot be found without stabilising the situation in these neighbouring countries .
As you know , in its conclusions of 23 July the Council emphasised the urgent need to address the destabilising impact of the Darfur crisis on the humanitarian and security situation in neighbouring countries and reiterated its support for the deployment of a multidimensional UN presence in eastern Chad and the north-east of the Central African Republic .
The Council also decided to continue working on a possible decision on a bridging operation , in the framework of the European Security and Defence Policy , to support this multidimensional UN presence with a view to improving security in those areas .
Preparations for such an operation have been ongoing throughout the summer .
On 12 September the Council adopted the crisis management concept that defines the main planning parameters of this bridging operation .
Particular emphasis is placed on the objective of protecting civilians in danger , particularly refugees and displaced persons , and of facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid by increasing security in the region .
With regard to the internal political situation in these two countries , the Council considers that the mission should maintain its independence , impartiality and neutrality .
Planning based on this concept is in hand , in accordance with the EU 's crisis management procedures .
The next steps to be taken will be the approval of a common action on the concept of the operation and the operational plan , including determining the composition of the force .
The operation will last one year and it is expected that it will be replaced by a multinational UN mission .
Any ESDP operation in Chad and the Central African Republic must be based on a UN Security Council resolution and will be conducted in strict consultation with the UN and our African partners .
We in the EU welcome the statement made by the President of the UN Security Council on 27 August in which he indicated the readiness of the Security Council to authorise the establishment of a multidimensional presence in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African Republic .
Any EU operation to Chad and the Central African Republic must be complemented by political initiatives to tackle the regional dimension of the Darfur conflict .
In particular , any efforts aimed at normalising relations between Chad and Sudan should be supported , in accordance with the Tripoli and Riyadh Agreements .
Sudan , Chad and the Central African Republic should also be encouraged to respect the commitments they made in terms of not supporting the rebel movements operating from their territories against any of the other countries .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with yesterday 's adoption by the United Nations Security Council of Resolution 1778 / 2007 on the deployment of an international force in the eastern part of Chad and in the north-east of the Central African Republic the door is now open for the Council of the European Union to give its approval , within the next few days , to an ESDP operation in these countries .
This is clearly a major development and I believe it is to be welcomed .
The regions targeted by the operation are currently in a state of general instability and insecurity that is affecting hundreds of thousands of civilians , who are forced to live in conditions of extreme vulnerability .
As you know , this situation cannot solely be explained by the knock-on effect that the Darfur crisis is having on Chad and the Central African Republic .
There are also endogenous reasons , peculiar to these two countries , especially in the case of Chad .
Stability in these areas of Chad and the Central African Republic can only be assured if international action , and especially that taken by the European Union , incorporates a number of factors .
These include , firstly , the quality of the military and police presence in Chad and in the CAR , secondly the adoption of an approach that is not exclusively based on security but also includes the provision of aid and the establishment of political structures , and finally the capacity to confine and contain any interference by Sudan and the Darfur region in Chad and the Central African Republic .
Let me deal with the first point : this is an area that comes under the second pillar .
Members of the Council have expressed their views on this matter and doubtless will have more to say in the days ahead .
One important element that has to be taken into account in the deployment of such a European protection force is obviously the need to protect the humanitarian zone .
This is why my staff at ECHO have been working closely with the Council 's military planners with a view to ensuring that the relevant mandates are respected and that there is a high level of cooperation between the military and the humanitarian agencies .
We have in particular insisted that the liaison officers of the European protection force should be present on the ground in order to ensure close links and a permanent exchange of information with the humanitarian organisations .
I will now move on to the second point .
The aid measures provided by the Commission cover three aspects .
The first comprises a security backup for the Chadian police operation , under the direction of the United Nations .
This essentially constitutes funding for the training of 800 Chadian police officers who will be responsible for maintaining order in the camps that have been set up for refugees and displaced persons .
It is crucial that this police action is exemplary .
It is also very important that it is well received by the local people .
For this purpose , funding to the amount of some EUR 10 million is to be provided by the stability instrument before the end of 2007 .
Now I will turn to the humanitarian measures .
In 2007 the Commission allocated EUR 30.5 million for emergency humanitarian aid and for multisectoral aid programmes designed to help the refugees and internally displaced populations as well as the host communities in Chad .
The Central African Republic received EUR 8 million in aid and similar amounts have been allocated for 2008 .
The third element concerns reintegration and rehabilitation .
Additional funding from the 9th European Development Fund of about EUR 13.1 million are to be mobilised in the short term for Chad and the Central African Republic .
The programme is intended as a continuation of ECHO 's activities in pursuing a strategy for rehabilitation and the transition to development .
Ladies and gentlemen , these aid measures are necessary but must at the same time be linked to actions involving the political process .
If lasting stability is to be assured , the actions being taken at international and European level need to be supplemented by various other activities associated with the restoration of the rule of law , the revival of economic governance , the reform of the legal and security systems , and the pursuit of political dialogue between the government and the opposition parties .
It goes without saying that this is an important element , especially in view of the 2009 elections .
The Commission will continue to promote this global approach in Chad and in the Central African Republic .
By the same token the Commission is fully active in trying to resolve the Darfur conflict , not only by providing humanitarian aid and help for reconstruction but also by lending support to the process of negotiation and mediation , in which we are obviously very much involved .
In this regard I recently informed the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr Ban Ki-moon , and the Chairman of the African Union Commission , Mr Konaré , that the Commission would be contributing to the Darfur Trust Fund in support of the negotiations .
Moreover , the Commission is also financing initiatives aimed at ensuring that Darfurian society is involved in and committed to the process of conflict resolution .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the humanitarian situation in Chad , especially along the country 's 1 360 km border with Sudan but also in the area bordering the Central African Republic , in my view makes intervention by the international community necessary .
I myself was in Chad a few days ago and was able to form an impression of the situation there .
More than 400 000 refugees and displaced persons are hosted in camps in this border area .
These camps are permanently under threat from bandits and marauding gangs but also from the Janjaweed militia from Sudan .
The situation in the open country is even more difficult .
Due to the lack of security there , more and more people are seeking refuge in the camps .
To help alleviate the plight of these people , the security situation in the region must be improved so that they can return to their homes .
This is a difficult challenge , and in order to manage it , burden-sharing is essential .
The United Nations has committed to helping to develop the police force , which can then partner the security forces .
The European Union , on the other hand , was asked to provide troops with the capability to ward off the Janjaweed and the bandits and prevent attacks on the refugees , displaced persons and the civilian population .
With this draft resolution , the European Parliament endorses this operation , albeit subject to the following conditions : firstly , as you have pointed out , Mr President , Commissioner , political negotiations must continue , for ultimately we need a political solution .
If we send troops , however , they must have a robust mandate which genuinely enables them to deter the Janjaweed and the bandits .
A very large area needs to be secured .
The force must therefore also be large enough to achieve a genuine improvement in the security situation .
It must be clear that this is a European force involving several European nations .
EUFOR must also be adequately equipped to fulfil its mandate .
In view of the relatively low troop strength and the size of the border area , this means that outstanding intelligence and transport capabilities are required , for the force must be able to determine quickly where there is a threat and must be able to reach the relevant location swiftly .
Under no circumstances should a situation arise in which , due to the mandate itself or to equipment deficits , a European force in Chad could only protect itself without being able to fulfil its real mandate .
A further condition imposed by the European Parliament is that a clear exit strategy must be defined which should foresee how and by whom EUFOR is replaced after its intended operational duration of one year .
In the present draft resolution the European Parliament also emphasises that in the light of the complex political situation in the region , this European force in Chad should act as a neutral force for security and the protection of the civilian population .
The deployment of EUFOR last year in Congo made it clear how important credible impartiality and independence can be for the success of an operation .
In the present situation , by deploying a force for a limited period of one year , the European Union can make an important contribution to improving the humanitarian situation and supporting the African Union as it takes on more responsibility in the region .
Both these aspects are necessary , and so I ask you to vote in favour of the present resolution .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Security Council Resolution 1778 , which was adopted yesterday , determines that the situation in the region of the border between Sudan , Chad and the Central African Republic constitutes a threat to international peace and security .
This Parliament 's motion for a resolution recognises the urgency of the situation and the European Union 's responsibility to provide protection .
An overwhelming majority of Members in this House agree with the humanitarian NGOs on the ground , with the refugees in the region who are living in miserable conditions and in a climate of permanent fear , and with the Secretary-General of the United Nations .
All cite the urgent need for an international presence in that region , which must include a strong military component .
There is no country or multilateral organisation that is better suited than the European Union to effectively fulfil the mandate given by Resolution 1778 .
The ESDP ( European Security and Defence Policy ) has come of age and exists for these very emergencies .
In this context , as regards sending an EU military force to the region , the Council and the Portuguese Presidency can count on the support in principle of Parliament .
However , the European Parliament must express its concern about certain aspects of this mission .
Firstly , we fear that the reluctance of Member States to provide the force with the minimum personnel and military equipment needed will greatly reduce its effectiveness .
We would add that the smaller the contributions of the other Member States , the more noticeable the French component of the force will be .
However , the perception of this mission 's impartiality is fundamental to its success and France is not regarded as a neutral player in the region .
Secondly , Parliament asks that this force be accompanied by a diplomatic offensive in the region in order to move forward the national reconciliation processes within Chad and the Central African Republic .
The roots of the instability , although linked to the drama in Darfur , are also domestic and can only be overcome through internal political processes .
As stated by Parliament 's motion for a resolution , without a genuine political reconciliation process in the region , the European Union operation , planned to last only 12 months , cannot sustainably contribute to peace in the region .
Finally , this Parliament welcomes the mandate of the force which will act under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations .
It is essential that this mandate is correctly interpreted on the ground and that the European troops are proactive in protecting civilians in danger , creating a humanitarian area for the international organisations and protecting the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad ( MINURCAT ) .
Recent history is full of tragic examples , from Kigali to Srebrenica , of defenceless civilian populations paying the ultimate price for the timidity and overscrupulousness of international troops .
We hope that one day this operation will be used as a model example of the ESDP and effective multilateralism in action and as due evidence of the European Union 's desire to strengthen the United Nations and contribute to conflict resolution in accordance with international law and the responsibility to protect enshrined therein .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you have already said several times , the UN Security Council yesterday voted unanimously to develop a multidimensional presence in east Chad and the north-east of the Central African Republic for one year .
This will consist of a civil and police UN mission that we will call MINURCAT following the UN and a military mission of the European Union , EUFOR , which will support and protect it .
This European security and defence mission will operate under Chapter VII of the UN Charter and that is extremely important because it means that it will be able to use all means to fulfil its task and it means that it will have a robust mandate , which is what Parliament expressly wanted .
That increases the chance of the mission succeeding but it also substantially increases its and our responsibility .
We have repeatedly expressed our concern in Parliament about the situation in Darfur and our alarm at the expansion of the lack of security and instability into neighbouring territories and the whole region .
More than 1 million people have been forced to flee , either inside their own country or across the borders .
They are exposed to all manner of hardship and acts of violence , with women and children usually suffering the most .
In addition , this situation is threatening the fragile peace agreements reached both in Chad and in the Central African Republic , because as well as the political rebels , ordinary bandits see it as their opportunity to rob , abuse and murder the civilian population .
EUFOR 's task will , therefore , be anything but simple .
However , before we can talk about that , we have to think about assembling those troops , as Mrs Gomes has said , and not only putting the force together but equipping it too .
The moment of truth is dawning for every Member State , including my own : the moment when , as well as fine words and noble statements , we have to deliver the goods in terms of soldiers and material .
That also holds good for Parliament .
We insisted , rightly , on thorough information and we have used our powers to give documented and substantiated advice .
We were able to do that partly because we had a lengthy exchange of views last week with General Leaky .
Our advice is positive .
It will be our job and our responsibility to ensure that the mission can get underway as soon as possible and in the best of circumstances .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Madam President , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group I would like to stress that we support the ESDP military mission within the largest peace-keeping mission in the world , in Chad and the Central African Republic .
We are talking about the most serious cross-border humanitarian crisis in the world .
In fact , the UN Security Council ought to have taken action much earlier .
The four-year delay has cost the lives of 200 000 people , 2.5 million people have been driven from their homes , and brutal attacks are being carried out on providers of humanitarian aid .
We can predict that the scale of the crisis triggered by the Darfur conflict will make it possible to test the European Union 's political will , as well as its military capacity .
A few days ago General D. Leakey assured Members that , regardless of funding problems and the difficulties in anticipating all possible threats and risks that could arise during the operation , in military terms the European Union was capable of carrying out this operation no worse than in Bosnia , and from a military viewpoint the operation would be less intense .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , here are some more figures relating to what we are talking about : 230 000 refugees , plus a further 170 000 internally displaced persons and an estimated 700 000 people who are indirectly at risk from attacks .
We are here to close this gap , this vacuum , in the protection .
That must be the focus of the European mission .
Since yesterday , the condition of a robust mandate has been in place .
The issue of neutrality is not resolved .
At the moment , it looks as if the French troops already deployed in Chad will merely be boosted by a few countries .
This puts both the neutrality and the success of the mission at risk .
What I want particularly from the Foreign Ministers who have to decide on Friday , however , is for them to ensure that the operational area of the EUFOR mission is clearly defined .
This is still not the case at present .
It would be a disaster if this mission were not permitted to operate where the help is most urgently needed , namely in the border area .
I expect the European Union to negotiate with the regime in Chad and ensure that it has the right to operate along the 35 km border as well .
Otherwise , this is a fig-leaf operation which could even put more people at risk .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , to clarify , this is an ESDP mission in Chad and the Central African Republic under Chapter VII of the UN Charter ; in other words , it is a military operation .
It is not about Sudan and Darfur . The French Government wants this EU mission at all costs .
It wants to provide the Force Headquarters and the Operation Headquarters itself .
The German and the British Governments are very sceptical .
French troops are already deployed in Chad .
It is quite clear that France is acting as a protection force for the governments in Chad and the Central African Republic and now simply wants to embellish its engagement there with the EU logo .
The French troops are not neutral ; on the contrary , they are obviously biased .
For example , they have bombed rebels operating in the country .
The rebel leaders have announced that if the EU force is not neutral , they will wage a war against these troops .
I have now heard that the Nordic Battle Group is not available , and the UN resolution calls for open cooperation with the military and the police in Chad .
It is obviously the case that Chad and the Central African Republic are not democracies .
Refugee return is not part of the mandate of this EU force and this mission is - to be frank - extremely dangerous .
As a group , we will be voting against the resolution tabled , because we believe that the situation will not improve but will deteriorate further as a result of this operation .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , let me clarify for the benefit of Mr Pflüger and the others : the mandate of the EU force is humanitarian in nature and consists of ensuring the safety of refugees from Chad and Darfur , also by military means .
The UN Security Council has endorsed the deployment of a UN-mandated European force and the consequence is that the European Union is immediately under international scrutiny to determine what it is actually capable of achieving in foreign policy and military terms .
This operation entails both a risk and an opportunity : it is a risk due to the extremely difficult political parameters in this conflict-laden region , but on the other hand , it also offers the opportunity to show that the European Union has developed foreign policy and military capabilities and can genuinely act to protect refugees in this region .
At present , however , and this view is shared by many , the risk is greater than the opportunity .
That is why the European Parliament has drawn up a list of conditions , which have already been outlined : from the time-limited mandate to precise definitions of targets and tasks , the proper preparation and technical equipment for EUFOR troops , and the granting of an operational mandate including an exit strategy .
Naturally , we must expect this operation not only to be approved but also supported by the local governments so that it is successful .
However , and I believe we all agree on this point , if all these conditions which the European Parliament has set are fulfilled , the prospects of success are greater than the risk , and we can approve the mission .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am satisfied with this draft resolution and with the decision that it upholds and I would also like to say something else : when man 's brutality leads to tragedy and suffering on the scale that we have seen in Darfur , then our conscience demands solidarity .
I am profoundly pleased that the European Union is responding to the appeal made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations .
Many Members and diplomats , including my friend and colleague Mrs Gomes just now , have stressed that this operation must under no circumstances be allowed to look like an opportunity to support French interests or to extend France 's military presence in the region .
I hope that I am surprising no one when I too give my vigorous support to this view .
Speaking as a former Prime Minister , may I say with some conviction that if France is still present in this region it is simply because of her significant historical heritage , where the burden of colonialism has been such that a policy of solidarity with the people is needed to try to help them regain peace and stability and to herald the start of effective governance .
France no longer has any strategic or economic interests in these regions and I am one of those who would have preferred to see us withdraw a long time ago : that would have saved a lot of money and would really have been in our own interest .
Even the uranium resources of the Niger do not constitute a strategic interest of kingly proportions , but simply require sufficient peace and stability so that these deposits can be made accessible to everyone and a competitive market can be established .
This then is essentially a European peacekeeping operation , not a French one , and that is the way it should be .
I would add a word of warning , however : this vision will only be made reality if a large number of European Member States agree to send troops .
It would be damaging if the spirit of solidarity , which for historical reasons has placed greater demands on France than on others to the extent that we have the largest contingent , were to be turned by your absence into a climate of post-colonial suspicion .
That would be senseless and I would take great exception to it .
Let me end with the following remark .
The oral amendment tabled this morning by our fellow Member Mr Gahler is for once - sadly for him - not relevant .
The Republic of Chad , by way of its Foreign Minister , gave its agreement in principle to this operation in a written communication that was sent to the Security Council several days ago .
I have a photocopy of this document here and I will be happy to make it available to Mr Gahler .
Madam President , I too support the decision to send 4 000 EU troops to Chad in the form of a peacekeeping force .
The reality is that there is a wholesale political instability in Chad and in the Central African Republic .
We know that genocide is taking place in the Darfur region of Sudan .
If peacekeepers are not sent to Chad , we run the risk of an even greater level of instability and violence breaking out in this region of Africa .
It is estimated that there are as many as 400 000 refugees from the Central African Republic and from Darfur in refugee camps in Chad , but there are only 250 guards from the army of Chad manning these camps .
Refugee camps in Chad are an enormous humanitarian crisis and the international community , including the European Union , must help the Government of Chad to deal with what is an escalating and growing problem .
The stories that we hear from people who have visited the area recently are really awful and , as I said , we have to do what we can to try and relieve the human misery that is going on there at the moment .
I very much support the decision to deploy 26 000 UN peacekeepers in Sudan .
The European Union must be at the forefront in participating in this peacekeeping force .
I also welcome the decision taken by my own Government today to carry out an immediate and in-depth assessment of the future role that Irish peacekeepers could play in the UN and EU peacekeeping missions in Sudan , the Central African Republic and Chad .
( DE ) Madam President , the situation in Chad and the Central African Republic is difficult for the people affected , and I therefore support , in principle , engagement by the EU to stabilise the situation and improve the real conditions of life for the people concerned .
In his statement of 27 August the President of the UN Security Council described the international community 's intentions to deploy an EU operation for 12 months with the goal of bridging the time gap until the deployment of a UN-led mission .
That is why the EU has also clearly limited the operation to a period of one year .
I am convinced that we need a robust mandate here ; that means not limiting ourselves purely to self-defence , but being able to pursue our objectives , if necessary , in the face of opposition from those who wish to stop us doing so .
The text of yesterday 's Security Council resolution points in this direction : it refers to a ' multidimensional presence intended to help create the security conditions conducive to a voluntary , secure and sustainable return of refugees and displaced persons ' .
We are authorised ' to take all necessary measures ' .
I urge the Council to ensure that this force is not simply a cosmetically enhanced French force .
In terms of the nationality of the commander , too , local sensitivities should be respected .
Unfortunately , France has not been neutral so far in the conflicts in Chad and the Central African Republic , but has traditionally supported the government .
For that reason , the language chosen for the command and operation at local level should be English , so that the people at least understand that these Europeans are obviously different from the ones they are accustomed to seeing .
Indeed , while I am on the subject of Britain , the UK has prevented the EU 's Command Headquarters in Brussels from leading the operation , and in my view , this warrants considerable criticism .
Not participating yourself but denying others the use of joint structures : that is something that we should not accept from those who drop out in future !
As regards the achievability of the goals , I still have doubts .
Have we set ourselves clear objectives ?
How many of the internally displaced persons should be back home by the end of the year ?
How many refugees from Darfur should have returned to Darfur ?
We would not have achieved enough if we handed on the baton after a year with the same number of people still in the camps .
The costs are also considerable : I hear that it will cost EUR 100 million just to build a suitable runway and headquarters .
Then there are the ongoing costs of the troops .
Can the Council give us any specific details of the overall financial framework ?
I have one final , but to my mind crucial , point : before deploying the force we must have an explicit assurance from the Government of Chad that it will subsequently endorse the deployment of a UN-led force , whatever the composition may be .
I have heard what our colleague has said .
I would like to have that confirmed in writing , in the form of an official document from the Government of Chad , not verbally from the Minister in the UN Security Council .
When I have this assurance , I can vote for the project .
Otherwise , we really will face the alternative , after a year , of either having to extend the operation or withdrawing and leaving a military vacuum in which an identical situation to the present one could very quickly arise .
In that event , we would literally have allowed hundreds of millions to run into the sand .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am delighted that we are today able to discuss and vote for a resolution on an issue that in my view does not get enough attention , for the situation facing the border communities of Sudan , Chad and the Central African Republic is quite simply intolerable and it is something that must never be forgotten in this House .
I for my part do not forget and I have no intention of passing over in silence the fact that this whole affair is one of the many consequences of the Darfur genocide , an event that has been masquerading as something else .
Since 2003 the Darfur crisis has created two and a half million refugees , including 125 000 in Chad . There have also been several hundreds of thousands of deaths .
Moreover , to date the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and the NGOs have had to move their camps 31 times in order to escape the violence , though this has not prevented the arrest of a number of their officials by the Sudanese police , the massacre of 12 humanitarian workers and the disappearance of five others .
The resolution that we are tabling today is clearly intended as an effective contribution to the objective of ending the situation that exists in the border areas .
This situation is unacceptable , but it is of relative magnitude when we see the scale of the disaster currently unfolding in that part of the world .
In this respect , I would like to point out that our responsibilities should not be limited to supporting or heading isolated and narrowly-defined operations as an emergency reaction to conflict situations .
This responsibility calls for action to be taken in the wider context to which such conflicts belong .
It also requires measures to be taken ahead of events , in other words making every possible effort to ensure that such conflicts do not happen in the first place .
The second part of my speech concerns the situation of the humanitarian organisations operating in the region .
The manner in which methods have evolved for the intervention of armed forces and for the role played by humanitarian agencies in conflict situations has meant that the boundary separating these two parties is becoming increasingly blurred .
As the confusion that exists between military and humanitarian personnel tends to act to the detriment of those missions traditionally assigned to the humanitarian agencies , we now find that the very survival of the humanitarian aid workers is being put at risk and , with it , the safety of all those people who are supposed to be benefiting from these services .
It is therefore absolutely vital that our protection force is not implicated in any way in the operations being undertaken by the various humanitarian groups that are working in the region .
I am pleased to see that the document before us today includes this point , which is so important for the future of our development policies both in this region and everywhere else in the world .
Madam President , I strongly support the sending of an ESDP mission to the Chad / Darfur border and I welcome the opportunity today to debate this proposition .
The conflict in Darfur has had dire cross-border consequences on neighbouring Chad and the Central African Republic , with a huge refugee spillover and the creation of thousands of internally displaced persons .
According to high level expert advice , this mission is doable despite some considerable operational and security challenges .
The infrastructure in this area is poor , water shortages subsist and logistic lines are difficult .
Such a mission will also face threats from rebel groups holding out against the government , but it appears based on a thorough assessment recently carried out in this region that all these challenges are surmountable .
So there is no reason to further delay deployment .
We have the military capacity ; what is now required is the political will .
I call for Irish troops to form part of this ESDP mission .
There is a sincere sense of urgency in this crisis region of the world , and Ireland could be part of a noble European effort to stabilise this border area .
Troops could be pulled from the Nordic battle groups for this operation .
Like these battle groups , this present ESDP mission is also intended to be a bridging operation .
Alternatively , Irish troops currently in the Lebanon could also join this mission .
This force has many worthy objectives .
It would improve the security situation in this region prior to further deployment of the United Nations / African Union mission in Darfur .
It would also be of assistance to relief organisations as it would open up previously impeded humanitarian corridors .
Thirdly , it would eventually facilitate the return of Sudanese refugees .
I believe this mission should have a robust use-of-force mandate with reference to Chapter VII of the UN Charter enabling it to have a deterrent effect when necessary , especially in the case of attacks against civilians , camps , villages , humanitarian workers , UN police officers and for self-defence .
The rainy season is abating .
The frequency of attacks on refugee camps is likely to increase as the militia and rebel groups become more mobile now that the rains have subsided .
The time for the UN to act is now .
Inaction is costing lives .
The EU is the most acceptable organisation to carry out this mission , and it is , based on several accounts , well-set to undertake this task .
I urge the Council to adopt a joint action immediately and to set the final stages in motion so that we do not miss the boat on getting EU troops in where they are urgently required .
Madam President , well , we do seem to have a lot of armchair generals in the House this afternoon !
The desperate humanitarian and security situation in Darfur and neighbouring regions of Chad and the Central African Republic certainly cry out for international action , but I have to say that is a separate matter from the issue before us today , which is really about ESDP , as we have heard from so many speakers .
I have long argued against the waste of resources , the duplication , the divisions , indeed the sheer duplicity involved in the EU 's attempts to develop a military capability .
There are no EU troops , Mr Ryan .
Our nations have troops and there are already well-tried structures for organising international military intervention by that small number of states that have capable armed forces and an expeditionary capability .
This is primarily through NATO and the UN .
The EU institutions have little to contribute to military matters .
It is clear that the motives of the ESDP enthusiasts are essentially political .
Indeed , one has said that Chad should be seen as a political opportunity .
The EU offered itself to the UN ; it was not the UN that invited the EU .
The EU is desperately keen to pin its institutional label on another military operation but , not surprisingly , national military staffs do not share the enthusiasm of the Eurocrats .
With extended lines of communication , over a thousand miles to the nearest seaport , lack of water resources and infrastructure , and a reluctance to take on rebel groups with offensive military operations , the Chad mission is precarious from every point of view .
Britain , Germany and Italy have already said that they will not be sending any troops .
What is this force going to do ?
Certainly not take on the armed hostile elements that have created the mayhem in this vast area of Africa .
Undoubtedly , therefore , most of its effort will go into protecting and sustaining itself in a very difficult logistical situation .
We really must stop playing around and using human tragedy as a political opportunity .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) I must very briefly highlight that this proposal to send a force under the ESDP ( European Security and Defence Policy ) to Chad and the Central African Republic is supported by a vast majority of the Members who have spoken on this issue .
As you will know , and as already mentioned here today , in the meantime - I believe just yesterday - the Security Council authorised the European Union to deploy this operation .
As mentioned , this authorisation was essential for the European Union so that the operation could go ahead .
All the military preparations and planning , in fact the whole exercise , can now go ahead and at a later date the Council will of course give an opinion on this issue through a joint action .
I consider that , by committing to this process , the European Union can now , as should be the case , move on from mere statements of intent and mere promises to practical steps and action .
This corresponds to what the European Union always says is , and what must be , its commitment to Africa and the African people .
We must help Africa and the African people in a close and complete partnership so that they can achieve peace where there is conflict , progress where there is poverty , health and education where there is disease , and something where there is nothing or very little .
In this way we will ensure respect for our values and our principles in our foreign policy as well .
The Portuguese Presidency therefore welcomes these latest developments and naturally also takes due note of the great support of many Members for this operation which has become clear in this debate .
To conclude the debate , I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure ( ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 27 September 2007 .
Situation in Burma ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Burma .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate and our discussions are highly topical and , of course , the Council and the Portuguese Presidency are monitoring events in Burma ( Myanmar ) with extreme concern .
It has been almost 20 years , in fact since the events of 1988 , since Burma has witnessed the kind of demonstrations that are occurring at the moment .
There is no doubt that what many commentators are saying about these latest events is true : namely that the country is at a crossroads which we regard as critical .
From the start the situation has proved to be highly volatile and , although we have made every effort to prevent the Burmese authorities from resorting to violence , today 's events demonstrate that , very unfortunately , the military junta in Rangoon is still deaf to the appeals of the international community , as it has been for many years to the constant and repeated international appeals .
If well managed , the situation in recent days could have presented an unprecedented opportunity for the first steps to be taken along the road to urgent political reform and national re-evaluation of the country .
We hoped that the junta would listen to the unequivocal message being sent by the demonstrators that its policies have failed .
What was in the beginning an ad hoc protest against the disproportionate rise in the price of fuel has become a vast public protest movement against the general policies of a highly dictatorial government .
Aware of the growing tension in the country , the European Union has not just stood back and watched the situation .
Immediately in August it vehemently condemned the detention of various opposition leaders , in particular the so-called ' 88 Generation ' group , which was protesting against the almost 500 % rise in fuel prices .
It called for the release of all political prisoners and highlighted the need to start a process of opening up , reconciliation and political reform .
Just yesterday we sent a clear message of solidarity and support to the Burmese population through the Joint US-EU Statement adopted by the 27 Foreign Affairs Ministers who are meeting in New York .
We call on the authorities to respect the right of the monks , nuns and ordinary citizens to demonstrate peacefully and we stress that this situation represents a new opportunity to try and solve Burma 's highly complex problems .
In another statement , also issued yesterday , the High Representative , Mr Solana , called on the Burmese authorities to continue exercising restraint and stressed that genuine peace , stability and development can only be achieved through political reform , the granting of fundamental rights and freedoms , and full inclusion of all stakeholders .
We have also discussed the situation with some of our partners in bilateral conversations on the margins of the UN General Assembly in New York .
In our continuing dialogue on Burma with partners in the region , including China , India and ASEAN ( Association of Southeast Asian Nations ) countries , we are encouraging the latter to talk regularly to the regime , placing particular emphasis on the following points : first , the long-term stability of Burma requires a genuine transformation , especially political ; second , the opening-up of the country is crucial to the development of Burma and is also in the interests of its neighbours and the international community as a whole .
We have also noted that Singapore , the current Chair of the ASEAN , has at least responded with a national statement in which it hopes that the current protests can be resolved peacefully .
The EU Foreign Affairs Ministers discussed the developing situation in Burma during the Gymnich meeting held at the beginning of September , and yesterday in New York , when all 27 met , they again tackled this issue , as I have mentioned .
In addition , this issue has been discussed by the Political and Security Committee in Brussels and was debated in more detail this morning within the Asia-Oceania Working Group .
We are obviously assessing all possible options for another European Union reaction and , although we hope that the situation will not deteriorate even further , we must be prepared for all eventualities .
We are also preparing for additional action through diplomatic channels and will remain in contact with the United Nations , in particular with Ibrahim Gambari , Special Envoy of the Secretary-General , who met with the presidency and institutions of the European Union in July , in other words immediately before the summer recess .
We also remain in close contact with our colleagues in Geneva where an incisive statement was made yesterday in the Human Rights Council .
Last night , due to the worrying news reaching us from Rangoon , we felt obliged to make another appeal to the Burmese authorities , asking them not to react violently to the people 's peaceful demonstrations .
We clearly mentioned the possibility of increasing the existing sanctions so that the message was precise and direct .
Finally , Coreper ( Permanent Representatives Committee ) will discuss this issue of Burma in more detail tomorrow .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , like the other European institutions the Commission is obviously very concerned about the situation in Burma / Myanmar .
We are keeping a very close watch on the dramatic events of recent weeks , and even of the last few hours , following the movement for resistance and peaceful protest that has been launched by the Buddhist monks .
As you know , Mrs Reding presented the Commission 's analysis of the general situation on 6 September : repeated human rights violations , political repression and a general deterioration in economic conditions .
I should also add to this the violations of international humanitarian law committed by the government of Burma / Myanmar against civilians and prisoners , together with the increasingly severe restrictions imposed on the ICRC as it goes about its work .
In recent weeks the regime has been reaping the bitter fruits of the explosive social and political situation that it has to some extent created itself .
What should be done in the face of such events ?
We are entitled to think either that the situation has an air of déjà vu about it , heralding a repetition of the violent repression of 1988 , or that we have reached a historic turning point .
Whatever the case , events in Burma / Myanmar seem to be taking an unpredictable turn .
The fact that the massive protest movement - with some 100 000 people taking to the streets of Rangoon last Monday - does not have a political agenda or any declared demands , obviously renders the situation more unstable and more precarious .
We clearly cannot rule out the possibility of the regime losing control of events as it takes action against the demonstrations .
There is no doubt that the intimidation , arrests and roadblocks that we are now seeing all point to the fact that a much harder line is being taken .
The arrests carried out this morning , the brutal manner in which the authorities have intervened and the fact that victims have been reported only serve to heighten our concerns .
Under such circumstances our primary objective must be to prevent any violent reaction on the part of the government and to urge those in charge to show the utmost restraint .
The safety and wellbeing of Aung San Suu Kyi is obviously one of our main considerations .
However , the protests have , to some extent , also provided an opportunity .
They show the regime , or at least those members of it who still have some perception of reality , that poor political and economic management has meant that people are no longer frightened of taking to the streets to express anger born out of despair that has existed for far too long .
The Commission 's second concern is therefore to urge the international community to persuade the government to make the gestures that are needed to restore a minimum of confidence and in this way to create the conditions under which the way can be paved towards national reconciliation .
The regime has to listen to the people 's aspirations for openness and democracy .
Any solution to the current crisis must of course involve a participative and transparent process that will allow all the parties that are interested in national reconciliation for Burma / Myanmar to contribute fully to the country 's political and economic future .
This is the message that my colleague Benita Ferrero-Waldner gave to our partner countries in meetings held alongside the United Nations General Assembly .
It is also vital that the states bordering Burma / Myanmar are made aware of their particular responsibilities .
I believe that China has already realised that its own long-term interests will not be served by such an explosive situation and it for one can exert a decisive influence .
However , we must also persuade India , Japan and South Korea , countries that have contributed significantly to the economic needs of the Burmese regime , to do more to help resolve the present crisis .
The ASEAN member states also have to be firmer in expressing their views .
Any deterioration in the situation in Burma / Myanmar can only have dire consequences for the entire region .
Finally , the Commission welcomes the special role being played by the United Nations , and more specifically the good offices of its special envoy Ibrahim Gambari , whose forthcoming visit to Rangoon will be of the utmost importance .
If the authorities in Burma / Myanmar again choose the road of repression , this will inevitably plunge the country into even greater international isolation , with further intolerable suffering for its people .
If , on the other hand , the authorities opt for open and democratic dialogue , they will then have to clarify their future roadmap for the country , give firm commitments as to a definite date for free elections and begin a sincere dialogue with their partners .
Under such circumstances the authorities in Burma / Myanmar will then be able to count on the support of the European Union and other partner nations .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , the European Union prides itself on its attention to human rights and yet it seems incapable of acting effectively against tyrannical regimes across the globe that continue to oppress and abuse their people year after year .
There is a mindset that seems to think that a statement and a common position are all that is needed .
The President-in-Office said in the previous debate that we should live up to what we say .
I agree with him .
Throughout my time in this Parliament I have fought against two particular odious regimes : Mugabe in Zimbabwe and the military junta in Burma .
Both have been the object of EU attention , but nothing has happened .
We should be ashamed .
Today our attention is focused on Burma where , for the past week , the Alliance of All Burmese Buddhist Monks has courageously led massive street protests in Rangoon and many other parts of Burma .
We are all shocked to see that a desperate situation has now turned to tragedy .
Pictures have been flashed around the world of injured monks , smoke-filled pagodas and battered civilians as the security forces begin their crackdown .
There are reports of at least five deaths , and hundreds more have been injured .
We were warned almost a week ago by the radio station Burma Democratic Voice that the Government had authorised the use of firearms , and prepared for a violent conclusion to the peaceful demonstrations .
It is high time that we stopped wringing our hands and got serious .
I am under no illusions .
As with Zimbabwe , the key to change in Burma lies with her neighbours , China in particular .
China is Burma 's biggest investor , trading partner and arms supplier .
There is a high-level Chinese parliamentary delegation in Parliament today , led by Mr Wang Yingfan , an influential member of the National People 's Congress .
I made a strong plea to him this morning for China to take action against the Burmese regime .
He reiterated China 's commitment to non-interference in the internal policies of other countries , but , at the same time , he assured me that China would continue to play a quiet but serious role and urge flexibility and a more positive approach on the Burmese regime .
We shall see what effect this has .
Yesterday , the Presidency of the European Union announced that tougher sanctions would be imposed in the event of a violent reaction .
That violence has come and those tougher sanctions must now follow if the EU is to retain any credibility on the world stage .
We must also make it clear that this time we will keep our word and stick to our sanctions .
There must be no repeat of the disgraceful episode in May when the Burmese Foreign Minister was allowed to attend an ASEM summit meeting in Germany in flagrant violation of the EU 's own travel ban .
We cannot ignore the fact , when considering sanctions , that TOTAL Oil is one of Burma 's few remaining foreign investors .
TOTAL is directly helping to prop up the military junta , supplying hundreds of millions of dollars every year for the regime to maintain one of the largest armies in the world .
The Burma crisis is one that we have discussed for so long , and it is now upon us .
We should remember that the men who were instrumental in the massacre of protestors in Burma 20 years ago now hold key positions in the regime .
It is a pity that the Council and the Commission did not listen more closely to Parliament on these matters over the years .
Today , once more , we are tabling a strong resolution ; it is short and very clear .
We say to the Burmese authorities : release Aung San Suu Kyi immediately , leave the protestors alone and convene a fully representative National Convention to include the National League for Democracy .
We say to the UN Security Council : meet now to address the situation in Burma and then immediately despatch your special envoy to that country .
We say to the Council and the Commission : talk to the US and to ASEAN to prepare a coordinated series of measures against the Burmese regime , including economic sanctions , if it responds violently and does not respond in the way that we are saying .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe , indeed the whole world , is looking at Burma .
Today , for the first time , blood has been shed , as my colleague from the UK has already mentioned , for nothing else can be covered up and that is a new situation in the debate .
The Socialist Group is appalled by the brutal methods deployed by the military junta against the peaceful demonstrators .
We expect the UN Security Council , which is now meeting in parallel , to take immediate measures and bring its influence to bear , and that means its influence over and with China .
The second message to be sent out today must be the European Parliament 's solidarity with the people of Burma : our solidarity , support and , yes , our admiration for the courage of its citizens .
The Buddhist monks are not a small elite minority .
They are part of the citizenry and are supported by thousands of people .
Clearly , the demonstrations were triggered by the arbitrary price increases , but violations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and specifically of International Labour Organisation standards , torture and forced labour have been practised by the junta for years .
In the age of globalisation , isolationism is no longer an option , and that is a good thing .
Democratic basic rights and the universal value system apply on the Asian continent as well .
We expect the long-planned constitution in Burma to be put on the agenda straight away , and that Burma - like Thailand , interestingly , relatively soon - will hold democratic elections .
It is possible to establish and implement democratic regimes in these regions .
Besides the UN and Europe , the ASEAN countries must of course also play a more active role , especially since they aspire to be something akin to an EU .
The demonstrations in the Philippines today are a positive sign of solidarity in the region .
There is no turning back on the road to democracy , even in Burma .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by humbly bowing my head before the incredible courage of the Burmese population who are peacefully protesting en masse against the military dictatorship in their country .
Today that regime embarked upon violent repression and our hearts go out to the fate of the Burmese people .
The European Union must protest against this more forcefully , not only in words , but also in deeds .
If the regime persists with the repression , sanctions must be stepped up and all European companies still operating in Burma called upon , if not forced , to cease their activities there .
The ASEAN countries should also tighten up their position with respect to Burma , and India and China should use their influence over the regime to urge it to enter into serious dialogue with the Burmese democratic opposition .
The Burmese regime does not only repress the population in the political sphere , it has also plunged the people into abject poverty and destitution , while it is a country that has everything necessary to be prosperous .
The mass demonstrations of the Burmese people provide abundant evidence that Aung San Suu Kyi certainly does not stand alone , but that she carries the hopes of the vast majority of Burmese .
The Burmese regime should give her back full freedom of movement immediately and release all political prisoners , including those rounded up today .
Finally , I want to call upon the European Union to make maximum use of the instrument to promote democracy and human rights that is now at our disposal .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the Commissioner , as well as my colleagues , for their comments so far .
The national movement for democracy in Burma said 18 years ago : What will it take to make the international community persuade the authorities in Burma to take on board democracy ?
Do we have to be gunned down in the streets and this to appear on television cameras before the international community will respond ?
Unfortunately , that prediction is now coming true .
We can see that one section of Burmese society , the Buddhist monks and nuns who live a life of non-violence and of pacifism , who give to others of their time , are now being slaughtered in the streets and intimidated by the military regime .
It is incorrect for people to think that any words that we speak here will achieve the ends we want to see .
However , likewise it is incorrect that the world has stayed silent for so long ; we can no longer remain silent .
And , as colleagues have said , it is up to us to use our influence , not just against the Burma regime but also our influence with China , India and Bangladesh to ensure that there is coherence and adherence to the sanctions that are in place and the demands for democracy .
Let us act to condemn the violence against peaceful protest but let us also ensure that we can give support to those protesters .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , it is obvious that recent events in Burma are increasingly leading us to a point of no return .
I feel that the large-scale demonstrations , not only by monks and nuns , but by thousands upon thousands of people who have supported and continue to support these protests , are sending a clear message to the military junta in Burma , but also a clear message to the world , stating that the Burmese people have had enough , that they are weary of the situation and that they want change .
It is exactly that desire for change that we in the EU and the international community in general ought to support .
It is obvious that after 30 years of sanctions with negligible results , the policy applied must take on a radical tack , and thus international policy must involve the countries in the same region : not just China and India , as has already been said , but also Japan and Singapore , which currently holds the ASEAN Chair .
This is why we ought to welcome not just the gestures made by the Council and the Commission , but also those being made in the UN to send a firm message of freedom for political opponents , particularly Aung San Suu Kyi , and in particular , a move towards democracy . I trust that at this time we cannot and must not abandon this aspiration .
Madam President , the State Peace and Development Council : that is the official name of the military regime in Burma .
Now in the present crisis in which the country finds itself , more than even before , that rings out as a cruel lie .
The junta has stood for the abuse of power and misrule for decades .
It makes sense that it is extremely economical with statistics .
Incidentally , the vast majority of the Burmese population are victims of two-fold exploitation .
Yes , indeed , two-fold exploitation : internally by the country 's military rulers - anyone doing business in Burma has to operate almost exclusively through the army - and externally by the People 's Republic of China , which is engaged in an extreme form of exploitation of the natural and rich agricultural resources of this south-east Asian state .
Diplomats in Rangoon even go so far these days as to say : ' Burma has become a quasi-Chinese province ' .
In schools in the north , built by China , Mandarin is the first language and Beijing time is the official local time .
Madam President , all in all the Burmese and Chinese rulers are almost indistinguishable .
I therefore call upon the Council and the Commission to be among the first to tackle robustly the Burmese rulers and Beijing about their shared responsibility for the suffering of the Burmese people .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when our resolutions and statements do not remain a dead letter or a feeble voice in the great ear of the Council , they are caught up in the flurry of events which certainly do not coincide with or await our plenary schedule .
A few days ago we voted almost unanimously in favour of a resolution on Burma .
Its recitals detail the numerous human rights violations being perpetrated in that country today , but they omit to recall that a Marxist-inspired and then military regime has been oppressing its people for decades , with support from China as is well known .
Not only is there oppression ; it is worth recalling that the Burmese regime is a system that bases a large part of its power and its budget on drug trafficking .
Concerning the repression , censorship and widespread harassment that have characterised the Burmese regime for years , I would point out that there is not only the much-acclaimed Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , not only journalists such as U Win Tin and actors such as Mr Zaganar or the well-known civil rights activist Win Naing .
Let me tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that there are also the Buddhist monks , as you know , but above all else there are many sizeable minorities .
These include one cultural and ethnic group in particular that was not mentioned in the resolution approved two weeks ago : the Karen people .
This people has for decades refused to fall into line with a system where subsistence depends on child prostitution and the cultivation of drugs .
Merely deploring the repression with which the State Peace and Development Council crushes popular protest , while simultaneously calling for democracy in Burma , is of no more use than the forceful condemnations , the requests for immediate and unconditional release of detainees - which , I emphasise , is crucial - and everything else that we do our utmost to write , beg or threaten without much practical effect .
Even US President Bush , despite his many vacuous remarks before the UN Assembly , has one point in his favour .
He has gone so far as to call for UN intervention and spoken of a country which has imposed a reign of fear , where basic freedoms are severely restricted , where ethnic minorities are persecuted , and where forced child labour , human trafficking and rape are commonplace .
Mr Bush went on to announce a tightening of sanctions , as has the Presidency-in-Office of the European Union .
Well , let us hope they serve some purpose , because if they do not we will certainly not hear any threats of bombing , neither of Burma 's military bases nor - still less - those of its partner , China .
The situation for the Burmese opposition is like that of the decades-old struggle of the Karen people : a lot of noise in Europe and the United States , but let that country sort out its own affairs .
For the time being there are no transnational interests at stake there ; for the time being the usual empty words are enough for the European Union .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I tried very briefly in my speech to give this House detailed and comprehensive information on all the political and diplomatic measures being taken and contacts being made in relation to the Burma ( Myanmar ) issue , on how we have been monitoring the situation and on what we have done .
I should now like to reaffirm the Portuguese Presidency 's absolute determination to continue monitoring closely the events developing in Burma and also to assure you that the Presidency will of course propose any measures which , in its opinion , prove our unequivocal solidarity with the people of Burma and which , at the same time , also unequivocally demonstrate to the Burmese authorities that there will be a price to pay for any further deterioration in the country 's situation .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Lobo Antunes , I would like to thank you , on behalf of the European Parliament , for having spent the entire day with us .
I want you to know that we have taken note of this .
To conclude the debate , I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 27 September 2007 .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.40 p.m. and resumed at 6.00 p.m. )

Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Burma is one of the worst and longest-lasting military dictatorships in the world .
It has kept its people in abject poverty , in stark contrast to the economic success of many of its neighbours .
Repression has been brutal .
Contact with the outside world is severely restricted , and the situation would have been forgotten were it not for the heroism of Aung San Suu Kyi in providing a focal point for the hopes and democratic aspirations of the people of Burma .
I hope that the next few days will see the end of the military regime without further bloodshed and I call on the Council and the High Representative to bring whatever pressure they can to secure that outcome .
in writing . - As Parliament 's rapporteur on the free trade agreement between the EU and ASEAN , I have made it clear in all my meetings with ASEAN trade ministers and officials that Parliament would strongly resist any concessions to the current Burmese military dictatorship .
The events of the last few days , where peaceful protest led by Buddhist monks has been met with teargas and bullets , have made an awful situation worse .
I had the privilege of visiting Aung San Suu Kyi in Rangoon almost a decade ago , when her house arrest was sufficiently relaxed for her to receive rare visitors .
She made it absolutely clear that she , as the representative and leader of the democratically elected National League for Democracy , overthrown by the military regime , wanted the EU to impose the strongest possible sanctions .
Now the EU and Member States should lead the demand for global UN sanctions through the Security Council .
Neither we , nor the people of Burma , can wait any longer .
in writing . - ( NL ) A new drama is playing out in Burma .
The junta has chosen confrontation with thousands of peaceful demonstrators .
This is extremely regrettable , because it is wonderful that the population has had the courage to come out in resistance without help from outside .
I support the unconditional release of Aung San Suu Kyi , U Khun Htun Oo , Ko Min Ko Naing and all other political prisoners and I support rapid democratic reforms .
The European Commission should make optimum use of the emergency funds , provided for in objective 1 of the Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights budget , so that sufficient support can be given to independent media , human rights activists and NGOs in Burma .
Further tightening of all the existing economic sanctions also seems unavoidable .
I am in favour of joining with the British and American measures and imposing strict restrictions on trading activities and financial transactions with Burma .
Parliament should send a delegation to Burma to assess the situation for itself .
in writing . - The situation in Burma is extremely worrying .
Those demonstrating against the military regime ( including the monks ) are showing immense courage .
The regime has brutally repressed previous demonstrations and shown scant regard for the welfare of its people .
International pressure must be maximised on the regime , including a commitment to hold those responsible for any atrocities in the coming days responsible before the International Criminal Court .
The EU must speak to China and India , who are in a better place to pressurise the regime , asking them to intervene to protect the demonstrators and help return Burma to democracy .
Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0316 / 2007 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Question No 1 is inadmissible ( Annex II , Part A , paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure ) .
Subject : Prospects for the Galileo project
The Galileo project is an extremely important project for the European Union , as it is the result of space-related research and cooperation between the Member States and can be applied to numerous areas , including that of transport .
Given the current deadlock in the financing of this project , I should like to ask the Council of the European Union what measures it intends to take to resolve this situation and what kind of cooperation with third countries , such as India , does the European Union have in mind for this project ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) As the honourable Member knows , during its meeting from 6 to 8 June 2007 the Council analysed in depth the situation of the Galileo project and adopted a resolution .
In this resolution , the Council invited the Commission to submit proposals on various aspects of the Galileo project .
The Commission has since then adopted these proposals ( on 19 November ) and we now hope that the competent Council bodies will analyse these with a view to taking an integrated decision on the implementation of the Galileo project , including the public funding and modalities of public participation , before the end of this year .
As regards cooperation with third countries , it should be recalled that the Council attributes the greatest importance to cooperation with countries that do not belong to the European Union .
Since 2001 , as you know , various cooperation agreements in relation to Galileo have been signed with non-EU countries such as China , Israel and Ukraine .
These countries are making contributions to the Galileo programme in terms of system definition , research and industrial cooperation .
In the specific case of India , a cooperation agreement was signed by the Commission and Indian negotiators in New Delhi on 7 September 2005 .
However , the Commission has decided to continue consultations with the Indian authorities in order to bring that agreement into line with the standard EC cooperation agreements on Galileo and to take account of the latest developments in this project .
In terms of the applicable rules , the Council must wait for a Commission proposal before making a decision on this issue .
In order to better define the position of third countries , on 22 March of this year the Council adopted a decision authorising the Commission to negotiate with non-EU countries with a view to signing agreements on their associated membership for participation in the European GNSS ( Global Navigation Satellite System ) Supervisory Authority ( GSA ) .
The main objective of this decision is to provide for a harmonised approach concerning all non-EU countries by clearly defining the modalities of their participation within the GSA .
( RO ) Mr. President , I would like to thank Mr. Secretary of State for the information provided .
However , I would like to come back to the first part of my question , namely the financing of the GALILEO project .
I would like Mr. Secretary of State to tell us more about the actual manner of financing this project and about the way in which the Commission 's proposal was examined and what will the actual decision of the Council be in the next period .
( PT ) I cannot predict what the Council 's decision will be on the issues that are on the table , in particular with regard to funding .
This issue must of course be discussed by the Council , together with the other issues set out in the Commission 's most recent proposals .
I can assure the honourable Member of two things : first , that the presidency understands that the Galileo project is a strategic project for the European Union and that it will therefore deal with this issue in that light , in other words as a project of strategic interest to the European Union ; second , that the presidency will do everything possible to reach a conclusion on the main aspects of the Galileo project during the Portuguese Presidency .

- ( ES ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I agree that Galileo is an urgent priority project for the EU , but farmers are extremely concerned because the Commission has come up with the idea of using surplus CAP funds to finance the Galileo project . Since 2007 did apparently produce a surplus , they are worried about their future .
My question for the Council is this : do the various governments , the 27 EU governments , agree that this ought to be a priority project and that funds should be applied either by means of extraordinary contributions or by using funds left over every year from the Community budget ?
( PT ) Thank you , Mr President .
I believe that I have already answered this question in my previous answer .
The issue of funding is still on the table .
The Council must discuss this as no decision has yet been made on this matter .
It is of course expected that the Member States will have differing points of view on this issue as well .
However , I consider that there is in fact a consensus among us on the strategic nature of this project .
Subject : Constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina
What is the Council 's opinion of the current state of the reforms , in particular the constitutional reform and the reform of the Dayton Agreement , in Bosnia and Herzegovina and what action is it planning to take to further the renewal and integration of this country ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union will assess the current reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the annual report on the progress made , which is scheduled for November as usual .
The Council has reiterated on numerous occasions the importance of the rapid implementation of the four essential conditions for the conclusion of the negotiations on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , as set out in the Council conclusions of 12 December 2005 , in particular the implementation of police reform .
However , as you know , the political situation has remained tense in recent months due to the radicalisation of the positions assumed by the main Bosnian political leaders .
At the moment it seems as if it will be extremely difficult to reach a consensus on the reform agenda , particularly with regard to restructuring the police force .
The High Representative , Mr Solana , met with Miroslav Lajčák , EU Special Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina , on 10 September .
During this meeting , which took place in Brussels , Mr Solana expressed his full support for the work of the EU Special Representative and his efforts to find a compromise on police reform with the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Secretary-General and High Representative , Mr Solana , urged the Bosnian leaders to engage constructively in the latest initiative presented by the Special Representative so as to remove the last obstacle preventing Bosnia and Herzegovina from concluding the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union .
He also called on the authorities of that country to act responsibly in order to finally deliver for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Council , too , has expressed its support for the efforts that have been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina on constitutional reform , with a view to creating more functional State structures that are more capable of reaching European standards .
Further effort is needed to continue improving the efficiency of the executive and legislative bodies and we must also reinforce the capacity for administration and coordination between the State and its bodies .
In terms of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance , the European Union has reserved EUR 1 million for constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
As you will know , the Council also adopted on 7 February 2007 a joint action amending and extending the mandate of the EU Special Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Under this amended mandate , the EU Special Representative will provide political advice and offer his services in the process of constitutional reform .
( DE ) Bosnia and Herzegovina will only have a future if it is transformed into a federation comprising all three of its nations on an equal basis , which must include not only the Herzegovinian but also the Central Bosnian Croats .
My question is quite specific : what can be done when an entity such as Republika Srpska blocks police reform and refugee return from within , but the EU only brings external pressure to bear on the state as a whole ?
Do you also speak to the individual entities and exert pressure on them , or can this only be done via the central state ?
If so , it becomes very difficult .

( PT ) Very well , Mr President , honourable Member , what I can say in this respect is that the European Union will do everything possible , through the diplomatic instruments available and particularly through the actions of its Special Representative , to ensure that the current deadlock in the constitutional reforms , particularly in the police reform , can be successfully overcome and to ensure that the obstacles encountered can be removed .
That is our commitment .
The Council will of course take account of the proposals and suggestions that may be made by the Special Representative as a result of his presence on the ground .
As the honourable Member may imagine , the Council is aware of the complexity of the situation and in particular of the urgent need to overcome the deadlock that we are currently encountering .
( DE ) As the Secretary of State knows , potential EU membership is a powerful driving force for political and economic reform in all the Balkan countries .
Very intensive negotiations are under way with Croatia , after all .
Can the Council offer an overview of the precise state of negotiations with Croatia , and above all , how the association agreements with the other countries are being implemented and whether they are working well ?
( PT ) Mr Seeber , as you know , the Council has repeatedly and systematically presented its point of view and opinion on the accession processes and on the European prospects of various countries , in particular the Balkans .
The Council has clearly stated that there is a European prospect for the Balkans .
In fact , for one of these , namely Croatia , we are already in the process of negotiating this country 's accession to the European Union .
As I have already stated , in November , as usual , the Commission will submit a communication to the Council reporting on the state of the negotiations , in particular the state of the negotiations with Croatia , and will make its proposals .
That will be the right moment for us to carry out a detailed and up-to-the-minute review of the state of the accession negotiations .
However , even though there may be certain difficulties , problems or delays here and there , it seems to me , according to my personal assessment of the state of the negotiations , that these are progressing at a good rate .
Subject : Measures to increase innovation
What specific proposals does the Portuguese Presidency intend to put forward to achieve 3 % investment in innovation ?
In what way will SMEs participate , particularly those in mountainous , island and very remote regions , in action that will be funded to promote innovation and research ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) As the honourable Member knows , the European Union has not at present agreed any quantified target for investment in innovation .
Such a target would be virtually impossible to define and put into practice as innovation covers a wide range of activities which are very difficult to define and measure .
The European Union therefore opted in 2002 to adopt a guideline quantitative target for spending on research and development , otherwise known as R & D. This is the well-known Barcelona target of 3 % .
It was possible to set this target as R & D actions , which are internationally defined in the OECD 's Frascati Manual , are easier to measure and quantify .
It should be noted that this objective has recently been used as the preferred reference indicator , given the difficulties encountered in recent years in increasing the private R & D effort in significant segments of the business sector .
However , action to promote innovation and research is a very high priority in the European Union 's policy .
It is being carried out through various instruments such as the Framework Programme and the CIP , otherwise known as the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , and also by using the Structural Funds .
The Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) and the CIP were conceived bearing in mind the needs of SMEs , which are the main beneficiaries of the CIP .
A minimum quota of 15 % has been introduced in the Seventh Framework Programme for the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in research activities covered by the thematic priorities set out in the Specific Programme on ' Cooperation ' .
It should be noted that the support in the Seventh Framework Programme for small and medium-sized enterprises may help to increase their competitiveness and innovation potential .
Mountainous , island and very remote regions receive support from the Structural Funds .
They are also supported through the relevant thematic priorities of the Specific Programme on ' Cooperation ' in FP7 , particularly with regard to improving their transport , information , communications and energy supply situation .
Under the Specific Programme on ' Capacities ' , the research potential of the EU 's convergence and outermost regions must be unlocked .
In addition to the current programmes and incentives , innovation will also be promoted through a series of initiatives which are currently being negotiated within the European Parliament and the Council .
These include the proposal to create the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , the EUROSTARS initiative , which will actively involve innovative small and medium-sized enterprises , other initiatives under Article 169 of the EC Treaty and joint technological initiatives provided for in Article 171 of the EC Treaty .
It should be added that the Commission is currently preparing its proposal for a strategic action plan for the SETs or strategic energy technologies , based on a wide-ranging public consultation .
It is aiming to present this proposal by the end of 2007 .
Along the same lines , I should also like to highlight the new industrial policy approach , which , in the context of sustainable development , is focusing on climate change in which innovation and the role of small and medium-sized enterprises in the European economy are fundamental aspects .
In all these initiatives , small and medium-sized enterprises will play a very important role .
Some of these initiatives will also be targeted at particular interests in the regions mentioned by the honourable Member , such as the ' bonus ' initiative which is already planned and through which marine research in the Baltic Sea area will be coordinated .
The Portuguese Presidency has borne in mind the pursuit of the 3 % target for R & D spending and must highlight the discussions held within the informal Competitiveness Council in Lisbon in July , when the role of public and private investment in R & D was analysed , together with public policy measures capable of contributing to the achievement of that target .
The informal Council to which I refer also considered the policy on small and medium-sized enterprises with particular impact on innovation and financing , internationalisation and energy efficiency .
Furthermore , by highlighting the need for specific measures in the area of human resources in science and technology and the reinforcement of measures in the area of the information society , the Portuguese Presidency also hopes to bolster the favourable conditions for an increased research , development and innovation effort across the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to ask the Council representative , whom I thank for his reply , whether the infrastructure of the Member States and the state of preparation of good governance enable this ambitious programme for innovation to be developed .
Are the Member States subject to controls when they implement any support scheme within the programme for innovation ?
( PT ) I hope that I have correctly understood the honourable Member 's question .
If not , I should of course like to be corrected or enlightened as to the exact meaning of her question .
I would say as follows : as the honourable Member knows , all these issues very directly relate to the Lisbon Strategy and in particular the Lisbon Strategy in its ' economy ' aspect .
At the moment we are obviously assessing various aspects in relation to the new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy .
One of the issues that we must assess and debate is precisely the role of the Member States in achieving the targets or objectives proposed in this area .
In particular , this concerns measures relating to innovation and development in small and medium-sized enterprises and also , of course , in the chapter on their governance , the way in which they can achieve these objectives .
We believe that governments and Member States have a fundamental role to play in this and it is also of course useful for the Commission to closely monitor how the Member States are developing and adopting their policies in order to meet the objectives set .
President-in-Office , in answering that question you mentioned energy efficiency , and I believe it is the right approach .
Yesterday Commissioner Potočnik also stressed that priority number one is energy efficiency and fighting climate change .
I would like to ask you , what additional measures can the Council take in order to mobilise all their resources and attention to solving this vital problem of efficiency and climate change ?

( PT ) As the honourable Member knows , in March the Council adopted a programme which is regarded as world leading on both energy issues and climate change issues .
We in the European Union will have an almost historic responsibility , I would say , at the Bali Conference , which will hopefully set new targets for CO2 emissions for post-Kyoto 2012 .
The European Union will clearly have a responsibility to support and / or encourage the international community to set itself as ambitious targets as we have proposed for ourselves .
We therefore already have , Mr Paleckis , a highly ambitious programme to implement across the European Union .
Among the specific energy issues , the issue of energy saving is on the agenda at both EU level and within the individual Member States .
I can tell you that in Portugal - and I have direct experience of this - this is an extremely important issue to which we have dedicated a great deal of effort .
However , the issue of investment in new energy technologies and in sciences relating to alternative energy sources has also been mentioned .
We have much to do .
We hope that what we have to do can be done quickly and well .
We must of course now concentrate on the ambitious programme for energy and climate change that we have agreed .
( DE ) We have voted on the EIT here in the European Parliament today and we agree de facto that it must have absolute priority .
When do you expect the Portuguese Presidency to be able to put forward a funding proposal which will then be implemented , in conjunction with Parliament , as swiftly as possible ?
Do you think that the EIT will play a role in the mid-term review and the Health Check as well ?

( PT ) Mr Rübig , I must tell you - Mr President , with your permission - I must tell you that the European Institute of Technology , its effective launch and its effective entry into operation are a priority for the Portuguese Presidency .
We will therefore strive to ensure that this Institute is set up before the end of the Portuguese Presidency .
Of course , while it is the Presidency that is taking action and making proposals , it is up to the EU institutions to adopt the Presidency 's proposals in this respect .
I can guarantee that the Presidency will try to act as quickly as possible .
There are other subjects and other issues which are of course the responsibility of the Council as a whole and of the institutions and we cannot ignore this fact .
Subject : Developments in Kosovo
The Secretary-General of the Council , Javier Solana , at a meeting with the UN Secretary-General on 10 July 2007 said , with regard to Kosovo : ' ... any further delay of this issue will not be beneficial ' .
In addition the French news agency , quoting diplomatic sources , said that Brussels was considering very seriously the possibility of recognising Kosovo but ' in the most organised way possible ' .
What are the Council 's comments on these developments ?
Can it categorically deny the possibility of unilateral recognition , particularly if it anticipates UN procedures in this regard ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , on 18 June 2007 the Council reiterated its position that the comprehensive proposal drawn up by President Martti Ahtissari , UN Special Envoy , provides the basis for the settlement of the Kosovo issue by a new resolution of the United Nations Security Council .
The European Council expressed its support for intensified efforts to ensure that the UN Security Council can adopt such a resolution in a timely manner .
As you are aware , the UN Security Council consultations on a new resolution are currently suspended , but the UN Security Council is very alert to this issue .
In a statement in August the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Ban Ki-moon , highlighted the initiative of the Contact Group for new negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade to be led by a Troika comprising representatives of the European Union , the Russian Federation and the United States .
The UN Secretary-General asked the Contact Group to report back to him by 10 December .
The intention behind this new period of negotiations is that the Troika will play a facilitating role , with the parties being responsible for proposing new ideas .
As you know , on 29 July 2007 the Secretary-General and High Representative , Mr Solana , appointed Ambassador Wolfgang Ischinger as the EU 's representative in the Troika .
So far the Troika has met separately with the parties on 10 and 11 August in Belgrade and Pristina , on 30 August in Vienna , and on 18 and 19 September in London .
At the ministerial-level Contact Group meeting , which will take place on 27 September in New York alongside the UN General Assembly , ministers will discuss the state of the negotiations and must issue a statement aimed at giving significant impetus to this process .
On 28 September , also in New York , further separate meetings will be held between the Troika and the parties , possibly followed by an initial direct meeting between the parties on the same day .
As Mr Solana has highlighted , it is now essential that the parties cooperate constructively in this process and conduct substantial negotiations .
On the conclusion of the Troika process , the UN Secretary-General must present a report to the UN Security Council on this issue .
As you must realise , at this stage it is still too early to predict the results of these processes .
( EL ) Mr President , only yesterday Condoleezza Rice said that Kosovo will become independent .
The US scenario is clear : a unilateral proclamation of independence by December and immediate recognition by the USA .
What position is the Council adopting with regard to this method of operation ?
Are you concerned by the worsening destabilisation of the wider region by Albanian nationalism ?
Does the Council finally intend to act in a unified , perceptive and uniform way ?
I have read in the New York Times that European diplomats are hastening to pre-empt the Council 's position , which will slavishly follow that of the United States .
Why do you not tell us what the diplomats at the Council are saying ?
We would like a clear answer .
( PT ) I have not read or heard the statements by Mrs Riis-Jørgensen and I would not therefore like to comment on them directly .
However , I would say the following : we now have a process to follow , a process which is being led by a Troika comprising representatives of the European Union , the Russian Federation and the United States .
We should leave the Troika to carry out its work , which should properly occur in a climate of tranquillity and confidentiality .
As far as the European Union is concerned , the work of this Troika naturally has our full support .
In addition , this Troika has a very clear mandate to present a report in December which will form the conclusion , which will contain the conclusions and in all likelihood recommendations resulting from its work over the next few months .
We therefore hope , as I have said , that this work will be concluded , that the report will be published and that any recommendations made by this Troika will also be made known to us .
In particular , it is fundamental for the European Union that , whatever these conclusions or recommendations may be and whatever the prospects for the future of Kosovo are , as indicated in the Troika 's report , in any decisions that may have to be taken , the European Union remains united and cohesive .
This has been the constant call of the Portuguese Presidency and we are confident that this call will be heard .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , do you know that Mr Papadimoulis is completely isolated here ?
Are you familiar with the resolution adopted by this House in which a 75 % majority of Members said that we were in favour of the Ahtisaari-Rohan plan and that we were clearly in favour of sovereignty under international monitoring ?
Do you know that we unequivocally ruled out the option of a division of Kosovo ?
I would also like to ask you what you think of these rumours and the talk of a division of Kosovo , which was actually ruled out by both the Contact Group and this Parliament .

( PT ) The issue of the division or partition of Kosovo is not in any way on the agenda , nor does it form part of the Troika 's work .
Subject : Kazakhstan 's candidacy for the OSCE Chairmanship
It is reported that Kazakhstan is putting itself forward as a candidate to hold the Chairmanship of the OSCE in 2009 .
The Foreign Affairs Minister of the country holding the Chairmanship represents the organisation and coordinates all the activities of the OSCE .
Kazakhstan is well known to be a country which has never held an election meeting international standards , and where human rights are in a very poor state .
The EU Member States very often act together as a block in the OSCE .
Unanimity is particularly to be expected on an issue as fundamental as this , in which an undemocratic country is pushing itself forward to be Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE .
This difficult decision is to be taken in November .
Is there a consensus within the General Affairs Council that the candidacy of Kazakhstan is unacceptable ?
Will the Member States present a united front ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Thank you , Mr President , honourable Member .
The European Union has not yet made any decision on the candidacy of Kazakhstan for the OSCE Chair in 2009 .
As the EU sees it , this candidacy will underline the need for Kazakhstan to pursue reforms and respect the OSCE rules and obligations in all their dimensions .
The Council has repeatedly affirmed that any country holding the OSCE Chair must set an example of respect for the principles of that organisation .
In meetings with the political authorities of Kazakhstan , the European Union , the Council and the Commission have emphasised that Kazakhstan must show that it is ready and able to commit to full compliance with the OSCE 's rules and obligations in all their three dimensions , namely the human dimension , the political and military dimension , and the economic and environmental dimension .
deputising for the author . - ( NL ) Thank for your reply , Minister .
May I assume that you imply that Kazakhstan does not meet those conditions at the present time ?
( PT ) I must comment because the honourable Member has inferred something from what I said that was not exactly what I said .
What I said was that no decision has been made on Kazakhstan 's candidacy and that a decision on Kazakhstan 's candidacy will take into account , at the appropriate time , Kazakhstan 's compliance with the conditions I mentioned .
This analysis and debate will take place at the appropriate time and in the appropriate place .
As the author is not present , Question No 7 lapses .
Subject : Bluefin tuna fishing in the Mediterranean
On 11 June 2007 the Council adopted Regulation ( EC ) No 643 / 2007amending Regulation ( EC ) No 41 / 2006 as concerns the recovery plan for bluefin tuna recommended by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas .
However , the text does not respect the principle of equal treatment for bluefin tuna fishermen in the European Union .
The rules governing the minimum weight of fish caught and the fishing periods differ according to the geographical areas of the catches .
What are the reasons for such disparities in the way Mediterranean and East Atlantic fishermen are treated ?
The restrictions imposed on French bluefin tuna fishermen in the Mediterranean could seriously disrupt the sector 's socioeconomic balance .
Above the 30 kg limit imposed by the new Regulation , tuna are hard to sell .
A two-week reduction in the fishing season means a significant drop in turnover for fishermen .
Around one thousand fishermen and their families are directly affected by these measures .
In what way is bluefin tuna fishing more harmful in the Mediterranean than in the East Atlantic ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Thank you , Mr President , Mr Navarro .
On behalf of the Council , I should like to thank the honourable Member for his question on the bluefin tuna recovery plan .
This plan was drawn up following an opinion from scientists at ICCAT ( International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ) , which recommended immediate and extensive action to prevent the current collapse of bluefin tuna populations in the Mediterranean and East Atlantic .
ICCAT adopted the recommendation aimed at implementing a 15-year recovery plan at its annual meeting in November 2006 held in Dubrovnik .
As a result , the European Community , as a member of ICCAT , accepted the international obligation to transpose said recovery plan into Community law .
In commercial terms , the consequences of total non-compliance with this obligation would be seriously prejudicial to the European Community 's position in the Asian markets .
This obligation was met for 2007 through the adoption of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 643 / 2007 amending the Regulation on TACs ( total allowable catches ) and quotas .
Based on a Commission proposal , the Council is currently assessing the regulations needed so that the plan can be permanently applied for a further 14 years as from 1 January 2008 .
Different rules apply to the various areas in order to reflect the respective differences in terms of types of fishing , levels of activity and situation of the population units .
It should be recalled that these fisheries range between high-technology industrial fishing and non-industrial traditional fishing .
The ICCAT groups decided on the plan based on scientific opinions which made certain distinctions between the Mediterranean and the East Atlantic .
The Council is therefore of the opinion that ICCAT tried to follow this scientific advice while differentiating the elements of the recovery plan in order to attenuate its socioeconomic consequences .
The Council is fully aware that this important recovery plan has socioeconomic consequences for the fishing communities in question .
These consequences would also be felt if the bluefin tuna populations were to collapse again .
During the negotiations with a view to adopting Council Regulation ( EC ) No 643 / 2007 , the Council and the Commission agreed to introduce a provision ensuring that the recovery plan would be recognised as such by the European Fisheries Fund .
This will enable Member States to use part of their resources from the Fund to mitigate the economic effects on the fishing communities affected .
It is planned that this provision will remain in force until 31 December 2014 .

deputising for the author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I now wish to speak on behalf of Mr Navarro , and then ask a question of my own , or rather repeat a question .


My question on behalf of Mr Navarro is as follows : Article 23 ( 4 ) of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2371 / 2002 , which provide for the establishment of a bluefin tuna recovery plan , allows any surpluses produced by a Member State with respect to the yearly quota to be deducted from future fishing possibilities .
What I wish to ask the Council is : what will happen to those who have caught less than their quota this year , since the Commission closed the fishing grounds last week ?
Mr Ortuondo , I cannot give you the floor as I already have two speakers listed .
However , I will give you a further 15 seconds if you wish to ask your question immediately because , under the Rules of Procedure , I cannot allow three supplementary questions .
As an exception , and with the forbearance of all those present , I therefore allow you to continue for a further 15 seconds .
( ES ) Mr President , I also wish to beg your indulgence to ask the Presidency of the Council how Regulation ( EC ) No 2371 / 2002 can be applied if the Member States have failed to cooperate with the Commission by not sending it the compulsory documentation on catches during this fishing year .
( PT ) The honourable Member has asked me certain questions , one of which is very specific and detailed .
I will try to answer as best I can but I very sincerely believe that the first question directly relates , and would be better put , to the Commission .
I feel that the Commission is certainly in a better position than the Council to give you the clarification you want .
With regard to your second question on the alleged lack of cooperation by Member States with the Commission , of course if this is true then it is up to the Commission itself to analyse the situation and find the best way of , shall we say , forcing the Member States to comply with what they themselves may have laid down .
This is clearly why I consider that the question would be better put to the Commission than to the Council .
( DE ) I would like to ask the Presidency how it is dealing with the phenomenon of climate change in relation to fishing quotas .
We all know that climate change is currently buffered by the strong heat absorption of the oceans ; 80 % of the energy is still being absorbed here .
However , it must of course be assumed that in future there will be massive warming of the marine environment as well .
How is the Presidency ensuring that appropriate account is taken of these new scientific findings and that consideration is given to the aquatic environment when setting fishing quotas ?

( PT ) I feel that this is another question that would be better put to the Commission , rather than the Council , as the Commission naturally has a leading and fundamental role in this respect .
I can tell the honourable Member , as I have already said , that the environmental issues , particularly those relating to climate change , are on the Presidency 's agenda and on the Council 's agenda as a priority item .
We will be facing a major challenge after the Bali Conference at the end of this year and , following this whole process , we hope to be able to decide in 2009 on new targets for CO2 emissions .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I also wish to make some remarks on the bluefin tuna issue , and more specifically on the closure of fishing grounds decreed by the Commission recently since the quota allocated to the European Union had been exceeded .
From the information supplied to us by the Commission , it may be inferred that when the fishing grounds were closed certain Member States , including Spain and Portugal , had not yet caught their quota , although others such as France and Italy had exceeded theirs , and had in fact doubled it , thus placing the European Union in , at the very least , an embarrassing situation of having infringed the international rules .
My question , which is directed at the Council , is as follows : what measures can the Council take to compensate states that have not exhausted their catches through deductions from those that have used up more than their quota ?
Can the Council do that ?
I also have another question : what does the Council intend to do ?
What measures will it take to ensure that this kind of situation does not happen again ?
( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Miguélez , once again I must say that you will have to put these questions to the Commission .
It is the Commission which is naturally in a position to properly answer the questions that you have just asked me .
Subject : Making EU laws in public
Is the Council aware of any negative consequences resulting from its decision in June 2006 to transmit on the Council website the proceedings of its meetings at which legislation is debated by ministers ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) In answer to the honourable Member 's question , the Presidency would refer you to the report on the implementation of the overall policy on transparency presented by the previous Finnish Presidency to the Council on 11 December 2006 .
This report contained the Council 's latest review of the impact of the new transparency measures on the effectiveness of the Council 's work .
According to the preliminary conclusions of this report , which is also preliminary , a more thorough evaluation should be made , before the end of 2007 , of the effects of the new transparency measures when more practical experience has been gained of their implementation and impact on the Council 's work .
I can tell you that in the first half of 2006 a total of 98 deliberations and debates were open to the public , in accordance with the European Council Conclusions of 15 and 16 June 2006 and Article 8 of the Council 's Rules of Procedure .
I welcome the President-in-Office 's response and I am very pleased that the Council took the decision to arrange for the transmission of these proceedings in advance of any provisions that may be found in the Reform Treaty .
I note the President-in-Office 's response that , before the end of 2007 , a review will be undertaken and published , which , I hope ; will indicate how the principles of openness and transparency in this area may be extended .
Can the President-in-Office confirm that , before the end of his presidency , such a review will indeed be published ?

( PT ) What I can confirm and assure you of is that this is a subject dear to the Portuguese Presidency and we will do everything possible to take this process forward .
I cannot , at this moment in time , guarantee specific dates for this review , but I can guarantee that the Portuguese Presidency is keen to take forward this issue of transparency and is committed to this .
Subject : Situation in Afghanistan
What role does the Council see for the EU in stabilising the situation in Afghanistan , where troops from a number of EU Member States are stationed ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) The European Union 's approach is essentially based on strict coordination .
Internally , particular attention has been paid to ensuring complementarity and mutual reinforcement of the actions of the European Community , Council and Member States .
Externally , the European Union has been one of the main members of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board set up under the 2006 Afghanistan Compact .
The Council Decision of 12 February 2007 to move forward with the ESDP ( European Security and Defence Policy ) mission to Afghanistan must be understood in the context of this wider strategy .
The EU Police mission ( EUPOL ) is currently in the planning stage .
Through this mission , the European Union is indicating its intention to play a more active role in the field of policing with linkages to the wider rule of law .
This mission will of course dovetail with the Commission 's commitment to reform the justice sector .
All these efforts have the common objective of reinforcing the sovereignty of the Afghan institutions .
Since 2001 Afghanistan has made very significant progress in terms of setting up representative political institutions , freeing the press , creating institutions in the security sector , making improvements in health and education and in human rights and the status of women , appointing a functional supreme court and setting up a consultative panel for the appointment of senior officials .
The European Union has played a fundamental role in this process and has already contributed EUR 3.7 billion since 2002 .
The European Union is continuing to intensify efforts to ensure that its development aid reaches Afghans in all parts of the country .
The greater emphasis now being placed on governance and the rule of law is intended to reinforce the action in other areas .
The Commission has been developing programmes in the areas of rural development , health and governance , and will financially support any civilian activities carried out by Member States through provincial reconstruction teams .
The European Union firmly believes that , as stated by the European Council of 14 December 2006 , the security and development of Afghanistan are interdependent .
That is why the European Union has always been committed on a long-term basis to Afghanistan through a strong and balanced strategy .
( PL ) Thank you very much , Mr Antunes , for this clarification .
I simply wished to refer to one key issue that also relates to the statements by representatives of the European Commission active in Afghanistan before Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I wanted to enquire whether the Council intends to increase humanitarian aid to Afghanistan and intensify efforts to rebuild civil society there .
In my view , much more than military presence is needed in Afghanistan . My country is , however , committed on the ground in Afghanistan , which is indicative of a certain desire to achieve stability in that region .

( PT ) I agree with the honourable Member : promoting security and stability in military terms in Afghanistan is fundamental , but that is only one part of what we have to do in that country .
We also have to work on strengthening the democratic institutions in Afghanistan and we must also concentrate on the ' Afghan civil society ' component .
We must invest in health , education and training .
We must also of course continue to win the hearts of the Afghan people .
That is why we have a strategy with two aspects to it , one of which is the military aspect involving security and stability on the ground .
Without security , without stability on the ground , there can be no peace and there can certainly be no economic and social development .
We therefore need to guarantee this aspect and , at the same time , work on , and invest in , Afghan civil society and the Afghan democratic institutions , which we refer to as rebuilding the administrative capacity of the Afghan State .
( DE ) Economic stability in Afghanistan is the key prerequisite for a functioning democracy and peace in that country .
In the European Union , we have the Oslo Agenda for Entrepreneurship Education for SMEs to promote business start-ups , foster entrepreneurial mindsets and promote exports and imports .
Can you envisage this Oslo Agenda being implemented in Afghanistan as well ?

( PT ) Mr Rübig , I believe that we have to invest in all areas of Afghan society , as I have just mentioned .
Clearly , in a country such as Afghanistan , with its current security difficulties , economic difficulties and its particular social structure , I believe that a very important role can be played by small and medium-sized enterprises .
It therefore seems to me that this is truly a sector in which , in terms of forming the economic and social fabric of Afghanistan , we can and must invest .
Of course we can discuss how to specifically use the financial instrument , but clearly no one is currently expecting , at least not at the moment , large enterprises to set up in Afghanistan .
It is not the time for that .
In order to revitalise the Afghan economic fabric , I believe that we must , in particular , concentrate our efforts on qualification , on training and , at the same time , on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Subject : EU response to stop organised crime in Europe
Can the European Council make a statement as to the level of organised crime within Europe at this time and what coordinated initiatives are being put in place at EU level to combat the growing threat of organised criminal activity ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) The Council refers the honourable Member to the Organised Crime Threat Assessment ( OCTA ) , which is annually produced by Europol for the Council 's attention and a version of which is published and submitted annually to the European Parliament .
On 13 June this year , in its conclusions on the OCTA 2007 , the Council restated its conviction that the fight against organised crime should focus on reducing the threat and the harm caused by it and , in particular , on tackling the following problems : the obstacles to dismantling organised crime groups stemming from their international dimension or influence , the level of infiltration of organised crime into society and the economy , especially the misuse of legitimate business structures and the transport sector in particular , and , finally , the misuse of technology by organised crime groups .
The Council also stressed that the European Union 's priorities for 2007 should be the following criminal markets : drug trafficking , especially in synthetic drugs ; smuggling and trafficking in human beings , especially in relation to illegal immigration ; fraud , especially in the area of highly taxed goods and Value Added Tax carousels ; euro counterfeiting , commodity counterfeiting and intellectual property theft , and money laundering .
As was the case with the OCTA 2006 , these conclusions highlighted the need for a multidisciplinary intelligence-led approach in order not only to disrupt criminal activities but also to dismantle criminal organisations , bring the offenders to justice and deprive them of the proceeds of crime .
This implies drawing on dedicated ( specialised ) resources and organising structures with a view to using all information that is available to law enforcement and thus identifying and tackling the most threatening criminal groups .
The Council also calls in its conclusions for the further development of a new , intelligence-led control strategy covering the entire national - and possibly EU - territory , complementing external border controls with checks , en route or at destination , monitoring financial movements and expanding the analytical capabilities of national and EU law enforcement agencies .
There are two parts to my question .
The first you have answered in the sense that you have given me the initiatives that have been put in place , but you have not answered the part about the level of organised crime .
Many people would feel that is grossly underestimated at the moment and organised criminal gangs are infiltrating huge numbers of countries , if not all countries , in the European Union .
This is a problem that is not going away and many people feel that it needs to be tackled in a far more coordinated manner than it is at the movement .
I suppose what I am asking you is about the levels of organised crime within Europe .

( PT ) Mr Ryan , as I have already mentioned , I feel that it would be , or rather that it is useful and in fact essential , to review or consult the Organised Crime Threat Assessment for Europe .
I am not disputing whether or not there is more or less crime as I do not at the moment have any information to give you on this , but it is often the case that there is a psychological perception of an increase in crime when the facts do not actually support this .
However , there is one thing that cannot be disputed : we do need a greater concerted effort by , and more cooperation between , the Member States , especially cooperation between the European institutions and the Member States , in order to eliminate the threats posed by organised crime , which are wide-ranging and varied .
As I indicated , due to the new technologies that are available , organised crime groups have extraordinarily sophisticated means of operation that are extremely difficult to combat .
I believe that all our Member States are aware of these new technologies and the new opportunities offered to criminals by these technological developments , which are definitely causing specific problems in the fight against organised crime .
Of course the Portuguese Presidency , as it should , will consider all proposals and suggestions made by the institutions in order to more effectively fight the threats posed by these criminal groups which , due to the type of crime perpetrated , cannot fail to have a major impact on our societies .
I expect the President-in-Office would be appalled by any link between organised crime and any government within the EU .
Yet , sadly , that is exactly the situation in Northern Ireland , where Sinn Féin , a lead party in government , is inextricably linked to the IRA , whose illegal Army Council controls a portfolio of hundreds of millions of euros accumulated from the IRA 's organised crime activities .
This is one of the reasons why its Army Council has not been disbanded .
Will the Council join in condemning this obscenity and call upon IRA / Sinn Féin to disband its illegal Army Council forthwith ?

( PT ) My response to the issue of fighting organised crime and the Council 's assessment and response are contained in my initial speech .
I have nothing further to add on this issue .
Subject : Road safety
Can the European Council outline what measures it is pursuing so that a greater level of road safety takes place within the territories of the European Union ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Ó Neachtain , as the honourable Member is certainly aware , following the presentation by the Commission of the Mid-Term Review of the European Road Safety Action Programme in March 2006 , the Council adopted conclusions at its meeting on 8 and 9 June 2006 .
In these conclusions the Transport Ministers of the European Union and the European Commission agreed on the need to strengthen road safety measures and initiatives at Community or Member State level .
As a result , in October 2006 the European Commission adopted two legislative proposals on the issue of reinforcing road safety and , thanks to excellent cooperation between the European Parliament and the Council , the two co-legislators quickly reached agreement on a proposal for a directive on the retrofitting of mirrors to heavy goods vehicles .
This entered into force in August 2007 and will be implemented by 31 March 2009 .
The Commission estimates that this new legislative measure could save up to 1 200 lives on the Community 's roads between now and 2020 .
The Council is currently assessing the proposal for a directive on road infrastructure safety management on which , pending the opinion of the European Parliament , it hopes to adopt a general approach at the Council meeting on 1 and 2 October .
The Commission estimates that around 7 000 injuries and 600 lives could be saved every year if the measures proposed in this draft legislative instrument were applied .
I must also say to the honourable Member that he can be assured of the Council 's intention to positively assess all road safety measures and initiatives proposed by the European Commission in the context of its current efforts to reduce the number of deaths and injuries on the Community 's roads .
I thank you for the reply but I just want to ask you if , in your opinion , a more coordinated approach is needed now in view of the number of Member State nationals who travel from one country to the other , especially as is the case in my own country , Ireland , where many people from Eastern Europe come in and bring their cars .
I do not think that the Council , or indeed the Commission , has made adequate provision for this type of travel at the present moment .
( PT ) Being Portuguese , I too have noticed very dramatic developments in my country in terms of road safety .
Portugal has a problem , or has had a problem , in this area and so we have made very significant efforts .
These have , in recent years , resulted in a very significant reduction in what was a plague of deaths on Portuguese roads , particularly in road accidents .
This reduction has been due to systematic and persistent action by the government .
This is a problem of which we are well aware , which affects us very directly and to which we are alert and highly sensitive .
I said at the end of my speech that the Council , in this case the Portuguese Presidency , will pay close attention to , and will be totally ready to assess and take on board , any proposal that the Commission may make to the Council aimed at further improving the current efforts being made to reduce the number of deaths and injuries on the Community 's roads .
As I have said , the Presidency , in other words the Member State holding the Presidency , is particularly sensitive to this issue because it , too , has to deal with this problem in Portugal .
As a result , as I have said , it is therefore willing to pay particular attention to any proposals made by the Commission to the Council in this respect .
Subject : The accession of Croatia into the European Union
Can the European Council make a comprehensive statement outlining how Croatia 's efforts to join the European Union are proceeding at present ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Crowley , I have already had the opportunity here today to briefly mention the process of Croatia 's accession .
I will now go into slightly more detail while still being as brief as possible given the time constraints .
I can tell you , Mr Crowley , that the accession negotiations with Croatia are well on the way and significant progress has made been this year .
Overall we have opened and provisionally closed two chapters : Chapter 25 - Science and Research and Chapter 26 - Education and Culture .
In the meantime , another 10 chapters have been opened .
These are : Chapter 3 - Freedom to Provide Services ; Chapter 6 - Company Law ; Chapter 7 - Intellectual Property Law ; Chapter 9 - Financial Services ; Chapter 10 - Information Society and Media ; Chapter 17 - Economic and Monetary Policy ; Chapter 18 - Statistics ; Chapter 20 - Enterprise and Industrial Policy ; Chapter 29 - Customs Union and , finally , Chapter 32 - Financial Control .
In addition , the Council intends to hold the fifth meeting of the Accession Conference with Croatia at ministerial level on 15 October in order to open Chapter 28 - Consumer and Health Protection .
Other chapters will follow at the end of the year .
There is still a lot of work to do , particularly in areas critical to the success of any candidate country , such as reform of the judicial system and public administration , the fight against corruption and economic reforms .
The Council is also continuing to urge Croatia to improve its administrative capacity and to effectively transpose and implement the acquis so that it can meet its membership obligations in due time .
In order to maintain this dynamic and ensure a quality process , we must point out that further efforts are needed to meet the requirements of the Negotiating Framework , including Croatia 's obligations in respect of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , and also the implementation of the Accession Partnership .
Could I just say before I ask my question that I think it is wonderful that the President-in-Office has spent so much time in the Chamber today and participated so well in so many debates .
Thank you on behalf of the House .
With regard to the time-frame for Croatia , we know the difficulties that there have been in a number of chapters in getting agreement with the Croatian Government , but could the President-in-Office give a time-frame for when he sees these negotiations being concluded ?
Are we talking about a two-year time-frame or a three-year time-frame ?
Is there an exact time-frame that can be given , taking into account the difficulties that may arise ?
Secondly , with regard to the areas that still have to be opened - the whole area of judicial independence and the police services in Croatia - what specific actions have been taken on those areas ?
( PT ) Mr Crowley , many thanks for your kind words .
I must tell you that it has been my great satisfaction and honour to be here with you today , discussing , debating and not always agreeing on such important issues for the European agenda and the European Union .
However , the honourable Member is asking me to do the impossible : to give him a date for Croatia 's accession .
I cannot do this because this accession , or this date , will in all likelihood depend more on Croatia than on the European Union itself .
In fact , Croatia would probably be better placed than the European Union to determine this for the simple reason that , as you of course know , becoming part of the Union , entering the Union , depends on or corresponds to the progress made in complying with the criteria and conditions .
What I can say absolutely unequivocally is that Croatia has a solid European prospect and a solid prospect of entering the European Union and that the Portuguese Presidency is committed to taking this process forward during its Presidency and is naturally also committed , together with the Commission , to overcoming any obstacles that may arise .
In November , as I have just said in answer to another question , there will be a review of the state of negotiations with Croatia .
This review and a proposal will be submitted to us by the Commission .
These , as I am sure you will realise , will have a fundamental role to play in reporting on , and monitoring , the work being carried out .
They will be produced under the competence , and with the detail to be expected of , the Commission and what the Commission will say and what it will propose and recommend in its review will be very important in terms of what the Council will decide for the future and for the continued negotiation process with Croatia .
It is true that very often it is the administrative and judicial issues that are more difficult to resolve , in essence those issues relating to the specific internal organisation of Member States .
It is those areas in which Member States , in terms of their specific organisation , must make greater investment and possibly also more extensive and , shall we say , more painful and more difficult reforms .
We are confident that Croatia will be able to overcome any such difficulties and that , in line with its own desires and also those of the European Union , in the not too distant future it will become a member of our Union .
Subject : Climate change
Can the European Council make a comprehensive statement outlining what structures are being put in place at EU level so that a greater level of coordination can take place between Europe and America in our efforts to ensure that the target to reduce CO2 emissions by 20 % by the year 2020 can be achieved ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Aylward , there can be no doubt that climate change is a global challenge requiring global solutions .
For their part , the European leaders have decided to send the international community a clear signal of their determination to combat climate change by making the following commitments with a view to launching negotiations on a global post-2012 agreement .
Until such an agreement is reached , the European Union makes the independent and firm commitment to achieve , by 2020 , a reduction of at least 20 % in greenhouse gas emissions in relation to 1990 levels .
Secondly , the Union intends to commit to up to a 30 % reduction if other developed countries make comparable reductions and if those developing countries that are more economically advanced make an appropriate contribution .
The European Union considers that it is time to assess the steps to be taken post-2012 and to establish a global approach involving the participation of a large number of countries .
Pursuing a more permanent dialogue with the United States will be essential in preparing for the post-2012 negotiations which must begin at the Climate Conference to be held in Bali at the end of this year and to which I have already referred in my answer to a previous question .
Within this framework , two important meetings are planned before the Conference , the results of which will certainly give very positive added value to the Bali negotiations .
The first is the high-level meeting of the General Assembly of the United Nations on climate change , which actually took place in New York on 24 September .
The second is the meeting of the main economies on 27 and 28 September in Washington , at which the European Union expects to make an important contribution to moving forward the international process within the United Nations .
In addition , the European Union and the United States agreed at the Vienna Summit in June 2006 to set up a high-level dialogue on climate change , clean energy and sustainable development .
The aim is to move forward based on existing bilateral and multilateral initiatives and to pursue the implementation of the Vienna Summit Statement and the Gleneagles Plan of Action on climate change , clean energy and sustainable development adopted by the G8 leaders .
deputising for the author . - I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
However , the purpose of the question was that the difference of outlook between the US Administration and the European Union , with regard to finding solutions and building partnerships around the world , seems to have got greater ; the distance between the two seems to have got greater in the last number of years .
Obviously , no matter how good we are in the European Union , we need other people to follow what we are doing and , in particular , we can see now , with China and India and other concerns that they have , that America may lag further behind again .
So what we are really looking for is specific action on behalf of the European Union to encourage our cousins across the water in America to join with us , so we can stand up to the power of India and China in these negotiations .
( PT ) Mr Crowley , I totally agree with you .
We must convince our cousins and , as they are our cousins , we expect them to be convinced or at least to be open to being convinced .
I must tell you that the road to Bali and the road after Bali will be complicated and fraught with difficulty .
No one can have any doubt about this , but it is clear that , through persistent and concerted action , we can , I hope , be successful .
In any event , I consider that , thanks to the permanent dialogue that has been established specifically with our cousins on the other side of the Atlantic , despite everything , any differences , any different views of this climate issue can be overcome .
In this respect , I feel that the conclusions on climate change reached at the G8 meeting in Germany and the possibility created there or the agreement reached there on the fundamental role of the United Nations in the issue of climate change were positive evidence of the possibility of further progress and further agreements on this issue of climate change .
As I have already said , it is essential that the European Union maintains , shall we say , its role as a leader and as an instigator paving the way for others in order to protect the environment and our planet .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will have noticed that the next three questions all relate to Pakistan .
Unfortunately , I cannot use the Rules of Procedure to invite the Council to answer all these questions together as the Council has structured its work otherwise .
I must draw your attention to the need for the reform of Parliament and , in particular , to what you , ladies and gentlemen , need to do in relation to the essential reform of Question Time , on which I believe we are all unanimous .
However , unfortunately , we cannot apply more flexible rules as we have Rules of Procedure by which we must abide .
I therefore have to put these questions one by one , which probably means that not all three will be answered .
Depending on how our work goes , we will see whether we are more or less productive .
I will start with Question No 15 on Pakistani military assets .
This question is by Mr Rutowicz and I urge the Council to answer this question directly .
Subject : Pakistani military assets
It is widely known that Pakistan 's army dominates the country 's economy and administration .
Does the Council intend to draw up an analysis to assess the total assets built up through military-related business while Pakistani society has suffered impoverishment ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) The multiple instances of dialogue between the European Union and Pakistan on that country and the role played by the armed forces form part of the comprehensive analysis on which the Council 's policy with regard to Pakistan is based .
The general situation of the Pakistani economy and its level of development are another two parts of this same analysis .
Of course both are taken into account in the general definition of our policy towards Pakistan and this will continue to be the case in the future .
( PL ) I should like to thank the President and Mr Antunes for this response .
As I understand it , the purpose of the question was essentially to enquire whether some kind of humanitarian support will be offered to these poor people in Pakistan .
I would be grateful if Mr Antunes could provide some information in that regard .

( PT ) Mr Rutowicz , as you know , the issues of humanitarian aid , cooperation aid and development aid are priority issues for the European Union .
Wherever people are suffering or in poverty , the European Union , the Council and also this Parliament do everything in their power to try and help resolve these situations .
The European Union is one of the biggest , if not the biggest , donor of international aid and this fact cannot be forgotten .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 16 and 17 lapse .
Subject : European Union Solidarity Fund
Could the Council make a statement on the effectiveness of the European Union Solidarity Fund ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mrs McGuinness , as the honourable Member knows , the Commission is responsible for applying the Regulation on the Solidarity Fund and the effectiveness of this Regulation must be assessed in terms of the criteria laid down therein .
As far as the Council knows , in cases of disasters provided for by the Regulation , its application has been effective .
The European Commission periodically produces reports that set out in detail the use of the Solidarity Fund .
Thank you for your brief answer .
I presume the Council has a view , because the Member States would have a view of how it is being impacted upon their own countries .
Do you think that the budget of one billion is sufficient and that the Fund reacts quickly enough to the various crises that it has to deal with ?
( PT ) Mrs McGuinness , as I said , the Council 's assessment is that the application of this Regulation , in other words the use of the Solidarity Fund , has been effective .
It was certainly an excellent suggestion to set up a fund to help Member States deal with any natural or other disasters as this was something that did not exist before .
This fund is certainly helpful as such disasters put Member States in a very particular situation of difficulty and need .
There should always ideally be the possibility of asking and applying for more .
We must of course look at this issue realistically , but also ambitiously .
I am sure that the Council , at the appropriate time and if proposed by the Commission , will not fail to assess this possibility .
However , for the time being we have the legislative framework that we have and , by using this , we can work realistically , welcoming the creation of this fund and the effective role that it has played , which in fact proves that this initiative is justified .
Subject : Making peace in the Middle East
Is the Council making enough use of the eponymous talents of the British Consul General in Jerusalem , Mr Makepeace ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) I will answer the oral question although I am sure it has been asked previously by Mr Newton Dunn .
Very well , I should like to say that the diplomatic and consular missions of the Member States and the Commission delegations in third countries cooperate to ensure that the common positions and joint actions adopted by the Council in the context of the common foreign and security policy are observed and implemented as specified in the Treaty on European Union .
This naturally also includes the British Consul General in Jerusalem to whom the honourable Member refers in his question .

In the interests of my colleague , who wants to ask Question No 20 , I will waive my right to a supplementary .
Subject : Member State seat allocations in the European Parliament
Will the Council be proposing changes to the allocation of seats in the European Parliament to each Member State ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Mitchell , I am delighted to answer your question , all the more so as questions relating to the Reform Treaty are , in my personal opinion , starting with the question of a new Treaty for the Union many years ago , particularly interesting and important .
I am therefore delighted to try to answer your question .
I would remind you that , in accordance with the mandate of 22 June given to the 2007 Intergovernmental Conference , the provisions on this issue to be included in the Reform Treaty provide for a decision establishing the composition of the European Parliament to be adopted by the European Council on the initiative and with the agreement of the European Parliament .
As the honourable Member is certainly aware and so as not to waste time , the European Council in June asked the European Parliament to put forward a draft of this initiative by October 2007 .
We are aware that a report is going to be presented on the future composition of the European Parliament at the part-session in October , i.e. on 10 October of this year , for which the rapporteurs are Mrs Lamassoure and Mrs Severin .
I would like to thank my colleague for waiving his supplementary and thank the President-in-Office for taking the question .
The reason I am raising this is that in Ireland we have already gone down from 15 to 13 seats .
It is an island off the west coast of Europe .
It is the furthest point before you go to the United States .
There is a proposal now to reduce us further from 13 to 12 , at a time when our population has gone up by 12 % and is due to increase again dramatically .
All I would say to the President-in-Office is this : since there are 16 additional seats to be allocated , would you please bear in mind Ireland 's case for retaining the 13 seats ?
I think if you look at the figures you will see that we do have a very good case , and I would ask that this should be taken into account .

( PT ) Mr President , I should like to point out that the westernmost point of Europe is in Portugal , at Cabo da Roca or Cape Roca .
Perhaps , as a result of this assertion , I will be challenging the honourable Member 's statement as to the geographical location of his country but , in truth , the westernmost point of Europe is in my country .
With regard to the question raised , specifically the second part , the honourable Member will of course primarily obtain the answer to this from the European Parliament and his fellow members .
However , I of course take note of his point .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Question No 31 is inadmissible ( Annex II , Part A , paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.35 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Obligations of cross-border service providers ( debate )
The next item is the report by Lasse Lehtinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the obligations of cross-border service providers .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , first I wish to express my thanks to the shadow rapporteurs for their encouragement and excellent cooperation : to Mrs Wallis , who is here today , and especially to Mr Hatzidakis .
He was so competent that he was immediately chosen to join my own country 's Cabinet .
I am grateful and glad that both Mr Harbour and Mrs Kauppi are also here today .
The internal market , as we know , is based on the four freedoms , one of which , however , the cross-border movement of services , is not working very well .
The Services Directive , which was decided on in this House a year ago , will improve the situation , when the Member States have to implement it in two years ' time , but that will probably not be enough either .
Services , of course , cannot be compared to products in all respects , but services will one day be more important than they are now .
High-quality and cross-border services in particular are this continent 's future .
The problem is that the acquis communautaire does not protect consumers who purchase services as well as consumers who purchase goods .
European consumer confidence in cross-border consumption is low because the standard of services and level of protection varies from one Member State to the next .
The Union has Community legislation in given areas , but has no common rules for services .
Consumers , like service providers , are not always able to say which Member State 's legal regime is applicable when there is a dispute .
It is partly because of this that consumers are afraid to use foreign service providers .
In my view , the Union should agree common rules and obligations which should be binding on service providers .
These would benefit not only consumers but also the service providers themselves .
If the Commission should at any time look into the matter of the service providers ' obligations , it should not distinguish between private and public services . Both should equally come under the scope of application of directives on consumer protection .
In 1990 the Commission made a proposal on the obligations of cross-border service providers .
It had to withdraw it , however , for lack of political will .
There is , however , political will once again .
The Commission should , if this report is adopted , submit , within 12 months , at least a work programme which reassesses the need for a horizontal instrument .
We need to settle on basic general rules enabling the consumer to obtain , if he or she so desires , relevant information on pricing , contract terms and remedies in the case of defective or delayed services .
The Commission should also take into account the impact of any initiative on operating conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Not all these matters were raised in the Green paper on consumer protection but they are in this report .
I hope I will receive the greatest possible support for this report .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am pleased to be here tonight to represent the Commission in this very important discussion on consumer confidence in the internal market .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lehtinen , and the shadow rapporteurs of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection for their very ambitious work in drafting this report .
I should stress at the outset that the Commission agrees with the report regarding the need to increase consumer confidence in the internal market ; in particular , the consumer internal market for services demands our attention .
So , one of the Commission 's priorities is to bring the benefits of the internal market closer to our European consumers and I am grateful for the support of the Parliament in this endeavour .
The Commission has already undertaken a number of initiatives in order to boost consumer confidence in the internal market .
I would like to mention two : European consumer protection legislation and the Services Directive .
Now , the consumer acquis already sets out a number of obligations for cross-border service providers .
For instance , it regulates the information obligations for traders who sell services long distance or on the consumers ' doorstep .
It also provides consumers with protection against unfair terms in services contracts .
And , with the ongoing review of this acquis , the Commission will elaborate if there is further need to address the obligations of service providers and the rights of consumers in these areas .
Then , the Services Directive : you know it very well , you discussed it not long ago .
It improves the position of consumers within the internal market for services .
And it ensures that consumers will be better informed by businesses , better assisted by public authorities , and it establishes a number of clear and substantive obligations on service providers .
The Commission of course is very keen to ensure proper implementation of this Directive in all Member States and we believe that those two initiatives are very far-reaching because we can , from both of those initiatives , expect a real change in the consumer internal market for services once the implementation of the Services Directive is complete and the review of the consumer acquis delivers its results .
Having said that , I have also to underline that the Commission takes a different view to Mr Lehtinen 's report on the need for a separate horizontal instrument to cover obligations of cross-border service providers at this stage for the simple reason that we believe that we should first accomplish our ongoing initiatives before coming , if necessary , to a separate horizontal instrument .
That is why I would like to thank you for your commitment towards helping us implement these two instruments ; in also helping European citizens to enjoy the full benefits of the internal market for services .
And I know that my colleagues , Commissioner Kuneva and Commissioner McCreevy , look forward to discussing with you , working with you , to establish this internal market together with Parliament , which is the real representative of the European citizens .
So , thank you for your collaboration , thanks for this openness and I am sure that my two colleagues - and , indeed , the whole Commission - will , in a very deep way , continue to work together with Parliament .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I would just remind you that all remarks should be addressed through the Chair .
It is late at night and there are few of us but it is a small point of protocol .
But I am sure Mr Lehtinen took on board your remarks .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , who seems to be losing his voice like I am .
It seems to be the case that most colleagues have sore throats in Strasbourg this week .
I represent the Committee on Legal Affairs , for which I was draftsman of the opinion .
I would like to say that , first of all , we fully agree with the assessment of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the importance of the services sector for the development of the European Union .
It would be an absolute kamikaze mission for the European Union and the competitiveness targets if we do not let the services sector flourish and allow the internal market to be completed in this respect .
I really think , out of these 11.7 million jobs created over the last eight years in the European Union , almost 100 % of the net growth of new jobs in Europe has come from the services sector , and everyday statistics prove this .
But I have to be - in Finnish , a fakkijuristi - a ' dull lawyer ' , and bring the Legal Affairs Committee 's point of view to this debate .
First of all , we really share the Commission view that at this point it is maybe too early to have a far-reaching new horizontal tool to solve the liability issues .
We have already pending several legislative initiatives , which are all aimed at ensuring legal certainty , such as Rome I , Rome II and also the Green Paper on the Review of the Consumer Acquis .
Also , I would like to say that Article 5 of the contractual obligations ( Rome I ) proposal is essential in order to determine whether the consumer protection legislation of the country of origin or of the country of the client applies .
This is especially important for smaller Member States , where we might lack a supply of new services if Article 5 is not correctly solved .
We also regret the present mix of legislative instruments .
Sometimes it is not very clear which legal regime is applicable to each aspect of the activities of the services sector : whether they have to obey the civil law of the host or home country or the regulatory regime of the host or home country .
It is necessary that we also get some case-law from the European Court of Justice on these issues .
Also I would like to stress that cross-border services are provided in many different ways .
Some of them sell online , some travel to another country for services , and sometimes the service provider visits the customer 's home country .
I think that the internal market for services , the legal framework which is based on the country of origin principle , depends on the relevant measures being clear both from the legal and practical perspective , and maybe it is too early now to really do something .
As the Commissioner rightly said , now it is time to implement all the good work we have done during recent years .
If colleagues want to place something on the record , they can always do so in writing during the course of the voting procedure .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I speak on behalf of my friend and former colleague in this Parliament , Mr Konstantinos Hatzidakis , who , as Mr Lehtinen says , has been elevated swiftly to the position of Minister of Transport in the Greek Government .
I want to pay tribute to him for the work he has done on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I am essentially picking up the work where he left off , right at the conclusion .
I want to thank Mr Lehtinen because it has not been recorded so far that this is his first report , I think , as a rapporteur .
Some of you may know that he is a distinguished author in his own right , though I think this is probably not his best work .
I do not think he will mind me saying that .
I have a copy of his book Blood , Sweat and Bears , which he gave me to read , and I think he has put a bit of blood and sweat into this .
It is an important report , but I have to say , from our side , we agree very much with the line that Ms Kauppi and Commissioner Reding have taken .

There is some useful material in here but I just want to reassure the Commissioner that , if she reads Article 22 , which in my view is a masterpiece of compromise drafting , where it calls upon the Commission to continue work and to submit a work programme for an assessment , you will be pleased to hear it does not actually ask you to produce a horizontal instrument but to do a work programme to assess whether we need one .
You already confirmed , I think , what many of us feel - that with all the work that is currently going on to implement the Services Directive , the Green Paper on the consumer acquis , which we have just considered and which will result in a horizontal instrument in that area plus the other work that is going on - which my colleague from the Committee on Legal Affairs , Ms Kauppi , and I know Ms Wallis will cover later - I think it is much too early to contemplate any further detailed provisions at this stage .
It is absolutely clear that we do need to monitor this , but of course within the Services Directive itself , with all the work we put in it , there are a very substantial number of provisions .
One of the amendments that we hope the House will agree to delete tomorrow does actually call upon the Commission to draw up voluntary codes of conduct .
In my view that is not the Commission 's role .
I think we will have support to delete that .
But in fact , if you look at the Services Directive , in Article 37 it actually says quite clearly that Member States , in cooperation with the Commission , shall take measures to encourage codes of conduct to be drawn up at Community level .
It is not as if we did not already have that .
So I think that we will take that out , so my summary of it is this : I think that this is a very useful contribution to the debate .
I think it will add to the corpus of information that we are building up to ensure , above all , that the Services Directive is fully implemented and is implemented on time , with all the accompanying provisions - particularly the issues like the single point of contact for service providers , which will give them the sort of requirements and information that they need to provide services plus , we hope , the sort of work on codes of conduct .
With those , I think we can look forward to a really effective and thriving services market that works to the benefit of consumers .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , let me first thank my colleague Mr Lehtinen for a very good piece of work .
With the adoption of the Services Directive , the internal market for services has clearer rules on the way freedom to provide services can be used .
On the other hand , there is a lack of clear rules on the obligations of service providers .
This means that , even after the Services Directive has been implemented in all Member States by 2009 , we may be left with an open market in which consumers do not have confidence .
Only 6 % of consumers made cross-border purchases on the internet in 2006 .
The rules for goods purchases are much better established .
Businesses , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , also need clearer rules since they often choose not to provide a service or make a sale across borders , which leads to reduced competition and higher prices for the consumer .
Clear rules will encourage both businesses and consumers to venture across a border and provide or purchase services in another country with peace of mind .
We must ensure that consumers have a well-founded sense of security when shopping on the internal market and that , even when they end up in dispute , they can easily get help and redress .
For this to be achieved , many different measures must come together .
Some examples which are mentioned in the report are voluntary codes of conduct for service providers and the possibility of collective action on a cross-border basis against fraudsters or businesses which do not honour their commitments to consumers .
It is not reasonable for consumers to get less protection when they purchase a service across a border than when they buy goods from another Member State .
Hence the broad horizontal instrument which the report proposes is another important element in the consumer protection we want to develop in the provision of cross-border services .
Consumers must know their rights when a service is provided too late or in an incorrect manner .
If freedoms are complemented by clear obligations on suppliers and strong consumer protection , we can strengthen consumer confidence .
Once again , our consumers must be given priority .
Without contented and secure consumers we shall not have a flourishing internal market .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this is , of course , unfinished business from the Services Directive , and , although I agree with much of the Commissioner 's analysis , we do have a problem .
We have a problem of confidence .
It is a bit like the Northern Rock bank in the UK over the past few weeks .
Whatever it said , the customers were still queuing outside , wanting their money back .
It is a bit like that with us and cross-border services .
Whatever we say , consumers still are not confident enough to use those services .
We have to find a way of addressing that .
Those in this House that sat on the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into the Crisis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society also saw only too clearly that there is this problem of confidence .
But we will not be able to address that by going back to old proposals that dealt with problems perceived some 20 years ago .
We have got to deal with the problems and situation that we have now .
What we are basically dealing with , in looking at service providers ' obligations , is looking at basic contract law and basic contractual obligations .
In this regard , we currently have on the table Rome I , which Ms Kauppi has referred to ; if we get that right , it will help .
We also have the whole review of the consumer acquis ; if we get that right , it will help .
We have the preparation of the Common Frame of Reference on contract law ; if we use that , and if the Commission puts a great deal more effort into getting the Member States to take it up , that would also help .
So there is much that can already be used to help us get right the relationship between private international law and regulation .
What we do not need - I agree with Mr Harbour - is the Commission writing soft law codes of conduct .
Let us use what is already being done at the moment and what is in preparation .
We can keep a weather eye on whether or not we need yet another horizontal instrument , but , at this stage , I really doubt it .
What we also need to address is the possibility of giving our consumers the right to cross-border access to justice where they can act together as a group .
This would be a balancing of arms against providers .
It would make good the current lack of cross-border access to justice , which we saw all too clearly with Equitable Life .
People do not like to use the words ' class actions ' , and neither do I , but a European right of collective redress might help give us the confidence for consumers that is currently lacking on this continent .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the development of the Union 's internal market is very significant in terms of forging links between the countries and citizens of the Union .
Increasing cross-border exchange of services on a competitive basis requires an increase in mutual trust , which should be supported by a consumer-friendly policy .
This policy aims to improve the legal framework for cross-border services whilst also simplifying procedures , which will increase competition .
It will also improve access to services and raise their standard whilst reducing costs , thus benefiting European consumers .
The report contributes to improving this policy by indicating a range of issues impeding the dynamic development of the market .
These include the lack of a single system regulating the obligations of cross-border service providers and the need to supplement Union documents in this regard .
The report also highlights the lack of clarity in implementing provisions resulting in mental barriers concerning foreign suppliers , the poorer legal protection for service users than for service providers , the failure to regulate public and private services under the same provisions , the diversity of provisions concerning the obligations of cross-border service providers , and the lack of the necessary transparency for the protection of these services .
Consideration should be given to the introduction of quality certificates for service providers in order to improve the recipients ' confidence .
The conclusions and proposals emerging from the report coincide with the findings of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for a business-like report .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , although sadly I have not yet had the pleasure of reading one of his books .
However , I have made a note of it and will make good the omission at the next opportunity .
Many thanks for the good cooperation , and many thanks , too , for your efforts to address important issues in your report .
Admittedly , legal frameworks are already in place for services in the internal market , such as the Services Directive or the Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications , but the implementation of these Directives - both of them - sadly still leaves a lot to be desired .
I therefore think it is regrettable that the Council is not present this evening , as we could have made it clear once again that we expect both Directives to be implemented by the deadline and the work in the Member States to be pursued accordingly .
However , we also need more initiatives - as the rapporteur has rightly pointed out - to increase consumer confidence in cross-border services in the internal market .
Here , too , previous reports have addressed important issues .
In her report , Mrs Roithová has pointed out that there are still very many deficits in relation to Internet sales in particular , and that consumers still lack the requisite confidence in cross-border services here .
Similarly , Mr Lehtinen , in his report , draws attention to the obligations of service providers and to the issue of legal protection for consumers .
I would like to come back to a topic which has already been mentioned by two previous speakers today , namely the right of collective redress in cross-border cases .
We urgently need initiatives in this direction , so that consumers have confidence in cross-border services , and that can only be achieved by strengthening their legal position .
In my view , both reports - the Roithová report and the Lehtinen report - give important indications of the deficits that still exist .
The Commission should take both these reports seriously in its work to genuinely overhaul , modernise and update the consumer acquis .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , we have adopted a Services Directive through which we have handed over to the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg the power to decide what we have decided !
We do not yet know if the Member States ' agreements are to be respected .
We do not know the extent to which the establishment of national quality requirements will be permitted .
We do not know whether it is lawful for the Member States to decide which services they would like to have under private or public control .
The report is therefore just as unclear as the legal situation .
We are waiting to hear from the judges in Luxembourg whether we can retain our hospitals and a long list of other core services that together constitute our welfare state .
In Denmark all citizens have social rights , which we finance through high taxes that only 7 % of Danes would like to see reduced .
It would seem that this 7 % will be rewarded by the judges in Luxembourg , but what about the majority ?
Who will safeguard the decisions and our democracy ?
We also have a flexicurity system , which is based upon voluntary agreements between parties within the labour market .
How can they be protected ?
It is the nerve centre of the Danish social model that is being threatened by the uncertainties and judicial activism of the Services Directive .
The June Movement would very much like to contribute towards the creation of clear rules for a common market for all services that are suitable for the market , but we do not want to prevent the Member States from also having a democracy to set limits on what should be decided by the electorate and what should be decided by the capitalists .
on behalf of the ITS group . - ( RO ) Mr. President , the free movement of services is , as we know , one of the four fundamental freedoms decisively determining the functionality and efficiency of the single market , an important element of the first pillar at the basis of the European Union construction .
This is one of the reasons why I believe that an analysis of the progress in achieving this single market instrument is both important and necessary .
It is important because the consistent economic and social development of the European Union equally depends on the area of services , the 70 % weight of services in the Union 's GDP being significant in this regard .
It is necessary because the volume of cross-border trade in services is very low as compared to the trade in goods , a situation that also generates the lack of confidence of European Union citizens in the consumption of such products .
Based upon these arguments , I support and I will vote for the approval of the report .
Nevertheless , I consider that , in relation to the pertinent and , at the same time , valuable solutions proposed by the Rapporteur , a more substantial analysis would have been required regarding the situation of some newly acceded countries , such as Romania , whose markets are far less developed than those of most of the other Member States of the Union .
From this perspective , I believe that the report should also have contained a set of objectives for leveling the degrees of national markets development , a condition required for the development of the single market and , consequently , of the segment of border services .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would of course like to thank the rapporteur as well .
The discussions in advance of this report were always very fruitful and interesting .
Much of what came out of these discussions has been incorporated into the report , although not everything , which is unfortunate , at least from my point of view , as the report emphasises in some places that the completion of the internal market for services in the European Union is trailing far behind the internal market for goods .
From my perspective , there is actually no real scientific or indeed objective evidence of that , given that we have not only the Services Directive but also the Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications as well as other Directives in the services sector .
Secondly , the services sector in the internal market is far more heterogeneous than goods .
It ranges from subordinate services to medical or legal services and finally large-scale services such as major banking and insurance services .
Lumping all these services together , which is what repeatedly happens in this House , is risky , in my view .
I believe - and a number of previous speakers have already pointed this out - that a differentiated approach would certainly be useful .
The third point which has been raised repeatedly , namely collective redress , is unlikely to become more relevant simply by being the frequent subject of discussion .
I think what we can say , clearly and unequivocally , is that Parliament expects the Commission to undertake a study to review which of the diverse models that already exist in Europe would genuinely be best for the European Union .
I think that is all that needs to be said on this subject .
The liability systems in the individual Member States - and this is my fourth point - are still highly diverse .
That is why we need a unified system of obligations for service providers .
Clarifying the legal system governing these obligations will generate more competition and create more choice for the consumer , but I believe - as some of the previous speakers have said - that it would be wrong to ask the Commission to produce a horizontal instrument at this stage .
In any case , I am very sceptical about the creation of this type of liability law at European level .
( PL ) I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report , which highlights many problems consumers encounter on the internal market .
This report rightly draws attention to the lack of legal clarity and certainty regarding safety and the quality of services . It also refers to the general lack of confidence in cross-border consumption felt by European consumers .
This is confirmed by the statistics . In 2006 only 6 % of European consumers made cross-border purchases over the Internet .
This situation has a negative impact on competition and on the activities of small and medium-sized enterprises . It also contributes to the expansion of illegal trade .
Dishonest entities often exploit the differences between the legal systems within the European Union to defraud people .
Swift action is called for once such situations have been identified , hence our response .
I would like to remind the House of the many months of work devoted to the Services Directive , that is to say , to a review of consumer legislation . As Members will be aware , the Services Directive must be implemented in all Member States by December 2009 .
A substantial proportion of the problems referred to by the rapporteur will certainly cease to exist after the transposition period .
It should be borne in mind that the Services Directive will significantly improve consumers ' rights . Thanks to this Directive , service providers will have to offer consumers better information regarding the services proposed .
This will enable consumers to make better and more informed choices . Consumers will also be more effectively protected by the relevant institutions .
The Services Directive also imposes a series of clear obligations on the service provider , including ones related to conflict resolution .
I believe there is no need to introduce further legal instruments until the provisions of the Services Directive enter into force .
In my view , it is premature to call on the Commission to present a horizontal instrument .
The same applies to the entire review of consumer legislation .
The Commission has already presented a Green Paper on consumer legislation and will in due course present legislative proposals in that regard .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are times when more legislation does not mean better legislation .
We would do well to keep that in mind .
( SK ) The Service Directive , which is to be transposed into national law in all the Member States by 28 December 2009 , will have a significant effect on cross-border services .
This Directive and even the Green Paper on the Review of the Consumer Acquis do not lay down the fundamental obligations of service providers and therefore I welcome the report by Mr Lehtinen on this issue .
The report seeks to ensure that not only consumers but also small and medium-sized businesses buying and selling cross-border services can benefit from additional legal certainty , simplicity and reduced costs .
I believe that European standardisation is key to the success of craft , small and medium-sized enterprises and the introduction of European standards at European Union level is thus a means of supporting the safety of services and guaranteeing consumer rights with regard to cross-border services provided by Member States .
Where consumers feel uncertain about the safety and quality of services , they tend to build up psychological barriers towards foreign suppliers , which dissuade them from using cross-border services .
If a consumer has a negative experience , that experience will often wrongly have repercussions on all foreign service providers .
Consumers have an opportunity to resolve problems arising predominantly as a result of the different procedures in force in the individual Member States within the European Consumer Centres Network , ECC-Net , and the cross-border Consumer Complaints Network for Financial Services , FIN-NET .
Where a consumer has enough information about his internal market rights but attempts to exercise them in vain in another EU Member State , he can seek help from SOLVIT .
Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fact that this report focuses primarily on consumers since they , in particular , are a fundamental and important element of the internal market .
Our common objective must therefore be to create the conditions for consumers that allow them to have the same confidence when making a purchase in another country as they have when doing so at home .
( CS ) Mr President , although the EC Treaty guarantees its citizens free access to services beyond their national borders , only a handful of service providers and consumers make use of this advantage of the common market .
A low level of competition thus makes services in the border regions more expensive and not always easily accessible , compared with services within a country .
Surveys show that the problem lies not in language barriers but in legislation .
It is not always clear when to apply the legislation of the country of origin and when to apply national legislation .
Unfortunately , thanks to the opponents of the country of origin principle , we lost out on the opportunity to provide a better definition in the Services Directive .
Here in Strasbourg this report is also accompanied by an irrational fear of mentioning the country of origin principle , notwithstanding the fact that in many professions service providers do not have to know the neighbouring country 's legislation in order to provide cross-border services .
Soon we will see case-law that will end the disputes about when the issue of consumer protection is governed by national legislation or the legislation of the host country .
I consider Mr Lehtinen 's report to be an excellent contribution in this respect because , in my opinion , our definition of providers ' general obligations should be based on agreed European standards .
I agree that when it comes to consumer protection , the same obligations should apply to the providers of private and public services .
I also support the financing of communication networks between Member States .
This will lead to effective control and to progress in solving disputes out of court .
Commissioner , we owe the European citizens a lot when it comes to the conditions governing the free movement of cross-border services .
This report settles one part of this debt .
The European Parliament gives the Commission the political support to clearly define providers ' obligations regardless of their origin .
Mr Lehtinen 's report is testament to the excellent work of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have been listening very carefully to the discussion on Parliament 's report on the obligations of cross-border service providers .
I would like to thank the honourable Members for their comments .
Now allow me to stress a few key points .
First , the Commission supports the aim of the report on which Parliament will vote tomorrow .
We are indeed concerned with the lack of consumer confidence in the internal market for services .
Let me stress that , as Commissioner for the Information Society , this lack of confidence in internet business is very important indeed and we will have to have a look at that .
Second , as I mentioned earlier , the Commission has already undertaken a number of initiatives which aim to remedy the current situation .
I have quoted the Services Directive and the review of the consumer acquis .
The latter , by the way , is one of the key priorities of my colleague Commissioner Kuneva .
I would like to say that we are very grateful for the support of Parliament and we would like to encourage Parliament to continue to contribute to the review process , and we would like , together with Parliament , to be able to deliver results as soon as possible .
What are we going to propose in a concrete way for the coming weeks and months ?
First a summary of the responses to the consultation will be published on the Commission 's website at the beginning of October .
Then there will be an impact assessment carried out with a view to a possible Commission proposal in the second half of 2008 .
The Members having had a look at this problem carefully will certainly be interested in this .
Third , the Commission agrees on the need to promote the safety aspects of services because it is very important to better ensure the health and the physical safety aspects of services provided within the internal market .
With the Member States , we will draw attention to possible shortcomings in national systems , or necessary enforcement of the assessment .
We will promote consumer education and awareness-raising initiatives .
We will facilitate access to existing information on accidents and injuries related to the safety of services offered to consumers , and one of the very important elements which has been stressed by several Members relates to collective redress .
The Commission is carrying out studies and concerting stakeholders in order to assess the opportunity of an initiative in this area but one thing is certain , and I would like to underline it - this will not be a US-type class action .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work and Parliament for the importance it attaches to this issue .
We are sure the parliamentary report will be instrumental for our future work in the interests of the consumers .
Thank you very much indeed , Commissioner , for an interesting debate , in which more than 50 % of the speakers were women , which is just as it should be .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 27 September 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL )
I should like to thank Mr Lehtinen for a well-prepared report .
The freedom to provide services is one of the four fundamental freedoms of the internal market .
Over the years , the services sector has become increasingly important for the economic and social development of the European Union and has undergone substantial change .
Despite the provisions of the Treaty establishing the European Community and the ongoing process of transposition of the Services Directive into national law , in practice the free movement of services continues to be hampered by administrative provisions and differences between the legal systems of Member States .
Bearing in mind the threats and challenges stemming from globalisation , together with the shortcomings in the services sector identified in the report , it is particularly important to take action aimed at eliminating obstacles to the supply of cross-border services .
Lack of confidence on the part of consumers and the reluctance of companies to operate outside their home country limit access to the internal market .
As a matter of urgency , the Community should introduce mechanisms making it easier for companies , especially SMEs , to benefit from the internal market .
Community provisions on the supply of cross-border services should therefore be rationalised , and a minimum period for the harmonisation of quality standards introduced , so as to protect users ' interests .
Strengthening cooperation between Member States , limiting administrative procedures and appropriate control of cross-border services will promote an increase of cross-border activity .
Harmonisation of quality standards will strengthen consumer and supplier confidence in cross-border services .
Facilitating the provision of cross-border services will lead to a properly functioning single market for services , thus laying the foundations for an economically cohesive internal market .
i2010 : Digital libraries ( debate )
The next item is the report by Marie-Hélène Descamps , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on i2010 : Digital libraries .
Once again , more than 50 per cent of the speakers in this debate are women , the first of which is Marie-Hélène Descamps , the rapporteur .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the idea of a European digital library originated from six EU Heads of State and Government who wanted to allow universal access to the European cultural heritage and to preserve it for future generations .
This federal project for Europe will strengthen the expression of a true European identity and help spread our cultural and linguistic diversity across the world .
The project , which is without precedent for Europe , combines the past with the present and links the cultural with the digital dimension .
It is the perfect response to the various issues now affecting our fellow citizens in the form of new information and communication technologies .
The Internet , which is the third favourite medium of Europe 's young people , is in effect one of the main means of access to knowledge and learning .
While some real progress has been made , the digitisation of our cultural resources and their bringing online nevertheless remains very fragmented and relies on the various mechanisms that have been put in place by the Member States .
If they are to be effective and reach the greatest number of people the initiatives for promoting and disseminating our cultural heritage need to be well coordinated .
This is the intended objective of the European digital library , which the Commission is supporting through its beacon initiative ' i2010 digital libraries ' .
The first part of this initiative , namely the communication of 30 September 2005 , was based on three main aspects : digitisation , online access and preservation of digital content .
The Commission has set out to analyse the main technical , legal , organisational and financial challenges that a project of this scale would pose .
At the same time , an online public consultation has been launched and a high-level expert group has been set up .
On the basis of these different elements the Commission adopted a recommendation on digitisation , online access and digital preservation on 24 August 2006 , in which it calls on the Member States to accelerate the pace of digitisation and to coordinate their efforts in order to achieve real synergy .
On 13 November 2006 the Council adopted these recommendations unanimously .
It is now up to the European Parliament to send a strong signal so that this exceptional project can become a reality .
This undertaking is such that we need to proceed in stages .
While working on the conceptual and technical organisation of all categories of cultural material , we therefore have to concentrate initially on the potential provided by the out-of-copyright text material held in libraries and to do this via a single , direct and multilingual access point .
Our libraries offer the advantage of already being coordinated at European level through the TEL , the European library that was set up in 2005 by the national libraries , which holds a large stock of digital works that are in the public domain and therefore can be used immediately .
As a second stage , and in order to promote the success of this tool , the library must also provide access to works of a more contemporary nature in addition to those documents that are in the public domain .
Any decision in this area will inevitably have to be taken in consultation with all the parties involved .
Indeed , the protection of copyright and other creative rights is vital for maintaining and protecting creativity in Europe .
If this project is to achieve the success that is expected it will have to be based on a coherent economic model .
The report therefore proposes , with the agreement of the copyright holders , that in the European digital library users should be able to browse the Internet to find any kind of digital documents , whatever their status , and to consult works in the public domain freely and in their entirety , whereas only short extracts would be accessible for copyright works .
Beyond that , users wishing to scan through a certain work or access a protected document in its entirety would be directed to private sites specialising in secure digital dissemination , where a number of options would be open to them in return for payment of a fair remuneration to the copyright holders .
Moreover , such a library needs to be organised so that it can provide access to content that is reliable and of a quality that is intended for all ages .
To this effect the report calls for a steering committee to be set up in which the cultural institutions would play a major role .
This committee would determine the priorities for , and the guidelines of , the European digital library , while ensuring the coordination , management and monitoring of its activities .
Finally , in order to provide access to all European cultures , the other cultural institutions and sectors , including archives , museums , cinema , audiovisual arts and universities , have to be involved at each stage of the project .
In this way we will shape the face of a Europe that is unified in diversity .
I would like to conclude by thanking all my colleagues in the Committee on Culture and Education , especially Mr Weber and Mr Graça Moura , for their support and contribution to this report .
I also wish to thank the Commission for having cooperated so effectively throughout the preparation of this document .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is a great report and Ms Descamps has done excellent work , together with her colleagues in the Committee .
The digital libraries initiative is an example of how Europe can contribute , through concrete projects , not only to economic growth but also to quality of life .
By bringing Europe 's cultural and scientific heritage online , we can disseminate it through into different cultures .
By using modern technologies , we can break down the walls which exist today .
I am very happy that this initiative , taken by the national libraries of our Member States and developed by the European Commission for so many years , has been highlighted and supported by EU political forces at the highest level .
They are right to do so ; our Heads of State and Government are right to support this initiative , because there is real wealth in our libraries , our archives and our museums .
It is not only books , but also newspapers , archive records and films .
This is a multilingual wealth , a multicultural wealth .
Knowing that less than 1 % of this wealth is digitalised , we know what is in front of us and what kind of work we have to do .
That work is necessary for two reasons .
The first is to overcome barriers and to get people to study , work and enjoy these works from their own culture and works from our common European history , and then to allow these elements of our cultural institutions to be reused for added-value services and products .
That is where industry comes in .
That is the reason why the goal of the Commission 's initiative is to achieve a common , multilingual access point to Europe 's digitalised cultural heritage .
We cannot do this alone .
It requires collaboration between different types of cultural institutions , from all European countries .
I am very glad to see that this is taking shape and is being formalised through the creation of a legal body that will increase the capacity of the European digital library to act .
This common access point will be launched in 2008 .
In the years thereafter the content will be gradually expanded as more libraries , more archives and more audiovisual archives and museums contribute their digitalised collections .
I am very glad , also , that the report by Parliament tackles not only the outcome but also the prerequisites for achieving that outcome .
This means improving the general conditions for getting our cultural heritage online as an integral part of the digital libraries initiatives , and the need for Member States to intensify their digitalisation efforts .
I would say very clearly that it is not enough to have a big cultural event where all the Heads of Government make beautiful speeches and then go back to their countries and cut budgets .
That cannot be !
We need words to be followed by deeds .
I want Parliament to move ahead and help us make this very beautiful project a reality .
We have the high level group on digital libraries , which I chair and which is forging ahead on this matter .
We are also very conscious that the preservation of digital material will be one of the essential questions of the future , and I am therefore glad that the Council has endorsed the Commission approach to the European digital library and that Parliament is now helping us move in the same direction and is putting its political weight behind this objective .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I must warmly congratulate Mrs Descamps on her brilliant report .
It is a document that will make an extremely important contribution to the issue of the relationship between digital technology and cultural heritage .
It calls for a coordination of efforts between national institutions , particularly libraries , and in the future , other cultural institutions .
It starts in a practical manner with works that are already in the public domain .
It proposes the effective use of synergies and the exchange of good practices between those involved in the process at all levels .
It calls on Member States to promote the project and to find ways of avoiding duplication of efforts in digitising holdings .
It calls for coordination of all these efforts .
The Descamps report will be a highlight of this legislature in terms of the relationship between cutting-edge technology and European culture through the ages .
When we talk about European culture , we are also talking about universal culture .
This is not only because European cultural heritage deserves this qualification , but also because the intrinsic cultural diversity of Europe forms a completely open system which will of course have positive consequences as the project advances .
It is also a project that has evolved .
It started as a ' chauvinistic ' fallacy in competition with Google , but has been reformulated , following various changes , in more sensible , realistic and productive terms .
It is no longer what the Financial Times previously called ' a blatant case of misguided and unnecessary nationalism ' .
The European digital library is different from other solutions because it is a European Union project , because it aims to reach out to all libraries , because it is intended to be based on existing initiatives and because it aims to cover all categories of European cultural heritage , without being confined to printed material .
There are certainly still a number of problems : finding funding partners in the private sector ; avoiding , as far as possible , different rates of digitisation between Member States ; solving certain technical aspects relating to the coordination of access to digitised works ; preserving digitised content ; resolving the issue of the integrated search engine for meta-information in image documents and for direct searching of text documents ; finding content interoperability solutions , and enabling multilingual searching by subject or keyword in addition to the current situation of searching by author or title .
We also cannot forget that the exchange of experiences between institutions will be essential , particularly with American institutions , and also that a strong research and development component will be crucial to the project producing good results .
In this context , by voting in favour of the Descamps report , this Chamber will take a positive step towards the future , whether the majority is made up of women or whether it reasonably consists of a percentage of women and another percentage of men , Mr President .
Ah , but the women are very happy you are a man !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , 2010 is just round the corner .
Given that the title of the report is ' i2010 : towards a European digital library ' , that means that we still have a great deal of work to do and in my view , we have been dragging our feet .
I am pleased that Mrs Descamps has presented a very good report , which points the way forward and shows us what can and could be done .
However , we must all make efforts to get things moving .
The report is a challenge and a response to the new technologies , the new management of knowledge and information , and above all , young people 's access to learning , information and knowledge .
We have a lot of catching up to do here and , as far as I am concerned , we really have to speed things up .
It is not only about preserving and safeguarding cultural heritage . Every day , new things arise that we must add to the equation , for things that were invented and written down only yesterday will be our cultural heritage tomorrow .
That means that we have a great deal of ground to make up .
However , we must always look ahead at the same time , to be able to keep pace with developments .
It will be very important to coordinate the process and urge countries - as has just been said - to put national sensitivities behind them and to move forward together along a European path to safeguard cultural diversity . There are hurdles to overcome .
The first is the financial shortfall that we face .
The Commissioner was right to talk about this .
All the ministers and presidents are very good at giving big speeches and are proud of our cultural diversity , but when it comes to funding and implementation , they quickly pull back and forget all about the pride that they have been propounding .
From my perspective , it is also very important to safeguard copyright , so there needs to be an agreement with the authors and publishers and everyone else involved , so that for an appropriate fee the information can be put on the Internet for people to access .
I think that we have a lot to think about here .
It is certainly no easy task , but the proposals are on the table and the countries could gain a lot .
I am convinced that we can achieve a positive vote on this report tomorrow .
In my view , we must use the new technologies and support this project in order not only to facilitate access for us as Europeans but also to carry our culture far out into the world .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , as has been stated in the Commission 's initial document , a European digital library would be based on Europe 's rich heritage combining multicultural and multilingual environments with technological advances and new business models .
In the context of integration , this is a fine and welcome objective , an ambitious goal .
However , besides reaching these ideal objectives we have to remain realistic and stay very attentive , prepared to meet the challenges that are inevitable during this process .
The main problems related to the creation of digital libraries are universal , though they are described in different ways .
Technical infrastructure , the creation of digitised resources , digitisation , the identification of copyright , content preservation and the preservation of documents are issues requiring developmental and essential decisions .
The potential to provide virtual services and projects for their implementation are relevant for libraries of all types .
However , it is obvious that digital materials , such as textual , visual and audio information , extend the traditional functions of libraries by adding different content .
For example , access to information stored in a traditional library is determined by its working times which are usually longer than those of other public institutions .
If a library is virtual its access is universal , because there is no physical door isolating information from its users .
Access to information is ensured by the working periods of the server .
Librarians can use traditional skills and knowledge to design virtual services , but these are not sufficient .
Digital libraries are a phenomenon of the third millennium and it is therefore necessary to evaluate not only the specific knowledge essential today , but also that which will be necessary in the future , as technologies change .
It is not so important to have a perfect knowledge of certain technologies , because any flexible and mature employee can attain the skills and experience necessary for his or her job .
In my country , Lithuania , the long-term preservation of Lithuanian heritage through the use of information technologies has been determined by the adoption of legal acts .
However , this problem is not being solved by coordinating the activities of the ' memory institutions ' ( libraries , museums , archives ) .
Neither the citizens of Lithuania nor those of other countries are yet able to use all the services provided by digital libraries .
I hope that today 's decision will accelerate these processes .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Umberto Eco said that whoever reads books lives twice .
The report by Mrs Descamps provides a good account of the modern approach to cultural and educational issues .
I also referred to the matter in my report on the contribution of the future regional policy to the innovative capacity of the European Union .
Just as Gutenberg 's invention marked a turning point in human development at the time , so we can today refer to a cultural revolution brought about by the Internet .
What is at issue is widespread access to the European , or indeed to the world , treasury of humankind 's spiritual and material heritage .
The latter comprises contemporary creations along with those dating back over the centuries arising out of different cultures and languages .
Copyright and related rights are certainly an issue in this context .
I recognise what has already been achieved in this regard in many Member States , including the work of the National Library of Poland .
I would like to take this opportunity to stress the importance of more extensive broadband access .
I believe we should find a way of cofinancing digitisation from the Union 's resources .
I shall conclude by referring to Goethe , who said that when he read a good book he felt as if he had made a new friend .
Just think how many good friends we could make through the European digital library !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Commission has defined three essential axes to exploit the potential of digital technology : online accessibility , digitisation of analogical collections and preservation and storage of digital contents , and we are well aware of this .
With respect to digitisation , it is common knowledge that the Commission , through a recommendation in August last year , asked the Member States to coordinate their efforts to ensure synergy on a European scale .
The Council unanimously supported the recommendation , but I wish to take this opportunity - although it is a pity the Council is not in attendance -firstly to inquire of the Commission as to the real progress made by the Member States in this area , and secondly to ascertain whether sufficient consideration has been taken of non-state authorities , which , as we know , are responsible for culture in most decentralised countries .
With regard to another aspect , online accessibility , as I said , we all agree that there must be a multilingual interface and content must be guaranteed .
It is a true joy to enter the digital library webpage and see that , apart from the 23 official Community languages , the contents also appear in Icelandic and Serbian .
Today we are celebrating the European Day of Languages and you , Mrs Reding , made a major contribution to its creation .
You have also said on countless occasions , Commissioner , and rightly so , that big and small languages do not exist , that all of them form part of Europe 's cultural wealth , and thus I would like to be given the chance to see an occasional reference in the digital library , or content rather than a reference , concerning languages such as my own , which are not official in the European Union .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , when the library in Alexandria burned down during Caesar 's invasion of Egypt , a substantial part of all the literature written by mankind at that stage disappeared forever .
In my view , nothing like that will ever happen again , thanks to the existence of digital libraries .
I welcome the rapporteur 's complex approach to the issue .
I come from the Czech Republic where successful digitisation of the National Library in Prague has been under way for some time .
Since the states have their own national libraries , it is only logical that the European Union should also have a similar institution , one that makes use of the latest technologies .
This is not just going through the motions of accomplishing the task of European integration ; this is a practical matter .
More and more books are being published these days .
This vast amount of literature cannot be concentrated in one place without the help of computer technology .
This is a mammoth task .
The plan is that the European digital library will absorb those digital sources that already exist and contain the literary works not affected by copyright .
Literary works will be joined by technical , legal , journalistic and also audiovisual works .
Setting up a system that is so universal and yet reasonably simple will be an interesting task for the digital technology experts .
I am sure the European digital library will eliminate endless cross-referencing and complicated searches in virtual cyberspace and will become an enormous library that we will have , metaphorically speaking , at home .
Of course there are also the risks .
Will digital libraries make us even more dependent on computers and threaten the existence of printed books ?
It may happen although I do not think it too likely .
A traditional book is an integral part of our culture , just like theatre or art .
It offers something digital libraries will never be able to provide : first-hand contact with the reader .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the British Library has roots going back to 1753 .
It contains documents dating as far back as 300 bc .
Famous people such as Karl Marx , Oscar Wilde , Mahatma Gandhi , Rudyard Kipling , George Orwell , George Bernard Shaw , even Vladimir Lenin , are just some of the figures who have studied in the reading rooms of the British Museum and British libraries .
I wonder if they would have found so much inspiration from surfing the internet .
I suspect that our magnificent facility , with its unprecedented collection of publications from every corner of the world and British Empire - and beyond , indeed - will be as treasured long after the EU has gone the way of other Eurofederalist projects from Charlemagne to the awful political nightmares of the last two centuries .
Good luck , Ms Descamps , with your digital library , but in this area , as in so many others , I would rather concentrate on protecting and preserving and developing a heritage that I am proud of than creating the trappings of a new state out of the ruins of failed ones .

Mr President , colleagues , first let me emphasise that I welcome the Commission and Ms Descamps ' report on digital libraries as a timely and important contribution towards ensuring that digital information is preserved for future generations .
It is true that the internet has become one of the principal means of access to knowledge and learning .
Digital libraries would surely benefit many researchers , students , teachers and - as one specific group - people with physical disabilities .
So this is a perfect initiative in the Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
I would just like to draw your attention to one aspect that needs to be thoroughly assessed before making decisions .
Public / private cooperation and private sponsorship for the digitalisation of Europe 's cultural heritage is an important element of the system as it now stands .
We need to make sure that new regulations in this field do not threaten the benefits of the current system , especially on scientific information .
For example , we have to make sure that the peer review mechanism is safeguarded .
Peer review is the process by which independent experts in a scientific discipline - the peers - critically assess a scientific paper reporting on research .
The peer review system is critical for the scientific community as it is an important quality control mechanism and can influence scientific careers .
We also need to avoid a scenario where open access puts the existing dissemination of scientific research through subscription journals at risk .
One question to be assessed is also damage to the profitability of journals from small publishing houses .
In short , the current system is perceived by many stakeholders as easy to access , efficient , cost-effective and also of high quality .
We have to be sure that the benefits , especially for researchers , will be on the positive side and we must avoid any unintended negative consequences for the very people we are hoping to assist .
( PL ) Mr President , the idea of creating a European digital library , by creating an Internet site where resources would be stored that could then be accessed by any user free of charge is certainly an ambitious one .
The library would have a multilingual interface facilitating direct access to the desired material .
Every citizen would be able to access even the least well-known works of world culture in his or her native language .
It should also be noted that this initiative raises an important issue , namely Internet access and the opportunity to connect with the world 's cultural heritage being made available to residents of rural areas , island areas and to those experiencing mobility difficulties .
Access to all categories of cultural material , including that which is protected by copyright and related rights will be another major problem .
I trust it will prove possible to resolve it in due course , through investment in technology .
Mrs Descamps has prepared a well-balanced report . I believe it deserves our support .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to echo the previous speakers who congratulated the rapporteur on her well-prepared report .
It sends out a clear message from the European Parliament in support of the idea of establishing a European digital library .
I am pleased to be able to remind the House that Poland was involved in promoting this idea .
My country was represented amongst the six Heads of State and Government who launched it .
The report presents convincing arguments in favour of the gradual implementation of this project .
It suggests progressive inclusion of the various categories of cultural heritage , together with documents protected by copyright and related rights , always complying with legal restrictions in the area of intellectual property .
The idea contained in the proposal whereby institutions other than libraries that are involved in the dissemination of culture could be included in the project is worthy of consideration .
It is only right and proper for museums and archives to play an important part in this system too , as they have enjoyed strong links with libraries over the centuries .
I have high hopes , especially in view of the plan to include in the coordination system for the European digital library not only scientific research on digitisation but also the very important issue of the protection of digital resources .
I believe that in this way it will prove possible to develop common unified requirements regarding the proper storage of digital materials collected in libraries and archives , and also digital materials - archived , I must stress -collected elsewhere than in archives , in other words in museums and libraries .
It is well known that for centuries these institutions have experienced difficulties in properly protecting archive material received from different sources .
We are at last in a position to remedy the situation .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to Mrs Descamps and the other members of the Committee on Culture and Education for having produced this report , because it is a very important one indeed .
You see , Europe 's true wealth is to be found not in the euro or in our economic development : it is in our heritage , a heritage that across the centuries has been created and built up ; that is what constitutes the real and profound source of Europe 's riches .
Now in a certain sense the scandal is that this heritage is disappearing into archives and vaults , into places where the public , the citizens of Europe , cannot go , where they cannot touch it , where they cannot understand it , where they cannot enjoy it .
The precise aim of the digital library is to break down these barriers .
I believe that this is one of the great advances that Europe has made and I would like to pay homage to the national libraries , to our national libraries , because they were there at the launch of this initiative , which has been so valid and so important for European cultures .
The directors of these libraries have been true pioneers .
They understood that symbiosis was involved , the symbiosis between culture , which is richness of the corpus , and technology , which is an instrument that provides access to this culture , and the fact that they undertook this pioneering work essentially means that in 2008 we now have the single multilingual access point .
And yes , yes , yes I say to those who brought up the point , it will even give us access to the literature of Luxembourg .
I am proud of this because Luxembourgish is my mother tongue and therefore for me it is the most important language in the world , just as every mother tongue is important .
This is precisely why the works of art and literature that have been created in all these languages , and the special manner in which these are expressed , are what we need to be able to access .
Take the culture of Luxembourg : of course the people of Luxembourg have access to it , but do you in this House know that there is a such a thing as the culture of Luxembourg ?
No !
However , once we have the digital library the common access point will enable you to understand that there really is one .
It is extraordinary that we can have access to these cultures , that we can share this wealth all around us , including - and I would emphasise the fact - outside Europe , because culture does not stop at our borders .
Culture means sharing and therefore it is in a spirit of openness that we wish to create this library , for interoperability will be a very important aspect , and this will apply not just to the books but also to all the other forms of culture : films , music , museum collections and so on .
We are therefore witnessing an extraordinary cultural opening-up that is both multilingual and multicultural , something that will truly show the very essence of Europe itself , which is this unified diversity .
Of course there are problems to resolve and the honourable Members have been quite clear on this .
There is the problem of financing , for one .
I would therefore appeal to the Member States to ensure that the discussions are followed by effective action .
Some have already done so and I would like to thank them for this .
In 2008 we shall be presenting an analysis of what has been achieved and also , therefore , of what has not been achieved .
I believe that this will be very important for moving the whole venture forward .
Of course we are also going to recommend the private-public partnership , because that will be essential for the progress of digitisation , which is a very expensive business .
I am also thinking about the preservation of fragile material that can be destroyed if it is not taken care of .
How many reels of film are allowed to go to dust ?
If we are to preserve this common cultural heritage then we simply have to digitise it before it is too late .
I am also naturally thinking of other problems that need to be resolved , namely those relating to copyright - which is a real headache - and to scientific information .
Our high-level group is currently working on solutions to these issues .
Mr President , what we have here is an extraordinary project that shows what European value added really is , and I believe that the greatest thing is to unite Europeans around their cultures plural , around their respective histories plural , which are things of beauty and which have been developed through creativity .
This really is the best of what we have .
Let us preserve it and let us work together so that we can share it .
I would like to thank all the speakers very much , and especially Commissioner Reding for her charm and intelligence .
I would like to thank her in own language , Luxembourgish , because today is Lesser Known Languages Day .
Merci !
( Laughter )
Efficiency and equity in European education and training systems ( debate )
The next item is the report by Tomáš Zatloukal , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on efficiency and equity in European education and training systems .
rapporteur . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is facing a number of connected socioeconomic challenges : the emergence of highly competitive countries , the ageing of the population , migration , a fast-changing labour market structure , and booming information and communication technologies .
Each one of these factors affects the issue of access to quality education .
People with low qualifications are increasingly at risk of unemployment and social exclusion .
Fair systems guarantee that education and training are independent of socioeconomic background and other factors that place individuals at a disadvantage .
The challenge is to support the participation of pupils , students and adults from all social groups : the current situation in this regard is particularly unsatisfactory .
The report I am tabling here in this Parliament urges Member States to take positive measures from the pre-school stage to ensure the social diversity of classes and establishments and run quality educational programmes .
Skills that are hereditary or acquired at an early age provide the basis for learning in later life .
The return on investment is highest during this period because the fruit of such investment lasts a lifetime .
I would like to point out that at the level of primary education premature categorisation of pupils has a detrimental effect .
Instead , I consider it important to adapt the curriculum so that it suits diverse groups of children and their capabilities within one school .
On the other hand , differentiation and creating a flexible range of study options is very effective at secondary level .
As far as vocational training is concerned , I would recommend improving access to tertiary education and developing opportunities for lifelong learning .
Third-level education is vital to the success of a knowledge-based economy .
It would benefit from more funding than it receives at present .
The report states that free university tuition does not necessarily guarantee equity and calls for an analysis of the range of financial incentives and support options that can significantly reduce inequity in terms of access to university education .
Education has an impact on the economy : it increases human capital and innovative capability and enables technology to be disseminated .
Each additional year of average school attendance raises productivity in an average EU country selectively by 6.2 % and in the long term by a further 3.1 % , thanks to its contribution to more rapid technological development .
Increasing the efficiency of education and training brings both individuals and society as a whole a return on investment of up to 8 % a year .
A further benefit is a reduction in unemployment : in today 's EU the average unemployment rate is 12.6 % amongst people who have completed primary or secondary education , as against 5 % in the case of people who have completed higher education .
Furthermore , recent research carried out by the Commission has shown that 75 million EU citizens - i.e. 32 % of the workforce - have received insufficient education .
In 2010 only 15 % of new jobs will be available for that group of people , most of whom come from socially disadvantaged sectors of society .
Education and training policies must have a significant positive impact on social and economic results , sustainable development and social cohesion , whereas inefficiency and inequity entail huge costs : loss of tax revenue , unemployment , a greater requirement for healthcare and support from public funds , and also the costs associated with a higher level of anti-social behaviour .
Education and training are basic factors contributing to long-term European economic growth , to competitiveness and to social cohesion .
In conclusion , allow me to thank all my colleagues who have worked with me on this report .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I really welcome this initiative of the Parliament to take further the message of our communication , which we adopted on this topic last year .
I read your report with a lot of interest and I also listened now to Mr Zatloukal , whom I want to congratulate cordially because I think and I feel we are partners on this issue , in this debate and in efforts to improve the situation .
We could listen now to a description of socioeconomic challenges that we are facing individually , collectively , together , but also of the importance of investment - better investment , more investment - in education and training policies .
I think that education and training policy lies at the centre of our efforts to create a more prosperous and a more cohesive European society .
All European education systems are marked by educational inequities that reflect socioeconomic inequalities .
The paradoxical role of education and training in relation to these inequalities is that they very often contribute to their perpetuation .
But they are sometimes the only vehicle by which inequalities can be ameliorated .
Across Europe , the process of modernising education and training systems is largely driven by the search for greater efficiency in terms of cost-effectiveness .
I think this is really desirable , of course , but it is frequently , and wrongly , assumed that efficiency and equity are mutually exclusive .
As part of our commitment to helping Member States improve their education and training systems , the Commission 's communication showed that efficiency and equity do not have to come at the expense of each other , at the expense of quality .
Efficiency and equity are , in effect , mutually enforcing .
I think this is the most important message from the whole communication .
Your report stresses strongly the need for European education and training systems to be both efficient and equitable if they are to help us to achieve not only economic growth but social cohesion .
I am especially pleased to see your emphasis on the need to develop efficient and equitable policies for the whole life-long learning continuum and on the need to invest in education early , as investing in quality early-childhood and pre-primary education and care is shown to be the most effective way of breaking the cycle of disadvantage .
I am also pleased to notice that you confirm our message that early tracking of pupils has detrimental effects on efficiency and equity .
And , of course , you place a lot of emphasis on the need to develop a culture of evaluation in order to develop effective long-term policies and create policies based on solid evidence .
Your initiative will bring us closer to the development of life-long learning strategies that foster equality , inclusion , integration , and social cohesion .
We will take full account of it in our forthcoming initiatives in the field of education and training , especially in the proposal for the 2008 Joint Report on the implementation of our work programme and our reflections for the future , and in the Green Paper on the links between education and migration , in which inequalities will be a central issue .
We hope to present this communication next spring .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( DE ) Madam President , the question is : why are we talking about equality or inequality when more women than men reach a high level of education ?
What this means is that we have the same educational opportunities and we are utilising them as well , but equality of opportunity is no longer guaranteed after that .
In training , in the use of their acquired knowledge , women continue to suffer discrimination , which means that there is still no equality in the education and training systems .
That is why it is essential that we take account of women who are already mothers and are studying , for example , that we demand particularly flexible organisation of studies here , and that we promote and support access for young women , especially from remote regions , and vulnerable groups such as migrant women and women from ethnic minorities , for there are major anomalies and inequalities here .
This must start at pre-school and school age and then continue all the way through to vocational training .
If I may , I will continue after a short break .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
I will speak in Hungarian .
Commissioner , last week , representing the Committee on Culture and Education , I took part in a conference in Lisbon entitled ' Young Voices - Meeting Diversity in Education ' , organised by the Portuguese Presidency .
It was a profoundly moving experience to hear young people living with a variety of physical and learning disabilities present their school experiences .
There was one common feature in their story : every one of them said that they felt that if they were able to participate in school activities alongside their able-bodied peers , they would not be judged according to their disabilities but according to their abilities and personalities .
Integrating children living with a disability into mainstream education alongside their able-bodied peers is also vital in order to ensure that society accepts them and includes them more easily as adults .
If children are accustomed from an early age to being around children who have some disability or other , and are accustomed to having to respect them equally and perhaps to helping them , then there is a good chance that they will demonstrate more understanding and more empathy towards disadvantaged people in their adult lives .
The report we have before us speaks a great deal about integration issues relating to social differences .
I am convinced that , by analogy to the example I referred to above , it is also important for children who are socially disadvantaged to be able to participate in an inclusive way alongside other children in all the various stages of education .
To achieve this , two things have to be put in place .
One is technological progress and removal of barriers .
From this point of view , central and eastern European Member States are lagging far behind : schools , the school environment , transport facilities , even the hospitals , other institutions , public institutions , for example , are all inaccessible to wheelchair users .
The other , and this will take longer , is the change in attitude that is needed on the part of decision-makers in order for them to acknowledge that inclusive education is the first crucial stage in the process that leads to social acceptance and integration .
In conclusion , let me say that sports , too , are an important tool for education and social leverage , because social and societal differences disappear in sports ; the only things that matter are talent , determination and application .
Physical education in schools and sports contribute greatly to strengthening important social values such as solidarity and respect for each other 's dignity .
This is why I consider it important that when this House debates the quality , efficiency and equity of education and training , reference should also be made to the importance of physical education and its quality , efficiency and equity .
We also need to ensure that inclusive education in this regard plays a major part .
I congratulate the rapporteur and thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the right to unrestricted education , which means the right of access to education , is enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and yet it is still deficient and has still not been fully realised in practice .
The considerable disparity in performance between education systems in the EU translates into differences in economic and social development .
Education systems must be efficient , equitable and , above all , freely accessible .
Efficiency must be promoted and emphasised from the pre-school level onwards , in schools and also in the vocational training system .
It is extremely important that higher education should become accustomed to some measure of flexibility in order to respond swiftly to economic and social change , for this is the only way to create competitive advantages .
Multidimensionality , quality and cooperation with the private sector and the promotion of research and development are essential .
However , we must not educate people simply to supply the economy with well-qualified workers .
Education is personally enriching and is the prerequisite for us to be able to live in social cohesion .
It fosters personal development and self-esteem , and that is at least as important as specialist , vocational and business skills training .
We need to work towards a situation in which teachers and all their students receive a high-quality education and , above all , have opportunities for advancement and flexible development , for here , we have been travelling down the same track for decades .
That cannot continue !
It would be simplistic to say that education policy should be solely a matter for the Member States .
This is only partly true .
A European educational area with a common goal , namely the Lisbon objectives , also needs a common approach to achieve efficiency and equity .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , learning is an inseparable part of the European social dimension , because it reveals the significance of solidarity , equal opportunities and social inclusion .
All citizens must gain the knowledge and skills required of them and continuously update them .
Moreover , it is necessary to consider the special needs of people who are on the verge of social exclusion .
The European Union does not regulate the development of national education systems directly , but it does have a significant impact on their development , firstly through the common objectives of the European Union ; secondly through the monitoring of set European guidelines and reports on the development of education systems presented by the Member States ; and thirdly through the education and training programmes funded by the European Union .
I welcome the European Commission 's recommendation to make investments in human resources a priority for the Structural Funds .
The European Union has to provide the essential conditions for every Member State seeking to create and develop an effective European education and training system in order to solve the relevant problems .
For example , one of the biggest problems in Lithuania today is violence in schools .
To combat this , various prevention programmes have already started to be implemented at national level .
Another issue is that we are searching for any methods that would help to improve the quality of higher education , seeking to ensure that the level of education provided by universities in our country is equal to that provided by the best universities in Western Europe .
The Lithuanian education system faces other problems too . One of these is low salaries for teachers in all disciplines , inevitably leading to a lack of teachers .
We do not have sufficient money to repair sports halls and grounds , and I believe that improving sports infrastructure is important not only for encouraging schoolchildren to enjoy sports , but also for preventing them from taking drugs and alcohol as well as smoking .
One more very relevant problem is the generation of young emigrants returning home .
They need extra funding and additional teachers for compensatory studies and special programmes .
I have mentioned only a few problems that are no doubt also relevant in other new Member States of the European Union .
I fully agree with the speaker who said that the current situation was unsatisfactory .
Realistic assessment and active support for different education systems complying with common European goals and standards should be today 's objective for the European Union .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , there is a popular saying in Poland according to which if you fail to learn certain things in childhood , you will suffer the consequences for the rest of your life .
It wisely reminds us that teaching children is the best investment of all .
The rapporteur is therefore right to suggest increasing the resources allocated to pre-school education , because that is when social integration begins . The latter helps to develop the individual and prepare him or her to carry out their mission in life .
Integration should be strengthened at a later stage too .
The rapporteur is also right , therefore , in identifying the problem of classifying individuals and the advisability of only introducing streaming at lower secondary level and of extending the period spent in school-based education .
It is appropriate too that the draft resolution clearly identifies the need to link policies on vocational education and training with policies on employment , the economy , social integration , improving the competitiveness of higher education and enabling everyone to access it on equal terms .
The most pressing reason for us to adopt these arrangements for education is the fact that 75 million European Union citizens , that is to say , 32 % of the workforce , is inadequately educated .
This has serious implications for the effectiveness of their work , the performance of our economies and the social situation .
Change is needed .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , an equitable and efficient system should guarantee access to education for everyone .
The rapporteur states that we need an improvement in pre-school education , which is when people form their habits and skills needed for later learning .
He asks the Member States to increase funding for pre-school education .
However , what is the reality ?
In almost all EU countries pre-school facilities have been closing down in recent years .
The adverse population trend is not the only reason .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality agreed with this , too , and the situation in the Czech Republic is no different .
Pre-school facilities have been closing down because they are expensive to run .
That is how villages and towns try to hold on to substantial parts of their budgets .
Company pre-school facilities practically do not exist any longer .
Waiting times for placing a child in these facilities are starting to grow .
Private nurseries that are run to high standards are beginning to appear : they offer foreign language tuition and other perks but only wealthy families can afford them .
Pre-school education in the Czech Republic used to be , and still is , of a high standard but even there a certain inequality already exists .
Furthermore , I cannot agree with paragraph 21 of the report , which states that free university education does not necessarily guarantee equity .
The situation whereby young people get student loans and pay them back later will have a more serious impact on the poorer students as opposed to the richer ones ; this may affect the psychology of young people who start their lives burdened with debts .
Europe is experiencing a wave of immigration . Among those who come here are many children and students .
These people have a lot of potential that can help the Union in its future development .
They are also standing on an imaginary starting line and we should enable them to participate successfully in the education system .
In this context , it is difficult to understand the legislation governing schools in force in the Czech Republic since January 2005 , which regulates the extent to which education is allowed to be provided to foreigners with permanent residence permits , or with long-term or short-term visas , refugees or asylum seekers , or persons under temporary protection .
One bureaucratic decision draws a line between children who must go to school and children who must not go to school .
Everything depends on how quickly the person in question is granted the relevant status .
Their arrival is dramatic enough to begin with .
We must make every effort to ensure that their entry into our Union is easier .
We do not want young people to be dragged into various undesirable social activities .

( RO ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioner , dear colleagues , I congratulate Mr. Zatloukal for the report , which I consider to be very good , because it refers to one of the most important and sensitive chapters in our life , namely education .
Furthermore , I would like to refer to three aspects of the report : I requested increased support for the university excellence programmes , both at the level of Member States and of the European Union , to the extent of its competencies .
This is essential if we want the Lisbon Agenda to be successful and the gaps in respect to other global actors to decrease .
The lack of highly-qualified specialists in Europe is felt everywhere and extremely seriously in the new Member States due to the brain drain phenomenon .
At the same time , I am convinced that the increase of the educational process efficiency is closely related to multilingualism .
In the context of the free movement of European Union citizens , adjustment to the market requirements involves knowledge of foreign languages .
Moreover , exchanges of pupils and students would be facilitated by multilingual education .
As regards the equity of educational and training systems , I believe that Member States should find the necessary means to increase the degree of access to education and training of children , young people and adults .
Subsidized positions should come as a support for underprivileged social categories , for the purpose of reducing illiteracy , social reconversion , for a better adjustment to the labour market requirements and reduction of unemployment .
This way , the required labour force in third countries will be reduced .
There are enough human resources , yet they are not trained and managed efficiently .
( ES ) Madam President , the review of the Lisbon objectives we carried out in 2005 demonstrated once more how important it is to position education and training at the core of future EU strategy .
It is obvious , and this is borne out by Eurostat data , that we are falling short of the ambitious objectives we have set for higher education for 2015 : investment in R & D , modernisation of universities , reduction of academic failure rates and the numbers of early school-leavers , more participation by adults in life-long learning , and an increase in the numbers of those who have completed secondary education .
This time lag leaves us behind our international partners , the US , India and Japan , and to add to this we have the huge disparity of situations among European countries .
Not only is making efficient and effective progress in the education systems of our Member States important in terms of international competitiveness and economic growth ; it is also an essential component of making progress in terms of social cohesion in our societies .
Investing in pre-school , primary and secondary education is a basic requirement to minimise the risk of social exclusion and ensure higher levels of employment and better pay .
Both the public and private finance allocated to education must be increased , and Member States must seriously consider the need to build on the Bologna and Copenhagen processes .
Likewise , university education ought to be adapted to our societies ' increasingly heterogeneous social and economic needs , while not ignoring the fact that education is also the basis for training free citizens capable of playing an active role in society .
Finally , we must update and improve the teaching of vocational training with all due haste , and adapt it to the new challenges posed by the extension of the working lives of Europeans , which increases socioeconomic and educational expectations in adults , without neglecting training on non-discrimination between the sexes at each and every level of education .
( PL ) Further to the recommendation of the European Parliament and of the Council in 2006 , emphasising the need to develop lifelong learning , with particular reference to the unemployed , and the need to adjust to economic changes impacting on the operation of the labour market , I should like to draw attention to the importance of education in achieving greater mobility on the labour market , which represents an opportunity to reduce structural unemployment .
I would like to emphasise the significance of the European Qualifications Framework in terms of increasing worker mobility .
Equal access to education , which is such an important factor in ensuring that all children and young people have equal opportunities in life , is linked to the financing of education in the Member States of the Union .
The differences between the financial resources allocated to education , qualifications and teachers ' pay have a significant bearing on the chances of achieving that particular objective of the Lisbon Strategy .
The report entitled ' Progress towards the Lisbon Objectives in Education and Training ' adopted by the European Commission in 2005 clearly indicates that progress in that field had been inadequate in terms of achieving the desired outcome by 2010 .
That is why it is so important to focus on improving the quality of education , thus preventing social exclusion and increasing the competitiveness of our economy .
I congratulate Mr Zatloukal on his excellent report .
( PT ) One of the areas of education which is still lagging behind in certain European Union countries , in particular Portugal , is pre-school education .
It therefore seems essential to me to underline the call to Member States to invest much more in a public network of nurseries supplied with teachers with high-quality training , capable of dealing with all children , as this is one of the most effective means of developing their intellect , establishing the basis for future education , raising overall skills levels , significantly increasing the equity of the education system and combating social inequalities .
Likewise , it is essential to ensure quality primary and secondary education , which must be universal , compulsory and free , in order to provide a basic education and key skills which will contribute to the achievement of fundamental social and civic values and education for peace and equality , thereby reinforcing social cohesion and inclusion .
As for higher education , it should be recognised that this is a fundamental sector in developed societies , which is why lack of success at school and early school leaving must be prevented , as is the case in Portugal where unfortunately around 40 % of pupils never even finish their secondary education .
Budget cuts in education , rising costs of higher education and the difficult social situation of a high percentage of families and young people are preventing Portugal from rapidly improving the higher education of its population , resulting in the worst indices in the European Union .
Given that studies show that , for every additional year of average school attendance , productivity increases selectively by 6.2 % in an average country of the European Union , we can understand better the difficulties of those countries which do not give their citizens access to high-quality education .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , education has played , and continues to play , a key role in the development of the European economy and the personal development of young people .
I fully agree with this and many other statements made in the report , and I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to the rapporteur .
It is also correct to say that education systems are effective when the resources deployed produce the best possible results .
These objectives are pursued by all the EU Member States , in fact , but comparative studies often reveal some interesting facts about the outcomes .
For that reason , pointers and appeals to the Member States , as set out in the report , are more than justified from a European perspective , even though we have no direct powers in respect of the content and structure of education .
The causes of such divergent outcomes can be found in the variations in educational quality and intensity , which result in different levels of performance and therefore also to unequal life chances for our young people .
In my view , it is essential , as a matter of urgency , to make it clear , time and again , that today 's generation of school students will be entering an international competition for training places after completing their education .
Equal opportunities for all thus pose a challenge for Member States which they must meet in order to ensure that young people receive the best possible education that equips them with the intellectual skills they need in order to flourish .
However , equality of opportunity always has to do with quality and performance as well .
This , in turn , merits a greater focus on quality and performance in the education system .
In this context , it should not just be about educational equality for everyone , but about giving everyone an equal start , followed up by the best possible education which takes account of individual talents and differences in physical and intellectual abilities .
( RO ) Madam President , Mr. Commissioner , by 2010 , the European Union plans for the dropout rate for young people between 18 and 24 years old not to exceed 10 % and over 85 % of the young people over 18 years old to attend post-secondary studies .
9.7 % of the children in the European Union aged between 0 and 17 are part of a family with no income .
Many of the children coming from poor families or a rural environment do not attend any form of post-secondary education for financial reasons .
I consider that , in a social Europe , scholarships for pupils and students should be accessible to all those who want to learn .
Disabled children must also have access to education .
The Member States and the Commission must have as a priority the registration of at least 90 % of the children aged under 7 in nurseries or kindergartens .
In this way , young mothers will be able to reconcile their family life and their professional activity .
I also request , in order to make education more efficient , ensuring the training and motivation of teachers .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to highlight a number of issues .
First , I agree with the rapporteur that investment in pre-school education brings the most rewards , because that is when the best results are obtained .
It is also important to support modernisation of universities , to emphasise the need for equal access to higher education and to increase its competitiveness .
Second , equal access to education leads to many positive outcomes .
It has a bearing on social development , economic growth , increased innovation , the development of human potential and new technologies , and also on reducing unemployment .
Third , although the return on investment in education only makes itself felt after a lengthy period and requires long-term planning , we should remember that such investment is vital .
Fourth , I agree with the view that it is essential to link policies on vocational training and education with employment policy , economic policy and social integration .
Fifth , we need to invest in our young people , because the younger generation represents the future of the European Union .
It is very important to prevent children from dropping out of school early .
Sixth , we are confronted by a demographic problem ; namely that Europe 's population is ageing .
That is why we must promote lifelong learning for adults .
And finally , education , education , education .
Madam President , in general I am concerned by the uncritical acceptance by the Commission that Member States are cutting funding for education .
In Ireland it is particularly glaring , with the growth in our population and , indeed , as a result , overcrowded classrooms .
I have long been an advocate of pre-school and primary education as essential for the personal development of every child .
All the evidence shows that the better the education , the better one 's life chances are .
It is even linked to a longer and healthier life .
I believe the Commission and Member States must put as much emphasis on quality as on efficiency and equity .
The quality of the school environment and teaching are prerequisites to efficiency .
Children need good teachers with a curriculum that gives a holistic education , one geared to teaching students how to make rational decisions , how to cope with diversity and change , how to communicate with others and , indeed , provide a broad ethical basis for the values they can choose to live their lives by .
These are skills they need to make the most of themselves and their society .
But there is even a more urgent and basic issue - that of hungry children in our schools .
Thousands of children go to school hungry in Ireland and I am sure we are not unique .
It matters not how efficient or equitable the access is , these children cannot do well , and the long-term consequences of that dwarf the savings a state makes by not providing a healthy breakfast for these children .
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) I would like to thank you for a convergent debate since it confirms not only the report and the Commission communication on this matter but also the position of the Member States , which expressed their views at the ministerial meeting in November and subsequently in that half of 2007 when the Council adopted conclusions that also confirmed the basic points in the Commission communication .
I would just like to make a couple of comments .
I believe that promoting equity and efficiency in education is both a moral duty and a fundamental financial / economic need .
Logic dictates that we need to make better and greater investment in education : firstly , better because there is scope to use every euro , every crown and every pound more effectively .
Several speakers have stated that skills and the quality of education and vocational training have a decisive impact on the future position of both individuals and social groups and need to be constantly improved .
Those who can improve them primarily are , for example , teachers .
Investment in the quality of teacher training is one of the most efficient ways of achieving an overall improvement since teachers multiply such effects .
In terms of improvement , there is a systematic need , for example , for quality assessment as a basic tool and not as an exception , not as something extraordinary but as a rule , where inputs , outputs and everything in between are evaluated , and quality is assessed and rewarded .
I would like to say that the Commission will , as expected from the report , continue to focus on this matter .
We want to pay more attention to the issue fair and efficient education , for example , in next year 's topic on education and migration .
There is presently an ongoing consultation on schools for the 21st century , i.e. what is expected from schools in this new era , and naturally we want this process to culminate in an up-to-date view of the position of schools in European society today .
Another topic that we raised recently was the communication adopted in August on the quality of teacher training and the very important conclusions it presents .
In conclusion , I believe that the processes that have been mentioned , such as the Bologna and Copenhagen process , and matters relating to adult education , pre-school education and lifelong education , must all come together under the topic of accessibility and quality as key factors in the truly fair education system that we require today and in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 27 September 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( ET ) Time waits for no man .
It is clear that in 2010 Europe will not be the world 's most competitive economy .
An appropriate and well-structured education system would bring that objective within reach .
It is impossible to ignore the academic and financial level of the individual top universities .
According to various data , 20-30 of the world 's top 50 universities are in the United States .
A further five or six are in the United Kingdom .
The rest of Europe is in third place with four or five , with Canada and Australia hot on their heels .
Success stories have a habit of repeating themselves .
Unfortunately , this success story owes its existence primarily to the fact that the English-language education market can tap into billions of powerful customers .
The effect of scale does the rest .
As a result Harvard is tens of times wealthier and more famous than its nearest competitor .
Imitating the elite system of the Ivy League and Oxbridge in continental Europe is a hazardous project .
I would even call it a blind alley .
Both in the United States and in the United Kingdom the literacy and numeracy of many ordinary citizens is deemed to be inadequate .
In the desire for success , especially rapid success , it would be more reasonable to rely entirely on those activities which are familiar to us .
The most successful European Union country in terms of education is unquestionably Finland , whose national strategy includes public access to education at an equally high level everywhere .
Education is by nature a strategic area .
The effects of decisions and actions emerge only over decades .
Consequently it would be pointless as far as equality is concerned to sacrifice another quarter of a century in the name of higher summits . Even if it were the right way to go .
A uniformly high level remains Europe 's best trump card in international competition .
European strategy for the rights of the child : against " dys " crimination of children and exclusion of " dys " people ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on a European strategy for the rights of the child : against ' dys 'crimination of children and exclusion of ' dys ' people , by Anna Záborská , Amalia Sartori and Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Roberta Angelilli on behalf of the UEN Group , Zita Gurmai and Catherine Trautmann on behalf of the PSE Group , Adamos Adamou on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , Hiltrud Breyer et Raül Romeva i Rueda on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , Elizabeth Lynne on behalf of the ALDE Group , and Kathy Sinnott on behalf of the IND / DEM Group - B6-0317 / 2007 ) .
( FR ) Madam President , Rule 173 states that a verbatim report of the proceedings of each sitting shall be drawn up in all the official languages .
I would draw your attention to the fact that this debate on the exclusion of persons affected by ' dys ' ability is not to be translated into the official languages of the European Union .
This ' tool ' has quite simply been done away with in practice , even though our Rules of Procedure require it .
My point of order is quite a simple one : this evening 's debate has to a large extent been requested by numerous schoolchildren , parents ' associations , teachers , educators and doctors in different countries .
However , the citizens who elect the Members of this House , since they will not be familiar with all the different languages used this evening , will never be able to know everything that is being said during this parliamentary debate , even though it is intended for them .
Thank you very much for your point , which of course concerns us all on what is the day of European languages .
The matter is being considered and a report is being prepared that will go to the Conference of Presidents , so your point is taken .
We now continue with the debate on the oral question to the Commission on a European strategy for the rights of the child .
author . - ( SK ) Allow me to begin with the testimony of a young 21-year-old woman in her third year at university .
' When I was 17 my schoolmates laughed at me all year because I looked like an 11-year-old .
In my report the teachers frequently asked when I would finally make up my mind to learn .
Those of us with ' dys 'abilities work much more than others and it 's very hard to live with ' .
End of quote .
Society is never aware of the 10-20 % of children with ' dys 'abilities because they are never diagnosed .
Their difficulties hinder communication , prevent normal education and unfortunately sometimes lead to mental breakdown and social exclusion .
As far as we are concerned , the European Union can do what it does best , that is to say it can act as a spokesperson and highlight , in a sufficiently varied manner , a problem which in other circumstances might remain taboo and hidden away .
Europe provides an opportunity to identify good ideas and the tried and tested practices of organisations and governments , as referred to in Written Declaration 64 / 2007 , which is currently before the European Parliament .
A ' neuro-dys ' programme already exists and the European Union funds projects that may be well suited to those affected by ' dys 'abilities too , such as the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , the ICT Policy Support Programme , support for research into information and communication technology skills , the Seventh Framework Programme for Research - health , the Lifelong Learning Programme , and the Second Public Health Programme 2008-2013 .
These programmes are the subject of amending and supplementary proposals for the 2008 budget , which we have put forward with our fellow Members from the five political groups .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in conclusion allow me to express my great admiration , respect , gratitude and encouragement to those who in their lives could have had plenty of reasons to be mothers without hope : ' des mères désespérées ' .
Nevertheless , none of them is giving up the fight .
They are the best defenders of their children 's cause , alongside the fathers where they are still part of the same family .
I believe that the debate this evening will show that they will not be alone and that their problem will also become a concern of the European Parliament .

author . - ( ES ) Madam President , first and foremost I wish to apologise for the absence of Mrs Zita Gurmai , the author of this oral question on behalf of the Socialist Group , who cannot attend this sitting due to unforeseen circumstances , and so with your permission , Madam President , I intend to speak on behalf of Mrs Gurmai and on my own behalf , since I had also asked to speak .
My wish , Madam President , is simply to reiterate what has been said .
We are talking about learning disorders that affect a substantial segment of our population .
Almost 10 % of Europe 's children suffer from ' dys ' problems : children who are usually invisible to our education systems , which all too frequently blame their academic failure on unrelated causes .
The necessary measures must be taken to prevent such ' dys 'crimination , and schoolchildren must be treated in a special , timely , intensive and multidisciplinary fashion , preferably at their usual teaching centre .
This requires protocols for detection and courses of action at schools .
For the first time in my country , Spain , a socialist government has introduced an education law to help pupils with specific learning difficulties .
This is a major step , since in our various countries families are usually dependent on the goodwill of teachers and their willingness to make a voluntary effort with the proper training .
Opting for other solutions means a substantial economic burden , which is often impossible to shoulder .
We must remember that boys and girls with these dysfunctions are intelligent , and all they need is a different way of learning .
Academic success is a genuine possibility for them .
All that is required is the political will to implement the right mechanisms that produce genuine solutions .
Making these pupils visible to society means having reliable statistics to allow proper decisions to be taken ; it means providing access to clear and truthful information for everyone who seeks it and starting up awareness campaigns extending to all our countries .
Making them visible to our education systems also means that , in addition to providing treatment in good time for all children affected in the early years of school , we must take account of their needs when designing syllabuses at each and every level of education .
A number of universities are now using examinations and tests adapted to university students with this kind of problem .
Community-financed education programmes such as e-learning or life-long learning must also be designed with ' dys ' people in mind .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must tackle the needs of this sector of the population .
We cannot continue to turn our backs on a disorder that affects over 3 million Europeans .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am pleased , too , that this important topic - the increase in dyslexia - is being discussed here this evening .
It is certainly the first time that we have talked about this issue , but it should not be the last .
I want the Commission to do everything possible to drive this issue forward .
We are not starting from zero .
There are already programmes , there are already initiatives , in many Member States .
It is important , in my view , not to talk about dyslexia as an illness or a disability , for that is incorrect .
It has already been mentioned that many children with dyslexia are actually highly intelligent .
We know that these children are quicker at thinking than in their motor skills .
The first step that we need to take , therefore - and this is my urgent request to the Commissioner - is to obtain an overview of what has already been done in the field of research and the programmes and initiatives which already exist at European level , and then pull all this information together .
I think it is important not to confuse dyslexia with ADS .
It would be disastrous to lump the two together .
We know that ADS is closely connected to excessive television consumption and over-stimulation .
On the issue of dyslexia , we should also consider how we can introduce children to books and reading early on .
We know that children who read a lot and have easy access to books are less susceptible to dyslexia .
This might be one way of curbing the alarming rise in dyslexia .
We urge the Commission to compile an overview of the diversity and the different approaches which exist in Europe .
Another option would be to hold a conference to bring together all these people and their different experiences in this area .
We know that children are our future and knowledge is our most important resource in Europe , so we need to do our utmost here .
author . - Madam President , it is estimated that there are approximately 49 million people with some form of ' dys 'ability within the EU .
As many as 10 % of children are affected by a ' dys ' -type disability such as dysphasia , dyspraxia , dyslexia , dyscalculia , or attention-deficit disorder .
Take the case of Sean in the UK .
The teachers ' report described him as stupid , awkward , disruptive and over-emotional .
Because of his problem , he was marginalised and bullied by fellow pupils and teachers did very little to intervene .
Sean 's parents were eventually forced to withdraw him from school after he arrived home badly beaten and bloodied , but the local education authority refused to provide tutoring or assistance , so education was left to his parents , one of whom was forced to give up work .
Thankfully , a local support group was at hand and offered help to Sean and his parents .
Other children in the UK and some other Member States are not so lucky .
We must exchange best practice across the EU , and this is where the Council and the Commission have an important role to play .
Information must be made more available .
Steps must be taken to spot , screen , diagnose and treat these disorders at an early stage .
Structures must be adapted to integrate young people with disabilities into the world of work , and it is important that a European charter for people with ' dys ' problems is drawn up .
It is also vital that research under the seventh Framework Programme is increased .
There is no point in paying lip-service to disabled people 's rights .
We have to continue to fight to ensure that individuals like Sean are treated equally and given the help and support they deserve .
author . - Madam President , there are millions , literally millions , of children who are not considered disabled but who struggle with a significant and disabling condition in the area of learning , movement and communication .
Although the number of children diagnosed with dyslexia , dysphasia , dyscalculation , dyspraxia and similar specific disorders is increasingly dramatically - dyslexia alone is estimated to affect 10 % of children in the US - many , if not the majority , of children affected in Europe still remain undiagnosed and therefore largely unhelped .
Often , when parents express concern they are ignored or told to stop imagining things .
Often , children - even gifted children - are written off as intellectually weak or clumsy by well-meaning teachers and education authorities because they do not have the expertise to tell the difference .
Ignoring these conditions does not make them go away .
They just become more problematic for the child , who gets increasingly discouraged and frustrated .
The children 's self-image can suffer serious damage and their potential can be squandered .
We have formulated this question and the written declaration to emphasise the enormity of the problem for children with a specific difficulty , for their family and for the community , and to ask the Commission , Parliament and Council to take these children seriously in research programmes , initiatives , guidelines and strategies .
We need to learn more about these ' dys ' conditions , how to identify them as early as possible , how to intervene effectively .
We also need to learn why a child 's developing brain is affected in these ways and how to prevent these ' dys 'abilities where that is possible .
We also need to ensure that no-one is considered less important or less valuable because of these conditions .
I would suggest to the Commissioner that many adults also struggle with these specific learning or coordination difficulties but have no name for their condition or real knowledge of it .
Many have come up with elaborate compensatory techniques to get by .
I collected signatures this summer for a citizens ' petition supporting persons with disabilities and was amazed at how many adults struggle to even write their names .
People suffer in silence with their gifts and talents hidden even from themselves by these hidden disabilities .
What is the price society pays ?
People quitting education and working below their ability because of a problem in one area of learning .
An educational psychologist told me that the tragedy of these children is that many of them would have done very well at university , where they could have worked to their strengths , but failed to get the opportunity as they cannot get through secondary school because the more general nature of the curriculum means that their particular difficulty becomes an insurmountable obstacle to the standard assessment system .
I know one young man who has a specific learning difficulty .
He failed primary and secondary school and had to leave the school system without a certificate but , on the basis of an aptitude test and the recommendation of teachers , he did get into a small college .
Two years later he has proved to be exceptionally gifted in the study of philosophy and has become a popular student leader .
Our education system in Europe tends to be competitive and rigid .
The authorities seem to think this is creating a class of educated , skilled citizens , but this inflexibility - a one-size-fits-all approach - is destroying the potential of countless young people .
This is not good enough and creates social exclusion which can lead many children to become disillusioned and even , in some cases , angry adults .
In Ireland , 76 % of the prisoners in Mountjoy Prison have a history of school failure and what are probably undiagnosed learning difficulties .
To ignore these children and adults is clearly discrimination .
I am very proud of this Parliament in the support it has shown for the written declaration , but have one word of caution . The UN Declaration on the Rights of the Child states that every child is entitled to primary education , but special-needs children are only entitled to the help they need according to resources .
Before we ratify this Convention and introduce it into our strategies , we must examine it very closely .
Otherwise we will bring this fault into our own policies .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I thank all those present , especially Ms Záborská and the co-authors of the question , because I think it is very important , not only as a question , as a topic for our discussions , but also in terms of action in favour of those who need more specific assistance or treatment or conditions for their life in society , for education , training and so on .
I especially underline what was said at the beginning : that we want to be the voice of those with these difficulties , and I think this is a very strong moral and political commitment .
The Commission is aware of the negative social and health consequences that these problems might have on affected individuals or families raising children affected by ' dys ' -related problems .
We agree that measures should be taken to improve the everyday life of children and their access to education , information and culture .
Of course , the main responsibility for dealing with people with ' dys ' problems falls on Member States , but the Commission , as well as European institutions , can support the action of Member States .
For example , our Disability Action Plan 2003-2010 promotes access to support and care services for people with disabilities and their families .
The Commission promotes a level of service which strikes an appropriate balance between security , freedom of choice and independence of life .
The Commission Work Plans for 2005 , 2006 and 2007 in the field of public health included specific reference to the need for further information and definition of indicators relating to attention-deficit hyperactivity disorders , cognitive retardation and disruption of motor , perceptual , language and socio-emotional functions .
Several calls for proposals have been published to support research on ' dys ' -related problems .
However , the Commission has so far failed to receive any proposal in these areas .
The Community programme PROGRESS provides support to a number of large European networks , including the European Disability Forum , as you know .
We support the European Agency for Development in Special Needs Education .
The agency provides policymakers and professionals with relevant information on special needs education and facilitates the exchange of good practices .
Special education needs are also one of the general priorities of the Lifelong Learning Programme and , as such , they must be considered a priority for all its actions because it is a general priority .
The Lifelong Learning Programme has a clear aim to integrate people with a range of special needs .
Concretely , this is done through funding cooperation projects to exchange , develop and improve practice in general , including on the design of pedagogical structures in ordinary and specialist education and by offering increased grants to disabled participants to fund any necessary extra support arrangements .
Furthermore , several research projects have been supported by the Commission , including the Neurodys project mentioned in the Oral Question .
The Commission also promotes access to information and communication technology ( ICT ) and new technology in general for people suffering from ' dys ' -related problems .
The ICT part of the sixth Framework Research Programme co-financed projects on e-accessible and assistive solutions .
I just want to mention two projects in this regard : the AGENT-DYSL project , which focused on developing the next generation of assistive reading systems and , secondly , the EU 's ' For All ' project , which aimed to develop technologies to make education accessible to everyone , including people with dyslexia .
The seventh Framework Research Programme will continue to support ' dys ' -related projects or research , including as part of the health priority and as part of the e-accessibility priority .
We recognise the importance of collecting relevant statistics .
This was one of the very strong issues here .
Although the Commission does not currently collect statistics on specific ' dys ' -related problems , Eurostat provides EU-wide statistics on disability and social integration .
Following a special disability-oriented labour force survey in 2002 , Eurostat is currently in the process of developing an EU-wide survey model .
The survey is part of the European Health Survey System and focuses on disabilities and on various aspects of social integration of people about 18 years old .
We recognise difficulties encountered by people or families caring for people with disabilities , including with those with ' dys ' problems .
Following up on our commitment in the Roadmap for Gender Equality , in 2005 and 2006 we launched a consultation with social partners on reconciliation policies .
The consultation covered a broad range of issues , including maternity leave , parental leave , paternity leave , adoption leave and a new type of leave to care for dependent family members .
Having finished the second phase of consultation in June 2007 , the Commission is currently engaged in an impact assessment process .
Depending on the outcome , the new proposals might be brought forward , possibly to 2008 .
The Commission constantly monitors the transposition of EU anti-discrimination legislation at national level .
Directive 2000 / 78 / EC , which prohibits discrimination in the field of employment and occupation , covers all citizens , including those suffering from ' dys ' -related problems .
However , the Commission believes that legislation should offer protection , not only to employees suffering from a disability but also to employees who care for a disabled dependent .
In this regard , we follow with great interest the Coleman case currently pending before the European Court of Justice .
Finally , I really want to say that this is primarily about real knowledge and awareness , and your contribution now is very helpful .
It is a pity that it is so late , just before midnight .
But , after raising proper awareness , I think we could focus more on implementation and concrete actions in favour of those in real need .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for staying so late and for your very thorough treatment of the issue .
I see two other Commissioners in your seat , including the Commissioner responsible for the health sector .
He is responsible for taking action to have behavioural and learning difficulties recognised as health problems rather than disabilities .
He also directs research into early diagnosis and ensures that medical methods for treatment and therapy become specific proposals in research programmes .
This in turn promotes your own education sector by giving special training to staff and parents , and special equipment to schools .
It also promotes new technologies so as to adopt accompanying and assistance measures for pupils with special educational needs .
The possibility of education leads to training and professional reintegration .
I also see in your seat the third Commissioner , responsible for employment .
He ought to take an interest in the measures for access to professional life , social rights and options for social integration .
This is to prevent social exclusion of individuals who are differently able , who have a special characteristic without being disabled .
You have used the word ' disability ' many times and have expounded to us all the disability programmes .
Here , however , it is a question of other dyspraxia problems .
We can tackle these without the need for a host of new initiatives ; we need no more than a little expense and funding , but mainly just care , organisation and the mustering of best practices already at the disposal of the Member States in a fairly broad sphere .
Legal recognition is a fundamental precondition and allows for access to health and schools as well as to social provision .
The use of technical means and financial aid for parents combine to prevent discrimination against families as well : they suffer from the time when they start to deal with a diagnosis of a dyspraxia problem until its cure .
I hope that our question will give the Commission the opportunity to take action .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is pleasing to see the subject of ' dys ' -type disorders , so often ignored , now being raised in Parliament and the fact that this topic has generated a response from practically all the political groups that make up this House demonstrates that for us no citizen of Europe , whatever their problems , should be subjected to discrimination .
Such is the case for ' dys ' sufferers , for increasingly sophisticated studies have shown that while this type of disability is still very widespread it is still not being properly identified .
As the only French Member to speak this evening I can pride myself on the fact that France has been fairly active in its efforts to tackle ' dys ' problems .
Thanks to the initiative of parents ' associations and professional groups , a national day , the first of its kind , is now to be held in Paris on 10 October and it is hoped that this will make the press more aware of the situation of the people , and especially children , who are affected by problems of this kind .
However , the purpose of my question this evening is not to celebrate the positive advances made in one country or another , since there is still a huge amount of work to be done , but collectively to discuss ways in which we might pool the best practices that have been developed at European level , insomuch as certain Member States do not even recognise the existence of this type of disorder .
It appears to me that the call for a European multidisciplinary network to be set up for specific training and learning problems , which is part of the written declaration , goes some way in this direction .
A judicious use of Community actions such as the Seventh Framework Programme would also be beneficial .
In this respect , the initiative that you mentioned , Commissioner , namely the NeuroDys project , which is aimed at highlighting the cognitive , cerebral and genetic origins of dyslexia , and which brings together 15 scientific research groups from nine Member States - and in passing I would like to point out , for this is important , that this body includes practically all the European languages - seems to set a good example because ultimately it appears to me that Europe should lead the world in understanding these conditions and in collecting the biological data that relate to them .
However , it should also set an example in recognising the most effective forms of rehabilitation and therapy so that children can begin to hope again and face life with optimism .
Does the Commission have plans for other programmes of this type in the future ?
Commissioner , you referred to a call for tenders that received no response .
It is our intention that the awareness campaign now being waged by the various associations and by the Members who signed the written declaration should perhaps make up for this lack of information and motivation .
We hope that your capacity for mobilising the European funding that is needed to fulfil these expectations will enable the relevant research to be carried out into other ' dys ' -type disorders , such as dyspraxia and dysphasia .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , it is quite alarming to learn that 10 % of children suffer from dysfunctional disorders .
That means that one child in every 10 either suffers from motor disorders , cannot express their thoughts or cannot do so clearly .
What will the adult population be like in a few years ' time ?
It will be composed of people who have difficulty undertaking the normal tasks involved in day-to-day living and cannot play a normal part in society .
Can we contemplate treating them as invalids and creating a society of invalids ?
That would be unacceptable .
If these conditions can be treated , we must do all we can to treat the children affected , instead of focusing on the prevention of discrimination and social exclusion , because one cannot exclude beings similar to oneself .
I do not think it will come to that . I believe there are ways to manage the situation .
Finally , I should like to offer my sincere thanks to those who brought this matter to my attention and say that I stand shoulder to shoulder with them .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I wish to start by congratulating the staff and Members who took this initiative of a written declaration and an oral question , and also the Commission for its attendance at this time of night to discuss this issue which , regrettably , not only seems to be a secret issue , an issue for absolute discretion , but also an issue that is completely invisible in certain cases .
Therefore , despite this situation , the fact that we are discussin