Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 3 December 1998 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I want to speak on pages 6 and 7 of the Minutes .
As you have acknowledged yourself , a qualified majority was needed to adopt the Statute , an absolute majority of Members of Parliament .
So I imagine it was a mistake that Recital g ) , which received 270 votes , was declared adopted , and likewise Amendment No 84 to the Annex , with 264 votes , Article 1 ( 1 ) of the Annex , with 251 votes for the first part and 212 for the second , Article 2 of the Annex , with 279 votes for the first part and 288 for the second , Article 8 ( 1 ) of the Annex , with 311 votes , and , finally , Article 5 of the Annex , with 297 votes .
These provisions appear in the Draft Statute which was adopted .
I believe they should not have been declared adopted and I do not think we can approve Minutes containing such a manifest error , especially as important provisions are contained in the text in question .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , you will remember that you raised this question when the text came to be approved in the form in which its various parts had been adopted .
It is when the vote is taken that the majority has to be established , and the majority was established at that point and easily obtained .
I also told you that I would refer the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
You wrote me a letter which I shall forward to the Rules Committee in order to have a definitive interpretation .
For the moment , these parts of the text are deemed to have been adopted in accordance with my interpretation of the vote at the time , right or wrong .
They therefore stand adopted .
The text has been forwarded to the Council , which moreover has just taken note of it at the European Council meeting in Vienna .
However , your written protest will be forwarded to the Rules Committee without delay , so that it can consider this interpretation .
Mr President , I asked you last time to consider improving the bicycle facilities in this building , such as by allocating one car-parking space in the covered car park for bicycles .
I have not had any reply from you , although the President at the time assured me she would look into the matter .
I would therefore ask you again , as I did last time , to ensure that improvements are made so that cyclists do not always have to take second place to car-drivers .
Set one car-parking space aside so that cyclists have more room to store their bicycles out of the rain .
Thank you , Mr Eisma .
I shall investigate what exactly happened and why no reply has been forthcoming .
Rest assured that you will receive a reply in due course .
Mr President , I have just found out that Mr Zaldivar , the President of the Chilean Senate , who supported General Pinochet 's coup d 'état , is coming to the European Parliament tomorrow in support of Pinochet .
May I ask in what context and on what grounds this visit is taking place ?
You are misinformed , Mr Duhamel .
The President of the Senate , Mr Zaldívar , was exiled for many years precisely because he did not support the coup d 'état by General Pinochet .
He is coming here to visit me , like any other Speaker of a parliament .
I do not know the reason for his visit .
That is not something that I ask other Speakers .
I have Parliament 's resolution .
It was easy to reply to him , because Parliament has already adopted resolutions on the subject .
Mr President , I have a point of order based on Rules 2 , 5 and 119 of the Rules of Procedure .
Messrs Falconer , Balfe and other like-minded Members will be pleased to hear that I have taken legal advice and that I intend to apply to the Court of First Instance to have the Bureau 's decision of 15 and 16 December 1997 annulled , in accordance with the Beate Weber procedure .
Once the Quaestors have taken a formal decision , a two-month period begins in which this application must be made .
I shall spare you the arguments - one legal and one fiscal - but if I give this document to your Secretary-General , Mr President , I should be grateful if , as the experienced and authoritative lawyer that I know you are , you would consider whether the decision taken at the time to impose penalties for a refusal to participate in roll-call votes should not be reviewed in the light of the new Members ' Statute .
I would be most grateful if you could forward me a copy of the legal advice , Mr Janssen van Raay . I shall then , of course , pass it to the Bureau .
This is not a matter of my personal preference , even though it might seem so at times .
It is a Bureau decision , and in due course , the Bureau will decide whether the issue should or should not be reviewed .
Mr President , I am very concerned about Members ' safety and there is something I would like to warn you about .
One Friday in Brussels , I had a group of visitors on the fifth floor of the LEO building , and at a certain point several people said that they could smell burning .
It took 20 minutes of telephoning around the various services before any alarm was sounded .
If there really was a fire in the building , this would be far too long .
Would you ask the security services in Brussels to carry out tests to see whether Members would be in danger in that sort of situation ?
There was not a fire on that particular occasion , but we were not to know that .
Thank you very much , Mrs van Putten .
Your comments have been noted and will be pursued with the security services .
To date , what seems to happen is that nobody can do anything for 20 minutes because the lifts stop working during an alarm .
However , the occasion you have referred to is different and we shall investigate exactly what happened .
You will be informed of the result of the investigation .
( The Minutes were approved )
Agenda
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed , to which the following amendments have been proposed :
Monday : no change
Tuesday :
Mr President , I would like to ask for a small change to Tuesday 's agenda .
The reports from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy are on the agenda , including my own report .
However , a report on fisheries is slotted in between one of the Economic Committee reports and my own , which is then followed by another report on fisheries .
In terms of time management for both Members and Commissioners , this does not make much sense .
As this concerns the second reading , I would like my report to be taken before the Souchet report .
It will take five minutes .
That is a better solution , because our fisheries colleagues will not have to wait .
So I would ask you to make this small change , which would also be appreciated by Commissioner de Silguy .
I would gladly do that , Mrs Lulling , but you know that amendments to the agenda must be proposed by a political group or 29 Members one hour before the opening of the sitting .
Unless I am mistaken , I have not received such a request .
But I see that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten is asking for the floor .
Mr President , this is something we overlooked , for which I sincerely apologise .
I think Mrs Lulling 's request is entirely reasonable .
Her report would take perhaps ten minutes to discuss , and I think it is important to bring it forward .
I gather from the expressions of colleagues on the other side of the Chamber , particularly Mrs Green , that they would not object to this .
Things as they stand are organised very illogically .
If there are no objections , I shall put the request by Mrs Lulling to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
Is there a speaker in favour of the request ?
Mr President , I must admit that events in the last few days have been totally unpredictable so far as the 1996 discharge report is concerned .
I would have thought that the 1996 budget would have been rather more important than the 1996 discharge but history has told us otherwise .
What we have heard this afternoon from Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is correct .
We now have a report which is extremely tough on the whole question of management of the 1996 discharge and yet a very narrow majority , achieved by our Socialist Labour colleagues when one of us happened to leave , means that we are now facing acceptance rather than rejection or refusal to grant .
In the light of the fact that we also have an unprecedented ruling that we now have to apply the Rules of Procedure in our vote rather than the Treaty , I suggest that we refer this report back to committee and bring it to our next part-session .
Does anyone wish to speak against ?
Mr President , I should like to oppose Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's motion .
Once again he has demonstrated that he is a bad loser .
I have never known a 14 / 13 vote to be an unacceptable majority .
When he says we had new information , we have had no new information at all from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
All we have had is a reaffirmation of the existing Rules .
In committee we had a very thorough debate .
As Mr Elles rightly says , we make some very tough criticisms .
But we have often made tough criticisms of the Commission without refusing them discharge .
At one stage we asked for a deferment of discharge but since then we have had an improvement in the Commission 's position .
I have to say that it still has some way to go , but there are sufficient grounds for progress , in the view of the majority of the committee , for us still to go ahead and grant discharge .
I hope that now we will reject Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's motion , having had this fully debated in the committee .
I see that the chairman has asked for the floor but the chairman is a very partial person in this question , having herself tabled an amendment to reject .
The chairman is entitled to express an opinion under Rule 126 .
Mr President , a while ago , I requested that you have the degree of incompatibility between the Treaty , particularly Article 206 , and Annex V to the Rules of Procedure looked into , as well as those areas that are vague .
I have just been in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , which you had asked to decide on the discrepancy that I have raised .
No clear opinion , if I may express it thus , was stated on the matter .
You will receive a letter from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure explaining its viewpoint .
However , I should also like to say that as I have understood it , the Treaty ought nevertheless to take precedence .
The matter has not been settled yet .
It will be explained to you how far these matters are or are not compatible .
I do not want to talk about discharge or refusal of discharge at the present time , even though Lord Tomlinson dwelled on this matter .
I only want to say that as a Member of the European Parliament , I am of course free to decide how I do or do not vote .
Mr President , I should like to tell Mr Colom i Naval that I do indeed know how to lose .
But that is not by any means my problem at the moment , because we will certainly know one way or the other on Thursday .
My question to the President is about when the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control will have the opportunity to reflect upon the findings of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
A certain insecurity did of course prevail when we pronounced our opinion .
That is why I would ask you to make some suggestion as to procedure , because in my view we simply cannot accept the opinion of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure on the subject without an exchange of views .
That is why I would ask you when there is going to be a discussion on procedure .
Mrs Müller , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure will put forward an interpretation , which is what the Committee on Budgetary Control requested .
This interpretation will be put to the vote in the House without a debate .
I hope that it will be possible to vote tomorrow , at the end of the morning sitting .
The interpretation will naturally be read out to the House .
This is the system laid down in the Rules of Procedure : the interpretation is to be read out and it will then either be adopted or rejected .
Mr President , I do not think it is right that we should have to vote on the basis of information provided by certain Members about a decision apparently taken by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
None of us has any documentation and we are being asked to take a decision .
I would ask that in future we should be provided with the documents or reports we need before we are asked to decide on anything .
Mr Martens , we did not vote on the decision by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , but on a request for referral back to committee , which is something quite different .
The Rules Committee will give its interpretation , which will be announced to the House .
Rule 162 ( 4 ) reads as follows : ' Should a political group or at least twenty-nine Members contest the committee 's interpretation , the matter shall be put to the vote in Parliament . Adoption of the text shall be by simple majority provided that at least one third of Parliament 's Members are present .
In the event of rejection , the matter shall be referred back to the committee . '
This means that as soon as we have the interpretation by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure - which I do not yet know myself - it will be read out to the House .
Everyone will have the text sufficiently far in advance to be able to exercise the right provided for in Rule 162 ( 4 ) .
By contesting the interpretation , therefore , a group can ask for it to be rejected .
Parliament will vote and take its decision after everyone has had time to read the interpretation and decided whether or not to contest it .
Mr President , last Thursday afternoon the Conference of Presidents was told that it would be informed of the results of the discussion in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure on Wednesday afternoon , to prevent us from having to have an endless procedural debate here .
I would like to ask you how these two things can now be reconciled .
First of all , I would not like us to arrive here at 9 a.m. tomorrow morning to find a document that the groups have not had a chance to read , study and compare with statements by other groups , because the problem at issue here is an extremely serious one .
Secondly , I think we must be logical in the order in which agreements are reached here in the House .
If the matter is to be examined in the Conference of Presidents , then we cannot have a vote on it here in the plenary before that .
Mrs Aelvoet , the Conference of Presidents is not competent to interpret the Rules of Procedure .
There is a system , laid down by the Rules themselves , which I have just read out .
As soon as I have the interpretation , it will be announced to the House and I will ensure that the text is sent immediately to all the groups .
Whether the announcement is made this evening or at 9 a.m. tomorrow , you will have at least three hours before the vote in which to decide whether to contest this interpretation .
Those are the terms of Rule 162 ( 4 )
Your group , or 29 Members , can contest the interpretation and Parliament will take its decision at the end of the morning .
The Conference of Presidents is not competent in this area .
I am sorry , but no agreement can override the Rules of Procedure .
The Rules must be respected , and that is how we shall proceed .
Mr President , before you close the item I initiated by asking for referral back to committee , I would like you to clarify something you said .
I think the conclusion you have drawn from the rejection of my request for referral went too far .
Rule 129 ( 2 ) does indeed state that a request for referral back to committee may be made only once , but that is during each of the three procedural stages . These are : agenda-setting , which we are now doing ; the opening of the debate , which will be tomorrow morning ; and the final vote , which I think will be on Wednesday morning .
So the rejection of my motion by no means rules out other requests for referral back to committee .
We simply cannot do so again now , while we are setting the agenda , and we will only be able to do so once during each of the other two stages .
That is correct .
You are quite right .
Mr President , I would simply like to ask you to move to the next item on the agenda .
I think we have spent enough time on this point and everything has been decided .
Thank you .
I think that everything is settled , but it is no bad thing for Members to be able to express their views on such an important issue .
Mr President , I just wanted to draw attention to the improper nature of this procedure . An issue that should have been settled before the meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control is in fact being dealt with two or three days before the vote , putting us in this kind of situation .
That type of thing should not happen in this House .
If neither the Treaty nor the Rules of Procedure are clear about how we are to proceed , then it is your duty to resolve the matter in good time , before the Committee on Budgetary Control meets and not after .
Then we would not have a situation like this .
I agree entirely with you , Mrs Pack .
For that to be the case , however , the relevant committee should consider the matter earlier .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure met as soon as it could .
I apologise for this .
Wednesday : no change
Thursday :
The Group of the Party of European Socialists is proposing that Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report on the quality of the drafting of legislative texts and Mr Cot 's report on ' Better lawmaking 1997 ' should be taken as a joint debate .
Mr Cot has the floor to explain the purpose of this request .
Mr President , I will be brief because this is a very simple matter .
The two reports are very closely linked because one deals with the procedure and the other with the substance , so it would be absurd to have two separate debates on two reports given that the connection between them is so obvious .
Mr President , I support what Mr Cot has said .
It makes sense for both reports to be debated jointly , as they deal with the quality of text and the quality of ideas .
Form and content are always closely connected .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
Friday : no change
( The order of business was adopted thus amended )
Supplementary and Amending Budget 1 / 98
The next item is the report ( A4-0497 / 98 ) by Mr Tillich and Lord Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft supplementary and amending budget of the European Communities 1 / 98 for the 1998 financial year - Sections I and III ( C4-0677 / 98 ) .
I give the floor to Mr Tillich as rapporteur .
Mr President , at the end of April 1998 , the Commission submitted the draft supplementary and amending budget for 1998 . The Council and the European Parliament agreed during the 1998 budgetary procedure that if the Commission discovered that the payment appropriations were not sufficient for the 1998 financial year , then we - both Council and Parliament - would give favourable consideration to a supplementary budget for 1998 .
The Commission fulfilled its duty and submitted the supplementary budget .
This draft plans to increase payment appropriations in the third and fourth categories by ECU 200 million , including ECU 100 m for PHARE . There is a further ECU 100 m for the European Social Fund , ECU 150 m for Section I , the European Parliament , and the ECU 400 m that you mentioned a moment ago for emergency food aid to Russia .
In various trilogues and in both conciliations with the Council , Parliament and Council agreed that this report on the supplementary and amending budget would be taken as a package together with the Notenboom Procedure and the budget for 1999 .
I would like to assure colleagues that in its proposals the Council was most accommodating towards the European Parliament .
Parliament is supporting the allocation of ECU 400 m for emergency food aid to Russia as the Council wanted , but on condition that distribution is guaranteed , action is taken to prevent fraud and the food reaches the needy .
On 8 December , during the conciliation , there was a common vote on this between the three institutions in order to reach agreement on the remarks for the budget line , and today the Commission delivered the latest proposal as an annex to the supplementary and amending budget .
I should like to point out to the House that it is important for us to vote today because the deadline is tomorrow .
If today at first reading we do not agree this supplementary and amending budget that the Council has already adopted , it will be dropped .
Then we would not have a supplementary and amending budget for 1998 and consequently it would not be possible for us to ensure the financing of our buildings in time .
As regards the amendments that have been introduced by colleagues , I would like to add firstly that these are covered by the remarks on the budget line , and secondly that we shall have a debate on the regulation tomorrow which should , I am sure , cover what colleagues have asked for .
Mr President , part of the supplementary and amending budget is ECU 150m for Section I of the budget . That relates to Parliament and this money is allocated for Parliament 's buildings .
If we debate that in two and a half minutes , it means that Parliament is gaining ECU 60m a minute during this debate for capital purchases towards our buildings .
The resolution adopted by the Committee on Budgets is explicit that the Council has included this sum of ECU 150m for the buildings of Parliament so that we will be able to continue the policy of purchasing its buildings where the conditions are appropriate .
The purchase of buildings for Parliament will lead to significant savings for European taxpayers .
All Members of Parliament will realise that in Brussels in particular , but subsequently for the IPE IV building in Strasbourg , we have been using the annual ramassage to make capital injections for our buildings .
This policy has been so successful that perhaps Members of Parliament do not know that we already own what was known as the D1 and the D2 parts of our Brussels building and a substantial part of D3 .
With this supplementary and amending budget , we will be closer towards becoming the owners of the D3 building and therefore the whole of the Leopold complex .
If we continue with the process of ramassage , we will be able to do the same not only here in Strasbourg with the IPE IV building but also for some of Parliament 's buildings in Luxembourg .
That is all part of the ambition , as well as making sure that the Belliard I and II buildings are purchased and made available for the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee .
This supplementary and amending budget takes us another large step along the road to being able to own our buildings , to save money for the future .
I commend it to the House .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution and the President declared supplementary and amending budget 1 / 98 adopted )
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure
Fifth RTD framework programme ( 1998-2002 )
The next item is the report ( A4-0493 / 98 ) by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision concerning the fifth framework programme of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities ( 1998-2002 ) ( C4-0646 / 98-97 / 0119 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it took four conciliation meetings for us to obtain this conclusion and this conciliation result , which I think is a record .
Now the question that naturally arises is whether the result actually justifies all the effort .
As rapporteur , I believe I can say that yes , this is a good result from the point of view of Parliament .
From the beginning , we could see that the Council had adopted the main points of the structure and content of the framework programme , some of which had been adopted by us with an overwhelming majority , leaving only details to be modified .
That was not the difficult part of the procedure as a whole .
In its great wisdom , or for fear of the potential developments , the Council introduced some changes and some articles which were not at all acceptable to us .
We are in the run-up to Agenda 2000 , in the run-up to perhaps a new financing of the European Union , which may also have effects on research policy and mean that changes may have to be made .
However , as a legislative authority it was not acceptable to Parliament that the Council alone was to vote and decide on possible changes .
We have succeeded in again making full codecision necessary for all future changes to the framework research programme , as stipulated in the Treaties .
A further point which was very important for us , although it may not have met with much of a response in the public discussion , is that we are living in a time of rapid change and great flexibility .
In the period 1997 / 98 we cannot know what problems may arise in the period 2000 / 2001 and what issues may need to be resolved with the help of research , innovation and innovative products .
We have therefore insisted on a review of the content of the programme halfway through its term .
We are not keen on starting a cumbersome procedure in two or three years time .
But if new trends are being introduced at that time , possibly by a new Commission , then we would like to have a say in them , and this is also something that we have succeeded in making sure of .
A third point that we were very concerned about was that small and medium-sized enterprises are taken into consideration in the framework research programme .
We have seen that recently a great amount of progress has been made in this area , not least due to the efforts of the Commission .
However , if small and medium-sized enterprises are regarded as the backbone of our economy as far as job creation is concerned , then we must remove all potential difficulties from their path so that they can have as large a share as possible of the research funding that should eventually lead to jobs .
We have increased the share of small and medium-sized enterprises accordingly .
We have also introduced rules to facilitate access .
The Council has approved these demands , albeit after lengthy discussions .
That brings me to what I have to say is one of the bitter aspects of the result of the conciliation , which is the overall budget .
I cannot deny that we would have preferred to see a different figure precede the billion .
In view of the small difference in the amount , I would say to the Council that it was really quite small-minded of the Ministers not to have given way .
It was only a difference of 0.26 % after all .
I am fully confident that the Commission and the Commissioner can save this amount through good , streamlined and efficient management in their area , and will not insist upon taking it away from research .
As Article 1 states , at a later stage Parliament will also follow the management of the programme .
I have to say that a conciliation is actually fought with very unequal weapons .
In Council unanimity is needed .
Ministers say that they have fully agreed on something and then hide behind the person who just happens to be opposed .
In Parliament majorities are needed .
For approval of the result of a conciliation , we need a different type of majority than that required for rejecting the common position of the Council .
This is simply no longer progressive or in keeping with the times .
I am firmly of the opinion that the Amsterdam Treaty , which has extended our rights and facilitated many procedures , will serve well here .
I now come to a very pleasant part of my statement , which is to thank the Commission for its constant cooperation and our very fruitful discussions .
We were not always of the same opinion , Commissioner !
I would also like to thank Members on the other side of the House . Dear colleagues , I am aware that some of you went to the limits of the possible .
You did not necessarily allow yourselves to be budged , and neither did we .
But I know that it was as difficult for you as it was for us to reach this result of the conciliation sometimes , particularly where institutional matters were concerned .
I would like to emphasise that the rights of this House are at stake in the run-up to the election , and this result of the conciliation came about in the end because all of you showed solidarity .
I can only say that this solidarity should form a precedent in this House where all of us - the elected representatives of the citizens - are involved .
For that I thank you very much indeed !
I now have a final comment on the specific programmes which are going to be discussed in a moment .
Once again , we were aware of the fact that the Council had already reached broad agreement on these specific programmes .
It gave out a few , very unfortunate , press releases in this regard .
I would say to the Council that we are going to take a very close look at whether the amendments which will be discussed today and voted on tomorrow shall find their way into the final version of the text , and here we shall also insist upon our rights .
In conclusion , I can say quite honestly that everything has been resolved , but it took one and a half years of work to do so .
I should very much like once again to thank all those who have helped .
As rapporteur I am happy , and I shall be looking forward to a unanimous vote tomorrow in favour of the result of the conciliation .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by heartily congratulating the rapporteur on the result achieved in the conciliation procedure .
The fifth framework programme for research is the first small step in the right direction .
Sustainable agriculture , fisheries and forestry , and the integrated development of the rural area and mountainous areas should also be funded and find expression within the context of research and science .
Nevertheless , I think it is highly regrettable that no serious approach to this forward-looking policy can be discerned in the proposal for Agenda 2000 .
I personally am very angry about that .
The Austrian Presidency of the Council made this subject a high priority , and held a conference of international experts on the subject .
I hope that ultimately those findings will also be taken into account in future European policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we had already introduced a multitude of amendments for the Committee on Transport and Tourism at first reading .
We were after a separate emphasis on transport policy , which was unfortunately not possible . However , we were very glad that it was possible to preserve the results and content of the first reading until the third reading now in the conciliation procedure .
I recall in particular intermodal transport , a subject which we were very concerned about .
One of the great successes of this conciliation procedure is that we have also managed to preserve the significance of aeronautics and space travel .
I would like very much to thank all of those involved , particularly the rapporteur .
We regret that it was not possible to make available enough money for transport , which is an important field and a motor for European integration . The Council was unable to take up the big challenges that this field offers and would rather go on backing its national policies .
I think that transport is an area in which more Europe would be better than less .
Mr President , although I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group , I am in fact doing so more as chairman of the delegation which conducted the conciliation negotiations . These , as Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl has said , proved extremely difficult : in fact it took four meetings , two exploratory ones and two at which we really tackled the substance of the matter .
I should like to draw some general conclusions .
First of all , the incompatibility of unanimous decision-making in the Council with the conciliation procedure emerged clearly .
There can be no equality of legislative competence if the Council is bound by the unanimity rule , which automatically leads to vetoes ; the Parliament is unable , under such circumstances , to exercise its powers of codecision to the full .
Secondly , I have the impression from this and other experiences that the concept of codecision has not been fully taken on board within the Council .
We noted once again during this latest conciliation on the fifth framework programme that the various delegations , speaking on behalf of their respective countries , stressed how arduous it had been to arrive at the common position , regarding that in itself as an extremely difficult compromise to achieve , almost as if Parliament should then simply decide whether to take it or leave it , rather than embarking on fresh negotiations to reach a further compromise .
Thirdly , I should like to take this opportunity to highlight the shrewdness of our delegation 's attitude and conduct , as well as the ability and experience of the various colleagues who are so familiar with the subject in question . They enabled our delegation to present a united front at every important juncture , demonstrating a unanimity which is often very difficult to achieve in this House .
I must say that we were assisted partly by an Austrian Presidency which was keen to move in the direction advocated by Parliament , and partly by the Commissioner , Mrs Cresson , who was of course on our side , given that Parliament 's proposal dovetailed with that of the Commission .
Nevertheless , the obstacles were truly enormous .
I wish to draw attention here , as did the rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , to the two main issues .
First of all , there is the Council and the way in which it has taken up the concept of codecision : a Council which inserts into its common position what it itself describes as a ' guillotine clause ' demonstrates a lack of skill , not least from the tactical point of view .
Presenting Parliament with such a position means failing to understand the substance and even form of the reaction likely to be triggered by such a clause .
The clause in fact stated that not a single euro would be available for research after 31 December 1999 and that , in the absence of any decisions on the new financial perspective , it would be the Council which decides . In other words , codecision had come in through the door and was being thrown out of the window .
The real point was this : paradoxically , on every other occasion when we have gone to conciliation we have argued over figures , but this time we had to talk more about institutional procedure , even before we could complete our discussion of the figures .
In our opinion , as we have said several times , this represented an infringement of the Treaty , or at least of the interinstitutional agreement on the financial perspective .
And here , after the Council 's statement of its common position , it might have been useful if the Commission as such - and not so much Mrs Cresson - had pointed out that a principle of the Treaty was being undermined , given that the Commission is guardian of the Treaties .
Nevertheless , I am reasonably satisfied in this regard , since we did achieve a fairly positive outcome .
With respect to the funds available , as Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl said , there could have been more , but we might equally have obtained less .
On balance , I believe that the outcome is a good one , as long as we abide by the terms of the negotiations .
However , I would raise one ' but ' , one contradiction : the governments say that the priority is employment and that we must invest in research and innovation in order to boost job creation , and then in the final analysis the Council - that is , all the governments together - will not even countenance the idea of increasing by ECU 2 billion the funds available for the fifth framework programme .
Therefore , what was said at this conciliation conflicts with what was discussed and decided at Vienna : grand statements and the new proposed pact for jobs , but no specific initiative just at the very moment when conciliation was coming to a close .
Other speakers will address themselves to other aspects ; I would merely thank the rapporteur , the chairman of the committee , Mr Scapagnini , and all the colleagues who participated with such commitment .
I invite the House to demonstrate its wholehearted support for the outcome of this conciliation .
Mr President , Commissioner , Francis Bacon said that whoever fails to find new solutions should expect new evils as time is the best inventor of all .
Those are the words of a great European 400 years ago . But it seems that Europe is still learning that lesson .
Innovation is a condition for survival : it is the antidote to inertia , it creates new , hitherto unthought-of markets and it promotes a more effective and more human society .
In order to have social innovation you must have research , research in high-tech areas such as biotechnology , research applied to industry and also research in the social and economic areas .
The fifth RTD framework programme has acquired coherence throughout the debate with its three readings and long conciliation process and is now presented to us as a balanced programme deserving of broad support .
It could even be seen as a model of interinstitutional co-operation .
The prospects offered by this fifth framework programme for researchers , enterprises and the well-being of citizens should not be jeopardised by a lack of agreement over the European Union 's financial perspectives .
The conflict between the defenders of so-called ' stabilisation ' and the defenders of ' cohesion ' should give way in the Council to an overall perspective that takes into account all of the interests at stake .
In the text that we are going to vote on , the winners are transparency , information , small and medium-sized enterprises , and the fragile sectors of society , such as the disabled and the elderly , and a fillip has been given to the outlook for peace , with the specific references to biological and chemical disarmament and the exclusion of nuclear armament .
Nonetheless , I hope that the Council , on 22 December next , will strengthen the socio-economic research component , as Portugal has been asking , which in itself will make it possible to predict trends and factors of change in a rapidly changing society such as ours .
Fundamental questions such as citizenship , participation , exclusion , violence , governability and the role of the media call for a close and continuous study that should meet with appropriate responses from society .
We must also strengthen the interdisciplinary perspective , the international perspective of European research .
That is why I hope that the Marie Curie bursaries are going to be opened up to nationals of countries that are not members , as symbolic recognition that science , like music , is a universal language .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Liberal Group I should like to congratulate Mrs Quisthoudt on her success in concluding the decision-making on the framework programme .
I should also like to express my appreciation for the solidarity shown by all the groups during the conciliation procedure .
Parliament spoke to the Council with one voice and was solid , yes , solid in defence of its own powers .
We refused point blank to accept the guillotine clause , and through close cooperation which was entirely consistent with the aims of the programme we achieved excellent results on both the budget and the contents .
I would like to thank all my colleagues for their cooperation , and my group wholeheartedly supports the results we have achieved .
There are a few comments I should like to make .
Starting with the substance of the programme , my group is delighted that the Council even at first reading agreed with Parliament 's proposal that we should choose four research areas for the next four years .
The Council and Parliament also agreed to give priority to the first two areas , namely biotechnology and information and communications technology , in acknowledgement of the fact that employment in Europe in the future will largely depend on the successful development of those sectors .
Technology , as I cannot emphasise too often , is the key to economic growth , competitiveness and employment - in short , Europe 's prosperity .
If we in Europe can apply new technological developments and develop new services , it will not just mean more jobs , it will also give a powerful boost to the economy and put us in a much stronger competitive position .
This is what Europe needs to maintain its position on the world market .
All of us - Council , Parliament and Commission - share this view , but despite all the fine words from the Member States and the Council , the European Union 's research expenditure lags far behind that of its main competitors , the United States and Japan .
As I said , unfortunately , the Member States are happy to support research with fine words , but not with money .
The ECU 14 billion that the Council originally proposed was not even as much as the budget for the fourth framework programme .
The policy pursued by a number of Member States is designed to reduce their contribution to the European Union .
If we look at the position of , say , the Netherlands , which is a net contributor , then this is quite right .
Yes , quite right .
We are not idiots .
But sitting up until all hours of the morning on three occasions haggling over ECU 40 million spread over four years is really going a little too far .
Research and technological development is exactly the sort of area where European cooperation is needed .
The framework programme plays an essential role , and this is where , in my view , European investment in research really comes into its own and brings major added value .
The decision-making process for this framework programme has not exactly been a thing of beauty , but there is hope .
It is a sign that after the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty the Council might decide on framework programmes by a qualified majority .
The Council is still not used to the codecision procedure , as Mr Imbeni just pointed out .
Codecision means joint decision-making , and this means that the Council and Parliament have to reach a viable compromise .
For the Council arrogantly to insist on its own hard-won compromise is not good for decisions on European legislation .
Good decision-making , I would point out to the Council , demands greater flexibility from the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to the rapporteur 's determination and the efforts of the chairman of the Conciliation Committee , Mr Imbeni , the European Parliament and the Council have reached agreement on an amount which is certainly not enough but does make it possible to continue the European Union 's research effort .
The principle of a mid-term review ensures that developments in the financial perspective are taken into account , along with progress made in science and technology .
Parliament also won the day on five important points : maintaining a 10 % rate for financing research by small and medium-sized enterprises , research concerning biological and chemical disarmament , no funding of cloning for purposes of human reproduction , taking account of research into ageing and disability and , finally , the establishment of a René Descartes Prize for talented and promising researchers .
I want to highlight two areas in the fifth framework programme which will have direct consequences on daily life in Europe .
One is information and communication technologies , accessible to all , respecting the rules of info-ethics , which aim to allow everyone to express their own personality and to facilitate the exchange of information .
The other is technologies of living resources , supporting not just the cell factory but also the fight against infectious diseases and ageing .
The bio-ethics arrangements are now in place to prevent deviance , and specific socio-cultural characteristics of the Member States must be taken into account , particularly as regards embryo research .
The Joint Research Centre must become a reference centre serving the concerns of the European Parliament and hence of the citizen .
Finally , in the field of research into nuclear energy , we certainly must not abandon permanently research into controlled thermonuclear fusion . We need to maintain scientific and technical vigilance in this domain , which retains its potential for the future .
Similarly , I think it is essential to pursue and extend research into the safety of nuclear fission , with a view to perfecting ever safer reactors , such as the EPR , in collaboration with several European countries , but also with a view to better management of the end of the nuclear fuel cycle .
We must continue research into high-temperature reactors in industrial enterprises and research must be done on experimental modules for hybrid reactors ; the necessary technologies need to be validated .
They can then be assembled with a view to making an experimental prototype .
Through research that is conducted transparently , nuclear energy is actually the most reliable way of responding to the growth in demand for energy , without increasing CO2 emissions .
In conclusion , under these conditions the fifth framework programme for research and development will make it possible to identify the skills of European researchers and laboratories as well as to look for complementarity between them right across the European Union .
It will demonstrate the effectiveness of European added value .
It will take us from a Europe of researchers to a Europe of research .
That is one of the major challenges of the fifth framework programme , serving knowledge , but also serving the citizens , in an ethical context .
With the fifth framework programme Europe will be able to take its place in the western world , earning world recognition through the skills of European researchers .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her diligence and her persistence during the many meetings of the conciliation committee , and likewise all the members of that delegation and in particular the chairman .
As he has pointed out , we wanted real co-decision and this was being blocked .
We finally obtained an acceptable result and for that Parliament has to be grateful .
I have to say that the devil is in the detail and I want to make some comments on the secrecy and lack of transparency of the Euratom research programme in particular .
It is now apparent that nuclear fusion has no future . It is therefore madness to continue the budget for the framework programme .
I believe that the Commission has accepted the logic of this and we will see what transpires .
In particular , I want to refer to the radiation protection programme run under the Euratom Treaty .
Within the programme there is a self-perpetuating oligarchy .
The programme is decided at closed meetings to which only existing research coordinators are invited and by government advisory committees .
These people represent mainly the radiological protection boards of the member governments and , as such , represent those in the member countries who get Euratom grants .
A case in point is Ireland where three of the four members of the national advisory committee , namely Jim Malone , physicist , Nuclear Medicine Department , St James 's Hospital and RPII board member , Peter Mitchell , Department of Physics , UCD and RPII consultant , John Cunningham , radiation chemist , RPII Assistant Chief Executive , are employed by or otherwise affiliated to Ireland 's Radiological Protection Institute and are funded by Euratom .
The remaining member is a civil servant in the Department of Energy .
Every other Irish national advisory committee involved in the EC programme has a broad representation from all interested parties and has 12 to 16 members .
So the way the Euratom programme is managed is unacceptable .
There is a similar lack of openness in the so-called independent review of submitted projects to this programme in Euratom .
Somehow the reviewers seem to get funded .
Application to see the complete list of reviewers is refused .
Why is the list of reviewers not published ?
It is for all the other programmes .
It is absolutely essential that radiation protection research should be conducted by those without vested interests and should therefore come under the environment and health section of DG XII .
I want to press that point most firmly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to express my thanks to the rapporteur for the clever and committed way in which she has dealt with the situation .
We have worked well together .
Yes , we have also argued , but we have achieved success .
The increase of EUR 1.7 billion in the fifth framework research programme compared to its predecessor , which was obtained by Parliament , seems at first sight to be a considerable amount .
However , what must be understood is that it is only about 4 % more than the increase to allow for inflation in relation to the previous programme .
This is not exactly the clear and self-assured signal of a resolute departure into the information society that we had intended .
I should remind you that the USA launched an offensive this very year to bring its annual aid for research up to 3 % of its GDP in the very near future .
European aid , however , will remain at roughly 2 % , because unfortunately , aside from a few exceptions , national research is also diminishing .
Unfortunately , as a result of obstruction by some Member States , the Council could not be persuaded to cross the apparently magical boundary of EUR 15 bn .
We will thus be far from reaching the strategic ceilings on research in the overall EU budget that were wisely instituted by previous Councils .
That is regrettable and in this regard the fifth framework research programme will be a compromise , many sections of which can only be accepted by Parliament because otherwise the continuity which we have now achieved in European research funding would be jeopardised , and this would be painful for all involved .
Ultimately there was nothing else for it , because this programme in principle suffers from a congenital defect , as has been said repeatedly , namely that Parliament decides in accordance with democratic rules by a majority vote while Council decides unanimously .
That will only change when the Treaty of Amsterdam enters into force .
Then it will be possible to approach the budget strategically , and rival minority interests will cease to be a significant obstacle .
Restructured management of the fifth framework research programme will allow the Commission at least partly to deal with the dilemma of a range of subjects that is still too broad by establishing links .
It also wants to bring together its different strategic advisory bodies into a European research forum .
We welcome this and shall support the Commission in the process .
Tomorrow 's decision will not mean that Parliament will relinquish its demand to be involved . Rather , it will accompany the implementation of the programme .
A realisation of the concentration and flexibility that everyone wants will be part of the critical accompaniment .
Adjustments to the programme which may become necessary will be made only according to the codecision procedure .
In view of the EU 's considerable negative trade balance with the USA and Japan in the field of high technology , the general under-funding of European research is worrying .
A certain balance could only come about by consistently making maximum use of results .
In this respect , we have improved considerably the opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises , some of which are highly innovative and labour-intensive , to participate in this programme , and this is one of Parliament 's big successes . It has been achieved , as has already been said , by Members being united .
Optimising the possibilities and , as said so often , achieving a European added value will also lead to the general integration of socio-economic research into projects and increased funding for it in the fourth action line .
Innovation in fact not only has a technological aspect but also a social one .
Converting research into profitable application on a massive scale will also depend to a considerable degree on how far it is possible to organise the new global information society in a way that is socially fair , and therefore involves comprehensive participation .
I think that is where our greatest potential lies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I should also like to thank the rapporteur .
I was searching for an image before , and then it struck me that this is like being faced with a bunch of individualists with their own pet ideas , and reconciling them is akin to the task of organising a large number of wild horses to make a good impression in a Spanish riding school .
That is what you have achieved .
Once again , thank you very much .
It was not easy , but you have succeeded !
On the framework research programme as a whole , I would like to say in all objectivity that it was the European Parliament once again that pushed through an increase , something we have seen in each decade .
My advice to the Commission would therefore be to work closely with Parliament , as this will be worthwhile in future too !
However , as the Council is being so tight-fisted with its money it has to be told that the only thing more expensive than research in the long run is no research .
If we want to secure our future , as many people have said , then broadening the knowledge base is the only way , and at the beginning that is simply going to cost money .
Secondly , I would like to say that once again I have had the bad impression that research does not really have a lobby .
Where are the large research organisations in Europe that supported us ?
Everyone wants a small piece of the large cake , but they do not want to see the cake as a whole made larger .
If that does not change , and if science in Brussels does not acquire a stronger lobby equivalent to that of other sectors , then it will continue to find things difficult in future as well .
Let us now turn to the tasks for the future .
My first point is one that the rapporteur rightly raised a short while ago , namely that the lifespan of products is becoming shorter and shorter , and knowledge evolving faster and faster . Because European research policy concerns itself with applied technology and its goal is therefore to bring products onto the market , it is important that as the lifespan of a product becomes shorter , the application procedure does the same .
I know there are limits to this , and of course there are also the budgetary and financial checks , but we must find ways to make sure that the end result is not that the system of financial supervision is in order while research is in ruins .
That should not be the outcome .
We should not have financial controls which last for three or four years , during which time nothing is achieved in the field of research .
We must make the procedures shorter .
This becomes even more important as more countries participate in the fifth framework research programme .
Central and Eastern European countries will be part of the research programme as well via the PHARE programme , and Switzerland will join them in a few years once it has signed the agreement .
That means that if management is not streamlined - of course after taking on board the rules arising from the financial and budgetary checks - then we will be dealing with a more complicated system than in the past .
The second comment that occurs to me here is that we also need some form of monitoring , not merely budgetary monitoring but better monitoring of research . There has to be a strategic and operational goal .
Ultimately there has to be some result .
The issue is not just that money should be used sensibly but that there also has to be something to show for it .
We do not just want to search , we also want to find .
That is forgotten again and again .
In order to do this , instruments must be developed which go beyond what we presently have .
Over the next few months we will surely have time to think about this .
I am sorry that an application for research on disarmament did not get through .
The Council proved to be quite stubborn .
However , I would like to mention a report that I read a short while ago in Le Monde , in which the Americans referred to the existence of new problems in the field of atomic , biological and chemical weapons , or weapons of mass destruction .
We cannot deny this , and will have to deal with it because it is also a part of security .
Research has to be used not only to develop new weapons but also to protect ourselves from their misuse . Above all it must be used to dismantle the weapons upon whose reduction we have actually agreed .
Once again , I thank the Commission very much indeed .
I think we have done a good job .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , later this week we will be dealing with the results and conclusions of the Vienna Summit .
However , one thing has been clear from the outset , namely that the most important matters discussed by the Heads of State or Government were employment issues .
I think that the conclusion of the conciliation procedure for the fifth framework research programme lays a very important foundation stone for tackling employment issues in Europe in a different and more forward-looking manner than has perhaps been the case for a long time .
In Europe , many people live together in a very small area .
Our territory is appreciably smaller than that of other continents , it is populated by many people , and we do not have the natural resources of other continents .
The resources that we in Europe have are knowledge , ability , our aptitude and skills . This explains the importance of research programmes , which aim to create European added value and to achieve more than can be achieved by teams of researchers in individual countries .
They are also concerned with what can be accomplished when researchers work together and combine their ideas and results and when , as the previous speaker said so clearly , these results can also actually be implemented .
Research is not an end in itself , rather it is the basis for the social and economic development of our continent . For that reason , when organising the research programmes we should not merely be thinking about covering many important subjects in the projects and programmes .
I am extremely happy with many of the subjects , because we are venturing into areas of research that are important and necessary for the future of Europe . We have also taken on areas of research that people thought had been dealt with long ago and which in my opinion will be of greater significance in future , such as foodstuffs .
However if we do not actually transpose the research results in terms of employment , the development of new products , the inevitable social restructuring and transition to a new type of society that moves away from the industrial society in which we still live , or whose upheaval we are experiencing , then even the best research will be of no value .
In our discussion on the fifth framework research programme in particular , we should be considering the mid-term evaluation and orientation of the programme to be at least as important as a final point which I should like to turn to now .
We in Parliament have worked together very well and in the right way , and in this regard I would like to express my great thanks to the rapporteur , the chairman of the delegation to the Conciliation Committee and other colleagues .
The Council should have understood that a larger sum than this - 14.9 something , a figure reminiscent of a special offer in a cheap shop - was required .
It is not acceptable to preach repeatedly about the importance of research and then , when it actually comes to making money available for research , to become so stingy with small amounts all of a sudden .
I hope that the different procedure in the Treaty of Amsterdam will improve things .
Finally I would like to say that , as an Austrian , I am happy that the Austrian Presidency has concluded - and indeed was able to conclude - such a difficult procedure . I very much hope that with this programme we will be able to achieve the objective of European added value in research .
Mr President , if we look at the developments of the past few weeks and compare them to a piece of theatre , we can see that there are three acts .
In the first act the European Parliament pushed through considerable improvements . In the second the Council accepted them , but incorporated some catches .
In the third there was the lengthy conciliation procedure .
Thus it is a piece of theatre in three acts .
I do not know for certain if it is a play , a drama or a tragedy , but I am aware that it is not a comedy , essentially due to the conduct of the Council .
There are three areas in which it behaved like a bulldozer .
Firstly it attempted to take research hostage for interests that were altogether different and had absolutely no connection with it . That kind of behaviour is by no means acceptable .
Secondly , as Mrs Graenitz has just pointed out , we have heard about the importance of research for innovation , employment and so on , in sermons from various sources , but when it came to committing money , the tap was turned off purely due to a rigid adherence to principles , and nothing was invested in research .
It did not even have to do with making savings , as the money withheld from research now flows into other areas of internal policy .
My third point concerns the specific programmes , and here , as the rapporteur pointed out , press releases are being published as though everything had already been decided without Parliament .
I very much hope that this bulldozing behaviour will not be typical of the Council in future .
All of this would lead us to believe that we are dealing with a drama here , not a comedy .
But on the other hand , we have accomplished something .
There has been a strategic change of direction in European research , away from the sectoral thinking and rare technologies , and towards a strategic approach to the European development model and qualitative competitiveness in Europe .
In this respect , what Mr Linkohr referred to is implicitly and explicitly contained in the research programme .
We are concerned with the integration of research into European policy to create more employment and thus of course with the matter of how research fits into the social context .
In this regard I am very glad that Parliament has managed to have socio-economic aspects of the information society taken into account , that the ageing of our society is to be a focal point of research , and that the city of tomorrow is to be a subject for research as a central problem of urban areas .
The direction that we are aiming in is thus clear .
So , be it drama , tragedy or play , I will be voting in favour !
Mr President , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , ladies and gentlemen , with this third reading in the European Parliament , we have reached the second-last leg of a long and sometimes difficult journey .
As this journey comes to an end , I want to express my sincere thanks to everyone in Parliament whose dynamism , intelligence and negotiating ability have made success possible .
First Mr Imbeni , who was authoritative and effective in his difficult role as joint chair of the Conciliation Committee , and next Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , rapporteur for the fifth framework programme , who produced work of the highest quality at each procedural stage and demonstrated realism and a great sense of the public interest when it came to conciliation .
My thanks also go to all the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and its chairman , Mr Scapagnini , who has devoted himself to this new framework programme for many months .
Thanks too to all the Members of Parliament who contributed to its progress through the other committees and the House .
In her report on the joint text that emerged from conciliation , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl gives a very clear and detailed account of the development of the procedure and of these last two stages in particular .
The final agreement which is to be ratified by you tomorrow , ladies and gentlemen , and by the Council on 22 December , is a compromise like all agreements , and I would like to make four points concerning it .
First , a solution was found to the difficult question of the amount of financing .
Of course , the amount is not as high as Parliament and the Commission had proposed .
So to have real impact we will have to apply the principle of concentration of resources more strictly , which means mobilising a critical mass of funding for specific targets .
However , I would stress that the budget for the fifth framework programme will be 4.6 % higher in real terms than that for the fourth framework programme .
In a difficult budgetary context , this increase is a positive sign and an encouragement both to the scientific and industrial community and to Member States , where the research effort is tending to contract at a time when public and private research expenditure is continuing or picking up in the United States and Japan , as some of you have quite rightly pointed out .
Secondly , throughout the procedure there has been a strong convergence of views between Parliament and the Commission , and their mutual support and highly effective collaboration certainly played an important role in securing the agreement .
Thirdly , thanks to the Austrian Presidency 's spirit of openness , Parliament has broadly succeeded in having its views on the fifth framework programme taken into account in the final decision .
For the last time , we had to overcome the obstacle to codecision represented by unanimous voting by the members of the Council .
In spite of that constraint , the scientific and technological choices will express significantly the vision of your institution , ladies and gentlemen , you who represent the people .
Finally , the fifth framework programme will be broadly consistent with what our two institutions wanted .
The research programmes will be clearly geared to economic and social needs , with priority given to business competitiveness and employment .
The key actions will introduce a new approach to research .
This will focus on actual problems rather than being broken down into fields and disciplines .
Through the external advisory group just established by the Commission , the programmes will be implemented in close association with the scientific community , industry and users of the research .
They will be managed in a more flexible and effective way .
There will be real emphasis on transparency , especially as regards the European Parliament .
So the combined efforts of the three institutions have succeeded in endowing the Union with a powerful instrument to exploit its scientific potential and industrial resources in the service of Europeans .
It would have been extremely regrettable to interrupt the European research effort , and the adoption of the new framework programme within the required time-frame means continuity can be assured .
Now comes the real challenge .
We must implement the fifth framework programme as soon as possible .
The Commission has already taken all the necessary steps and will ensure that the first calls for proposals are launched , as planned , at the beginning of 1999 .
It will make sure this is done even more effectively , as Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl rightly insists .
This new framework programme can be implemented in the spirit which presided over its conception .
I am sure that the debate that is about to begin on the specific programmes will demonstrate that here the Commission can count on the support and collaboration of the European Parliament , its suggestions and its constructive vigilance .
So I will conclude by thanking Parliament in advance for its contribution to this great enterprise .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Specific RTD programmes ( 1998-2002 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the life sciences have hitherto been divided among three different programmes but they are now combined in a single , problem-oriented programme .
The Commission has found a poetic title for it , ' Quality of life and management of living resources ' , but if I have understood the contents correctly , then it actually has to do with life sciences .
There is going to be an increase in funding compared to the fourth framework programme , in fact a considerable increase of 42 % .
In relative terms , this is the biggest increase for a sector in the fifth framework programme and reflects the importance that has to be attached to the development of life sciences in the European Community .
European life sciences and technologies have already had successes over the last few years .
Most significantly , the number of employees and firms in the EU has risen considerably in 1996 and 1997 , by over 40 % .
But here , too , there is a negative side because this figure is less than half as high as the American equivalent .
This path can still lead to success , but only if progress is made in the scientific foundations and infrastructure in this field and in the social consensus on it , particularly of course with regard to the hotly and widely disputed gene technology .
Enlightened social discourse is therefore a prerequisite , not only for legitimising the aims of funding research , but also for making the best use of the results , and Parliament is reinforcing its demands to make it a part of the programme .
In addition , some colleagues are demanding that new bans on research funding and moratoriums are written into the programme .
Let me tell you , I do not think much of that !
For example , it will not provide us with a way to solve problems resulting from the possible eugenic misuse of gene technology .
The most effective solution here is still the ostracism of those who behave in this way , thereby contravening the ethical consensus .
The funding programme should consist of projects and not bans .
Projects that are ethically controversial simply do not belong in the body of the Community programme .
Of course , the consumer 's decision is extremely effective .
Products which contain undesirable substances , or which have been manufactured in an undesirable manner , and which are accurately and clearly labelled , are not going to stand a chance on the market .
That is and always will be the bottom line .
I would therefore explicitly support the extension of accompanying socio-economic research which looks at the relevant issues , and the obligation of the Commission and those running the project to be part of the public discussion .
Parliament has insisted on writing this into the programme .
The programme describes very many interesting individual projects , illustrating the importance that is being attached to the life sciences , as I mentioned at the beginning .
But it also seems to me that it highlights the dilemma of Community funding of research , which is that 125 priority themes are still supposed to be funded , more than in this case . If there are 125 priorities , that means that there must be other , non-priority , projects .
The sum total is colossal . It will then be allocated by the Commission down to the thousandth part among the key actions , as the budget allows .
That therefore leaves no room for manoeuvre at all in response to the quality and number of project proposals submitted under the various key actions .
It will not facilitate compliance with the principles of concentration and flexibility .
In this regard , Parliament calls for practical steps , such as the establishment of financial margins .
The days of breaking down the claims for funds in such a precise manner ought to be a thing of the past .
In spite of the multitude of amendments , the way in which the programme has been worked out is basically such that Parliament would not call into question the Commission 's fundamental idea .
So I would recommend then that having regard to the amendments proposed by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , the programme should be approved .
Mr President , I wish to speak on the second thematic programme , the one concerning a user-friendly information society or IST , information society technologies .
This programme is in fact a priority which is directly linked to the potential for boosting economic growth , wealth and employment , as was underscored by the ministers meeting at the recent Vienna European Council , and as emerges from a Commission document on the prospects for the information society .
Following the conciliation procedure , this programme has been allocated a budget of ECU 3 600 million , which is lower than the allocation accorded to the ACTS , Esprit , RACE and Telecommunications programmes combined .
This is a cause for some concern , even though the reduced investment in research could be offset by the growing presence of information technology in the other thematic programmes .
One case in point is the networking of all the European research establishments , which accounts for 3 % of the thematic programme ; here I have put forward amendments stressing the need for involvement in the coordination of every thematic programme , so that this ambitious networking scheme can be taken forward in a coherent way .
As far as the Commission 's proposal is concerned , we would ask Parliament to endorse certain important rectifications suggested by myself and largely endorsed by the Research Committee . I should now like to run through these rapidly .
I have suggested curtailing slightly the funding for the action on electronic commerce , transferring this to services for the citizen .
Indeed , if we expect administrations to act as trail-blazers in the implementation of new services for citizens , we must somehow encourage this approach .
I have also highlighted the importance of basic technologies , emphasising the move towards platforms , technical and industrial standards , patents and ultimately whatever can promote the creation of products and services which are widely used on the international market - not only on the European one - and can thereby generate economic and commercial success .
I have included a reference to information technology in the machine tools and production sector , a sector which is absolutely crucial to the competitiveness of our industrial system and to complement the thematic programme on sustainable development .
I responded to concerns regarding the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in this programme by accepting the cross-party amendment in favour of a minimum guaranteed SME participation of 10 % .
I would however point out with satisfaction here that , according to the Commission 's data , the participation of SMEs in IT programmes has traditionally been around 26 % ; I therefore believe that this amendment should be understood more as an encouragement to boost the qualitative and quantitative participation of SMEs .
I recommend for their sakes that the exploratory awards scheme , modelled on the CRAFT programme , should be maintained to provide assistance during the phase of drawing up proposals .
Since information society applications have a satellite dimension , we are constantly in a situation of competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis the Americans ; I am therefore pleased to note that the programme takes this aspect into consideration .
Whereas I can certainly agree with the ideas behind the amendments from the Committee on Women 's Rights , some of these , in particular Amendment No 8 , strike me as impracticable .
In conclusion , I believe that it is vital to make clear to the Commission that not only a high degree of flexibility and focus , but also care and attention are required to avoid duplication between the various programmes .
I believe above all that Parliament must keep an eye on the Commission in this respect .
I nevertheless thank the Commission for its cooperation , and am relying on the Council to adopt the proposed amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since we have reached agreement on the fifth framework research programme in the Conciliation Committee , we can also discuss the specific programmes today .
This evening I am presenting a report on behalf of Mr Argyros .
The specific programme ' Competitive and sustainable growth ' , provided unfortunately with only EUR 2.7 billion , is made up of the most significant priorities for the European Union . It is therefore of fundamental importance for a successful implementation of the fifth framework research programme as a whole .
Allow me to make four general comments on this programme which should be taken into account when it comes to selecting the research partners .
Firstly , and I think quite self-evidently , the activities undertaken should be in tune with the proposed requirements as they are presently stated in the programme .
Secondly , and this is an important point which we have discussed again and again in this House , I think that the Commission 's publications should also be made available in accessible forms , for example electronically .
Thirdly , in committee we laid down some conditions for selecting the companies to be funded , and I would ask the Commission to accept these .
The contribution made by a company should improve the overall competitiveness of the sector , and therefore due attention ought to be paid to applying the sectoral approach to individual research projects .
There should ultimately be an improvement in the position of the European economy as a whole on the world market .
The knowledge that has been acquired through the research programmes should be analysed and made available , and should also lead to new processes and products .
Fourthly , we must also of course remember that our competitors in the USA and Japan are carrying out similar programmes , and we have to be able to react to these accordingly .
A wide range of themes for research is available in the four key actions and the two horizontal measures in this specific programme , which I would also like to comment on .
In the first key action , our concern is that alongside what has been proposed , additional new methods of management and human resources are also developed and entrepreneurial activity further encouraged . That is very important .
However , it is also necessary for us to think about methods for the recovery and restoration of the damaged environment to its original state .
In addition , the committee suggests that this should also cover production and the textile and construction sectors .
In the second key action , we are faced with the huge task of continuing the development of different transport systems and intermodality in order to be able to react in a suitable manner to the great challenges in this particular field . I mentioned this when I presented my report on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism a few minutes ago .
I think it is extremely positive that we in the European Union are for the first time making a separate priority of the field of aeronautics and space flight , because the business news of the past few weeks has shown in quite a dramatic way that this is the way to do justice to the European dimension of the sector .
Finally , when it comes to funding the research infrastructure , some thought ought to be given to using existing structures , particularly so that the small and medium-sized enterprises can be appropriately integrated .
On behalf of Mr Argyros , and also on my own behalf , I would like to thank all of you for your friendly cooperation with the rapporteur .
Madam Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has fallen to me to give you the details of the fourth specific programme , which is part of the first action and concerns energy and the protection of the environment .
Although the Commission had originally proposed separating these two issues , the Council felt it was best to deal with them both together .
This was therefore what Parliament did , in a programme entitled ' Preserving the ecosystem ' . A special feature of this programme , and one which is not very helpful , in my opinion , Madam Commissioner , is that it includes demonstration projects .
We are all calling for more resources to be devoted to research .
I agree with previous speakers that ours are not old or antiquated industries . Rather , they are obsolete , and what they must do is modernise their facilities .
Subsidies and other aid are not what is called for .
It is true that , for example , Parliament 's Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy is strongly in favour of subsidies for renewable energy .
Of course we all support renewable energy , Madam Commissioner .
Nevertheless , for it to succeed , become more efficient and play the part it should on the market , what is required is more research , more innovation and fewer subsidies .
I shall now refer to the six key actions that make up this specific programme : four relate to the environment , and two to energy .
Firstly , I should like to congratulate the Commission and thank it for including , as a key action , everything concerned with research into technology relating to the management of water resources .
We know that what mankind will lack in the twenty-first century is water .
No particular difficulties are anticipated in connection with energy ; if there are any , they will be speedily resolved .
There will , however , be serious problems regarding water supply . The European Union must develop technology , equipment and much more efficient management techniques so as to be in a position to export significant amounts of equipment and services .
I therefore feel that both aspects of the programme on water resources are very important : the management of water resources and water quality .
The second key action covers climate change and biodiversity . These are truly crucial issues .
What more is there to say about climate change ? It is of great concern to us all and so closely connected to the dreadful disasters that are affecting people with such meagre resources to draw upon .
Being so poor means that for them the consequences are far worse .
Furthermore , it is on climate change that the future of mankind surely hinges . Everything else depends on it .
Biodiversity is also closely connected with it
The third key action concerns the integrated management of marine ecosystems .
We have used the sea and its resources in so many ways , yet the sea , which covers the majority of the surface of our planet , tends to be forgotten . It hardly figures in research and investigation .
I very much hope , therefore , that the integrated management of marine ecosystems will receive a significant boost . The citizens of the future will also be heavily dependent on them .
Finally , the fourth action under ' environment ' relates to the city of tomorrow and cultural heritage .
Madam Commissioner , as has often been stated in this House , cathedrals , tapestries and great palaces are all part of Europe . They represent a great cultural heritage that we must not lose .
Substantial investment in resources and technology is needed if we are to conserve it well , not just patch it up . If we take inadequate measures to restore our cultural and historical heritage , we shall gain nothing .
This programme is also of great consequence , therefore .
The objectives have been well chosen , but unfortunately there are too many of them .
As Mr Tannert said referring to his programme , the Commission has used the word priority in a sense I simply cannot grasp .
There are no less than 130 priorities in this specific programme .
I do therefore feel justified in saying that the objectives are all very well , but there are just too many priorities , assuming we all take priority to mean the same thing : something worth highlighting , something that deserves to come first .
I am confident that the Commission in its wisdom will be selective concerning the programmes and will make more efficient use of resources .
There are two subsections or two key actions relating to energy . One concerns the development of cleaner energy and includes renewable energy .
The other aims to achieve a more effective and efficient use of energy . It must be recognised that in the European Union we use too much energy in the home , in transport , in particular , in our factories and in production .
It is with regard to this area that I have serious doubts as to whether the programme as it stands will prove useful .
Mr Linkohr said that the results would have to be quantified , and that Parliament would have to exercise an important supervisory role . I agree with him .
Such parliamentary control will be of great help to the Commission , and I am not referring merely to budgetary control , though that should also be undertaken .
I have in mind the monitoring of results , of innovation , of the efficiency of the groups of researchers working in the various countries , and of the efficient use to be made of the scarce resources available . It should be stressed that the resources available for these two programmes are somewhat limited .
I am opposed to Amendment No 9 , because it means that 42 % of the budget would be devoted to demonstration projects , in particular to those involving renewable energy .
Madam Commissioner , that amounts to subsidising them .
Renewable energy will never make headway if you allocate 42 % of this budget to subsidising small projects concerned with solar panels , biomass , renewable energy and so on .
They certainly deserve to be supported , but not in this way .
The trouble is that renewable energy is not competitive , and only new technology can reverse this situation .
I should also like to mention Amendments Nos 25 and 27 , and I hope the Commission will include them , because they refer to gas .
Europe is to promote a major gas programme , and we have rather fragile and rigid gas systems .
Something will also have to be done therefore regarding the storage of non-liquefied gas .
More needs to be done too concerning further prospecting for hydrocarbons in offshore areas . Once again , the need to support SMEs must be stressed .
We all genuinely want to improve employment prospects .
Research can achieve this .
I doubt if it can be achieved through subsidies , but it may be possible through the Commission 's skilful handling . All the Commission 's flexibility will be called for in order to succeed in this .
Mr President , there are two different programmes involved here , and I should like to begin by talking about my own report on SMEs and innovation .
Small and medium-sized businesses deserve to be given a prominent place in European Union policy because , even apart from the employment considerations , they have enormous economic importance at European level .
Of the 17 million firms in Europe , a good 99 % are small and medium-sized businesses accounting for more than 70 % of Europe 's jobs , 50 % of its investment and 60 % of its wealth .
SMEs are thus the most important economic factor in Europe .
Most businesses are extremely small .
Almost 15 million firms have nine workers or less and just over one million firms employ between 10 and 99 people .
SMEs are also not a homogeneous group , which means that a different approach is needed for each target group .
I am therefore pleased that in the framework programme too , the definition of SMEs is now restricted to firms employing up to 250 workers .
The competitiveness of these firms largely depends on their ability to innovate , which is why it is vital to promote innovative activities , facilitate the dissemination and exploitation of research results and support technology transfer .
Action at European level is needed to supplement the initiatives taken by the Member States in order to help SMEs to globalise their activities and gain access to new technologies .
This specific programme must help to optimise the effort devoted to promoting innovation and encouraging SMEs to take part in the framework programme .
It is merely a coordinating instrument designed to support the thematic programmes , and therefore has a small budget of ECU 363 million .
I take the view that all the projects should be carried out in their natural environment , in other words within the thematic programmes , and I am therefore delighted that Parliament and the Council have supported my proposal to earmark at least 10 % of the research budget in each thematic programme for projects involving SMEs .
Secondly , ideas and new technologies need to be disseminated as effectively as possible , and a great deal of attention must therefore be given to innovation in the thematic programmes .
What can be done to encourage the dissemination of R & D results and their transformation into new and better products , processes and services ?
When projects are started up , appropriate output indicators must be decided upon and developed , such as publication of results and patents , since these are the only way to quantify and legitimise the effect of European research investment .
At the same time , I would stress the importance here of disseminating knowledge .
We need to have a sound infrastructure so that knowledge can be used throughout Europe and the wheel does not have to be constantly reinvented in all 15 Member States .
There are still far too many untapped opportunities .
This was true four years ago and it is still sadly the case today .
For example , small firms lack information about new ideas developed by universities and research institutes , the possibilities for technology transfer and , as I said earlier , access to assistance programmes .
When I entered the European Parliament four years ago , in the first report I wrote I stressed the importance of disseminating information for SMEs .
If Europe is to be able to face up to competition from the major powers - the United States , Japan and China - the 15 Member States must work together , particularly in the field of research and technological development , and the framework programme provides an excellent instrument for this .
My third point is that people still tend to think that if there is enough research , the commercial applications will develop themselves .
The opposite is true .
A new product may be produced , but there is no money to develop it further .
Banks and venture capitalists often dare not finance high-tech projects if they fall outside their area of expertise .
The have too little in-house knowledge to be able to calculate the technological and financial risks involved in developing these new products .
This was why the technology rating institute was set up in the Netherlands in 1995 to try to make it easier to fund promising technological innovations in SMEs .
It is Europe 's job to disseminate knowledge about such successful initiatives , and this is what is going to happen over the next few years through the ENTAS system - the European new technologies appraisal system - that is to be set up by the ING and other European banks and the Frauenhofer institute in Germany .
National networks of knowledge centres must learn from each other , set a good example to each other and contribute to cluster formation in Europe .
This should generate a great deal of innovation and costs relatively little to do .
My final point is that a shortage of manpower is a typical feature of SMEs .
To make the procedures and conditions for taking part in the framework programme clear for SMEs , all the thematic programmes must define and apply specific measures for SMEs such as exploratory awards , feasibility studies and CRAFT in the same way .
They must also be accessible via a single central contact point in the Commission .
However , the first signs are already there that the Commission is going about this in the wrong way .
For example , the proposed work programme for the ICT programme makes no reference to CRAFT .
I would therefore like to ask Commissioner Cresson how she intends to coordinate the various DGs involved in the implementation of the framework programme , particularly with regard to the measures for SMEs ?
I would like to have an answer on this fairly soon .
I should like now to move on to my second task , which is to deliver the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations on a number of specific programmes under the fifth framework programme .
On behalf of the REX Committee , therefore , I should like to congratulate the four rapporteurs , Messrs Tannert , Malerba and Argyros and Mrs Estevan Bola .
Europe has a very solid tradition when it comes to research and the application of science and technology .
The strategic aim of the programme before us is to establish a link between research capacity and production capacity primarily in order to promote technology exports , thereby bringing more jobs and greater prosperity to Europe .
The added value and the fundamental role of the European Union in the field of research is consequently to promote cooperation between Europe 's research partners .
By going beyond frontiers and making use of each other 's knowledge , European companies both large and small will be better equipped to face the international competition .
But partnership does not come to a halt at the boundaries of the European Union .
Europe is currently witnessing a globalisation of the world economy and its hitherto disparate markets .
Less than two weeks ago , I spent five days in the Bay area of San Francisco and saw for myself how new small businesses , or ' start-ups ' as they are known , are sprouting like mushrooms in the biotechnology sector .
New activity means new jobs , which Europe so desperately needs .
Cooperation with the United States in this field could also encourage the European biotechnology industry , and the same applies for the information and communications technology sector .
Up to now , the European Union and the framework programme have concentrated on cooperation within Europe , but in the future , global cooperation , which already characterises the high-tech sector , will become increasingly important .
The Committee on External Economic Relations was therefore delighted with the agreement signed a year ago between the European Union and the United States on scientific and technological cooperation .
There have always been close links between the United States and the European Union .
Our bilateral economic relations generate the largest trade flows in the world .
The European Union and the USA are each other 's main investors , and the quality of this relationship has a major effect on world trade .
More intensive scientific cooperation is therefore justified and could lead to a better understanding of each other 's views and the settlement of trade disputes with the United States such as in the field of biotechnology , Internet security , encryption , privacy and data protection .
These disputes arise from our differing views on the human and environmental consequences of these new technologies , and differences in consumer behaviour within the Union and in the USA .
If we are to prevent a constant stream of trade conflicts in these areas and develop universally acceptable legislation , cooperation with third countries and in particular with the United States within the framework programme is an absolute necessity .
Mr President , the question of what holds together the innermost part of the world is not a very original one as it is very old . It is however more relevant than ever , because of course our social development is moulded by many different factors , together making up what we call the European development model .
To that extent , it is crucially important with respect to our future development for us to ask at this point what really holds our society together in the innermost part , and then to tie that in to research activities in all sectors .
That is why I very much welcome the fact that we have here a specific programme that supports the mobility of researchers and focuses on socio-economic research , particularly with regard to the innermost part of our society .
This delicate plant was produced by Parliament and began to bloom in the fourth framework research programme .
There were many problems and excesses , the strategic direction could have been better , but in the last few years it has improved considerably and the last call , the third one , was excellent .
At this point I would also like to praise Director Mitsos from the Commission , who really handled it well . Praising the Commission is something we ought to do once in a while these days !
Nonetheless , I have taken the liberty of proposing improvements on seven points .
Firstly , in the provisional allocation of funds , it is foreseen that only 10 % is to be made available for socio-economic research .
I think that in our provisional allocation we could easily fix the figure a little higher , as the areas of responsibility have increased somewhat within the framework of the conciliation procedure under the fifth framework research programme .
I would therefore suggest a provisional figure of 15 % .
Secondly , I think it is important for us to know about the mobility and research content of the programme .
Transparency must be ensured , in particular by using the Internet , with regard to the participating institutions and the themes .
Thirdly , I think it important that socio-economic research is not just carried out as a sideline , but is connected horizontally to the other research areas .
That is why there are some proposals - Amendment No 37 in particular - for greater coordination of this research with other research areas .
Fourthly , I would like to mention some small improvements with relation to content . These involve structural changes , particularly as regards the ageing of our society , the effects of structural changes on employment and people 's mentalities in our society , and the forms of participation .
In many areas it turns out that participation is no longer taking place in traditional policy areas , but more in non-governmental organisations , citizens ' initiatives and so on .
These aspects should also be reflected in the content .
Fifthly , of course , the networking of researchers is also important .
I do not want to take up the cudgels for social science research , but I sometimes have the feeling that European cooperation has not yet developed very far in the area and a little help could still be given to establishing a European research network . This is also important of course when it comes to making applications .
The creation of a network ought therefore to be supported .
My sixth point concerns support for equality of opportunity , also where participation in this research programme is concerned .
It cannot be acceptable for instance that time spent bringing up children is not taken into account when the Marie Curie fellowships are awarded .
That point has to be clarified , as indeed does overall support for equality of opportunity .
Last week I attended a symposium where there were 150 participants , and only two of them were women .
There is obviously room for improvement here .
My seventh and final point is that we also have to promote the results .
It is of no help at all to have good studies if they are lying in a drawer .
In the area of the social sciences especially , this often happens .
The results should be promoted on the Internet , for example , but should also be transferred directly to the users , the politicians , in this Parliament , in the national Parliaments , and presented on the ground , in order to make them useful in the social process .
Mr President , I am presenting two reports , both under my name and both about the JRC .
The first is the fifth framework report and the other is the Euratom nuclear report on the work of the JRC .
The JRC is the living embodiment of what European added value means .
It is something that should be very much better known by the Members of this House and by the general public .
That is true of all the research programmes but in particular of the Joint Research Centre where scientists from all over the European Union come together to work on problems which are relevant to its citizens .
Like the European Union itself , the JRC 's role has changed and its emphasis has changed .
It started off with a very largely nuclear emphasis and did valuable research in the nuclear field .
That emphasis is now lessening and the new mission of the JRC as it takes us into the 21st century is being highlighted more and more .
Mr Allgeier , the Director of the JRC , and Mrs Cresson , the Commissioner , have between them shown very great clarity of thinking in defining the role of the JRC so that everyone is clear about its task .
Its task principally is to be a tool for policy makers in the European Union and for those carrying out implementing programmes in a variety of areas .
For example we need the ' technology foresite ' work which is done in Seville where they look at forthcoming technologies .
We need the testing and standards work that is done in Ispra and elsewhere .
Recently , for example , they tested the methods used in every Member State to monitor air pollution and they found great discrepancies in these tests .
That was a very valuable piece of work .
Alongside the clarity of purpose we need some reform and some restructuring and that is being done very efficiently .
The JRC possesses facilities which no one Member State could possibly afford to build and there ought to be better use of some of those facilities .
As the European Parliament has a duty to monitor what is going on in the research establishments , we would like observer status .
We would like two observers on the board of the JRC .
If for technical or legal reasons that is not possible we would like an exploration of other ways in which we could carry out that task .
Given the size of the Ispra site and the complications of maintaining such a site , some renegotiation has to go on with the Italian authorities and I hope that is in progress .
In this , as in every other programme , we need to emphasize that the equal opportunities policy of the European Union is not just a pretty phrase .
It means that this must be implemented .
Here I would pay tribute to Mrs Cresson , a woman Commissioner for science who has grasped that if we are to have an equal opportunities programme , there must be research , in her words , ' by women , for women and about women .
She has set up a special unit at DG XII , and should be congratulated and supported .
I move on to the Euratom part of the JRC .
In view of the reduced budget , a sensible decision has been made to cut the fusion research in the JRC and a higher emphasis will be put on nuclear materials and safeguards control .
The FARO facility is very important : this is a way of studying real accidents .
My Amendment No 20 highlights the fact that it is not the job of a research programme to pay for the decommissioning of nuclear facilities .
There must be urgent discussions with the budget authorities and the Committee on Budgets about how the ECU 100m needed for the full decommissioning at Ispra and elsewhere can be paid for without impinging upon the research programme ; this would be wholly inappropriate .
I would like us to look at the suggestions of Professor Rubbia , amongst others , on on-site separation and transmutation of nuclear waste .
If we do not find a solution to the problem of nuclear waste , the public will lose heart at any suggestion of the use of nuclear power .
This may be a promising way forward .
I should like to say now - pre-empting a little but my time is in one block - why I have tabled an amendment to Mrs Matikainen-Kallström 's report , on which I congratulate her , and I certainly agree with her suggestion that the title be changed to one which is more straightforward .
My Amendment No 19 suggests that , in view of the amount which has to be cut in the fusion programme , the Commission should come up with a new plan and should bear the following points in mind when it looks at the international thermonuclear experimental reactor :
There is a sharp decrease in interest and ability to participate by the planned partners and , as far as I can see , a site is not available .
The timescale is inappropriate for the fifth framework programme .
We are not going to be doing that work within this timescale .
There is certainly scope for a cost reduction .
The JET facility in Culham in the United Kingdom has very many achievements and is an important part of the fusion programme .
My suggestion for a cut in the budget does not include the JET facility .
Indeed , so long as Parliament is consulted , there is probably a case for its continuation after 1999 .
It has fixed costs .
However , I cannot believe - even though we want to study the socioeconomic aspects of nuclear fusion , and I am all in favour of them - that they cost ECU 920m , or anywhere near that amount .
We need to continue our on-going research into the fusion programme and I do not suggest in any way that we should not .
But I ask the Commission , if this amendment is adopted , to look again at the programme as it is drawn up and get something that is slightly more appropriate for the available budget .
Mr President , the need for energy will approximately double over the next fifty years .
Most of the increase in demand will occur in the present developing countries , which will obtain their increased quantities of energy mainly through the use of fossil fuels that accelerate the greenhouse effect .
To some extent we can influence the consumption of primary energy sources by means of energy saving measures , but these are only possible in industrialised countries , and even there their effect on total energy consumption is minor .
The increased use of renewables will be considerable , but will have insufficient effect as far as contamination of the environment is concerned .
Knowing that the earth 's resources of uranium and natural gas are finite , we could say there is no environmentally acceptable energy solution that exists at the present time , especially with regard to carbon dioxide emissions , which would meet the growing demand for energy and prevent the worsening of the greenhouse effect .
For several decades now we have been researching the theory of nuclear fusion , and fusion has actually been achieved in trial reactors .
In trialing the commercial exploitation of fusion we have reached the point where it is necessary to create the next demonstration project .
We now have the ITER research project which should get under way soon and which is jointly organised by the EU , Japan , the USA and Russia ; its purpose is to produce the technology for the future commercial exploitation of a nuclear fusion power station .
The barriers to the exploitation of nuclear fusion are at present technical , so mere theoretical research is no longer enough to ensure development .
For the time being the developing world will not be able to develop an energy source that commercially exploits fusion , so the programme will have to be undertaken by the industrialised countries .
When we consider the timescale for exploiting fusion , which is estimated at approximately fifty years , it is clear that investment in the continuation of this work will be needed if the research currently being carried out is not to be discontinued , the Commission 's proposed funding cut and the ITER project postponed .
Current research being undertaken into nuclear fusion costs ECU 500 million per year , which is just 1 % of the total cost of the oil imported by the EU .
The production of energy from fusion does not produce fuel-derived radioactive waste .
Research into fusion and its possible commercial exploitation will not involve elements that would encourage or facilitate the manufacture of nuclear weapons .
We also have to remember that research into nuclear fusion has led to an abundance of innovations , such as in the field of materials technology , and we have thus been able to exploit the results of the research well before any production of commercial energy has commenced .
To stop the greenhouse effect from ultimately causing irreparable damage before the introduction of fusion energy , we must invest in the production of energy from sources other than fossil fuels .
Making present nuclear power stations safe and more efficient will be vital if we wish to work to produce energy without harming the environment .
The Commission 's original proposal was to fund research for the modernisation of current nuclear power plants and the treatment of nuclear waste .
I believe these will be areas of nuclear fission research which will be well suited to this programme .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are taking decisions on energy alternatives that will affect future generations .
Now , by taking the right decisions , we can solve the problems of the production of energy for Europeans in the future .
By voting in favour of research into fusion energy we can guarantee those future generations a life that does not rely on respirators .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall now comment on the three horizontal programmes from the perspective of the Committee on External Economic Relations , in other words as regards the international role of research , innovation , SMEs and human potential .
On the first topic - the international role of Community research - it is essential , in my opinion , that technological research in the European Union should be a match for research worldwide and should remain competitive ; I would even say that the benchmark should be the international relevance of our research and discoveries .
The fifth framework programme would be impoverished if this openness were not ensured .
Nevertheless , we might ask ourselves under what conditions non-EU partner companies should be allowed to participate , and to what extent the money of Europe 's citizens should be spent on partners not belonging to the Union .
Special conventions will need to be drawn up , but our committee would see fit to lay down two vital criteria : firstly , research conducted in conjunction with external partners should be of benefit to the European Union , thereby improving its competence and its qualities ; secondly , there should be a reciprocity criterion , meaning that if , for example , the partners - the American researchers - have access to a European research programme , the opposite must also be possible .
This , in my view , is a key point which the Commission as a whole , not just Mrs Cresson , must press in its international relations .
I am thinking here of technologically advanced countries such as the United States , Japan and Canada . Whereas we have by now found ways of solving conflicts and competitive difficulties , for example in the commercial sector through the World Trade Organisation , the world of research is still a fairly closed , impermeable one in most countries .
As regards the emerging and developing countries , on the other hand , and above all nearby countries such as those applying for accession and the third countries of the Mediterranean , I should very much like to see research becoming a tool of cooperation .
In these cases , however , additional financial instruments are needed to complement the RTD framework programme : I am of course thinking of the Agenda 2000 programmes and the MEDA programmes .
In this context , technology transfer and the involvement of third countries will add to the merits of the framework programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , it has been a long road to the final decision on the European Community 's fifth framework programme for research , technological development and demonstration .
Today I can tell you that although there was an initial protest about this programme , the Committee on Fisheries can accept the result of the conciliation procedure despite a general disagreement on funding and possible deficiencies with regard to content .
But I would like to explain to you why we shall be following its implementation very carefully .
In its opinion on the proposed fifth framework research programme , the Committee on Fisheries described the research needs of the fisheries and aquaculture sector .
It noted that , in contrast to the fourth framework research programme , the proposal does not contain a programme solely devoted to fisheries .
The design of the new framework programme means that fisheries interests will have to compete with other research interests in several programmes and key actions .
That does not make things any easier for fisheries .
Moreover , a solution also needs to be found for the future funding of activities relating to fisheries , which have so far been defined as studies and kept outside the research programmes .
These activities include the collection of basic data for stock assessments , which have so far been funded through the Structural Funds .
The Committee on Fisheries stresses the need to avoid any risk of interruption in the funding of the very important activities concerned , and the need to extend support for such activities to the aquaculture sector .
We have heard that in accordance with Article 130i , the framework programme will be implemented through individual specific programmes , in turn consisting of key actions as they are known , or work programmes .
The first specific programme , called ' Quality of life and management of living resources ' thus covers many key actions of relevance for the fisheries and aquaculture sector .
The most important of these is ' Sustainable agriculture , fisheries and forestry , including the integrated development of rural areas ' .
The priorities for research , technological development and demonstration in fisheries and aquaculture have been defined in such a way that most of the relevant research needs should be covered .
The key action ' Health , food and environmental factors ' is absolutely relevant here , and the key action ' Control of infectious diseases ' provides a natural framework for research on prevention and control of fish diseases within aquaculture , since it has now emerged that this key action will not be limited to human diseases .
The key action ' The cell factory ' could possibly also be of some interest to the aquaculture sector because of the genetical problems that may arise there .
That is all I have to say on the first specific programme .
The second and third programmes are not very relevant for fisheries and aquaculture , so let me move directly on to the fourth thematic programme , ' Preserving the ecosystem ' .
This programme is of the greatest importance to fisheries and aquaculture , especially in the attempts at what is known as the conceptualizing an ecosystem approach to fisheries management , because understanding how environmental changes may affect the marine ecosystems upon which fisheries and aquaculture depend is extremely important .
Up to now we have always complained that the current state of knowledge rarely permits forecasting of concrete effects on fish stocks or predictions of the consequences of a troubled ecosystem for the fishing industry .
The other specific programmes predominantly concern amongst other things the need for international cooperation with third countries in the Mediterranean region , as well as Russia , the USA and Canada .
It is a subject that we will be increasingly preoccupied with in the fisheries sector as we search for new resources .
The Committee on Fisheries has clearly defined the contents and affirmed their importance .
We look forward to their realisation .
We have heard about the growing demands that are being placed on the framework programme , and in view of these each penny of the amount had to be fought for .
Of course this was tiring at times , but it was worth it .
My thanks to all those who were involved .
We are also very relieved that with the framework programme , an important part of employment policy that we have all been waiting for is to be implemented .
In a modern Europe we ought never to neglect the field of research .
It is often the true beginning of all things . Of course this also has to be reflected in our budget .
Mr President , I wish to focus on the section in the framework programme covered by Mr Argyros , which deals with competitive and sustainable growth . It is very gratifying to see that so many suggestions in the opinion from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have been incorporated into the report .
Greater emphasis is now being placed on sustainable growth as a means of creating jobs and improving quality of life : in other words , a horizontal approach is being advocated . Equally , there is recognition that the programme will need to be monitored and , where necessary , adjusted .
This will be necessary to keep pace not only with scientific and technological progress , but with economic and social developments too . I am convinced that societal considerations will increasingly dictate the future course of research .
What is more , politicians and decision-takers will be requiring advice on socio-economic and environmental issues . Research can contribute towards smoothing the way for social change and safeguarding ecological balance .
I am disappointed that we failed to obtain budgetary resources for such work and I therefore call upon colleagues to support the Green Group 's Amendment No 30 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will start with the report by Mr Tannert .
In the fifth framework research programme , European research is supposed to be more in tune with the needs of society than ever , and more concerned with searching for solutions to its pressing problems .
The biotechnology field potentially contains many answers , which we are seeing already in the medical , pharmaceutical and agricultural sectors , where work is being done worldwide . The European Union must intensify its efforts here considerably if it wishes to remain competitive .
But just as biotechnology answers questions , it also throws them up , especially in the field of gene technology . There is for example the safety of manufactured products that are genetically engineered , and there are also the highly sensitive ethical aspects .
I would fully agree with the rapporteur that research on gene technology depends mainly on whether we can arrive at a social consensus on the issues associated with it .
That is why objective information and a widely-conducted discussion in the field of ethics also have to be among the aims of this programme .
The Green Group in the European Parliament is calling once again for a moratorium on research involving foetal tissue and research on embryos in vitro before implantation until a full ethical evaluation has been undertaken .
But for my group the moratorium on research is not a feasible option .
It is an unrealistic demand because we can never have a conclusive ethical evaluation .
It is always going to have to take place in parallel with the research .
It is crucial in embryo research that the provisions in national legislation are complied with , and that the common , basic ethical principles are taken into account .
European research projects should be evaluated carefully from an ethical point of view before they are begun .
But a complete moratorium would lead to a standstill , which is something we especially want to avoid with this programme .
Now let me turn briefly to the report by Mr Lange .
By and large , the amendments can be supported and also have the approval of my group .
I very much welcome the fact that this specific programme continues the efforts to promote the training of European researchers .
It is hugely important for Europe 's competitiveness that the quality of our researchers and scientists is continually reinforced .
It is important to achieve a lively and effective cooperation between European researchers .
As for socio-economic research , the Commission 's aim that socio-economic aspects be identified as a key action in this horizontal programme is an idea that is very much to be welcomed .
But in any case it has to be said that not everything that is scientifically interesting and feasible requires comprehensive European research funding .
I think therefore that the chosen figure of 10 % of the funds from the specific programme for socio-economic research is sufficient .
Thank you very much indeed to both of the rapporteurs .
Mr President , I should just like to make one point on the Estevan Bolea report and that is about renewable energies , specifically geothermal energy , better known in my part of the world as ' hot rocks technology ' .
Many of our Member States have a very good record in this area .
Europe has a good track record in that it has been successful with its research in the past . And yet this is not specifically mentioned in the Commission proposal .
Perhaps it is included under the title ' Any Other Energies ' .
In my own mind that is not at all sufficient .
Hence Amendment No 19 which specifically mentions geothermal energy .
I would remind the Commission that the United States is currently putting something like USD 100m into research into this particular area .
They are looking for export markets .
They are areas where we , as the European Union , will miss out if we do not make sure that we keep abreast of this technology .
Will the Commission support geothermal technology ? Will it please support Amendment No 19 .
Mr President , I congratulate all the rapporteurs on the excellent reports they have produced .
I can agree with almost all of them .
I am pleased to see that the Tannert report clearly spells out that research into human cloning will not be permitted in the present framework programme .
My personal belief is that human cloning in any form should not be tolerated under any circumstances .
The user-friendly information society programme presented by our colleague , Mr Malerba , is of great importance .
Every single element of the four key action areas will have a major role for future progress and development , not least for the creation of jobs .
In recent weeks the Taoiseach of Ireland , Mr Bertie Ahern , announced the decision to create a major digital park .
In so doing he said : ' Linking cities and villages into this busy network will not only give new jobs to Ireland but will provide the one-stop media shop for local services in health , education , tourism , business development and all public services ' .
Speaking on behalf of the Irish delegation in my group , it will come as no surprise to many that I have some difficulties with those reports dealing with research of one kind or another in the nuclear sector .
The Sellafield lies , leaks and cover-ups saga has been consistently denounced by my Fianna Fáil delegation in this Parliament , right back to the early days of Windscale .
We are totally opposed to the proposed new expansion of Sellafield .
There is no justification - economic or otherwise - for the reprocessing of nuclear waste .
We will not support any programmes which would in effect contribute to a continuation of the lethal contamination from Sellafield .
That money would be far better used for research into projects in non-nuclear renewable energies as set out in the programme , preserving the ecosystem , the subject of the Estevan Bolea report .
In conclusion , I have one comment on the overall fifth framework programme .
I am convinced that the time has come for Europe to stop being perceived as a follower of American and Japanese research fashion and become , in a coherent and united approach , a world leader in the field .
We can do it if we wish .
Mr President , I would like to emphasise three points in connection with the fifth framework programme for research and the special programmes attached to it .
The first concerns the users of research .
According to the Commission 's proposal , the intention behind the fifth framework programme is greater interaction with users .
It is very important that by the word ' users ' the Commission does not just mean those engaged in business , but the real end-users of research , the people .
Organisations that represent the people and democratically elected decision-makers must also be able to participate in the planning and monitoring of research .
Secondly , I would like to focus on the special attention paid to women in the research programmes .
Mr Lange 's report , now under discussion , pays commendable attention to the issue .
We have to make sure that both sufficient resources are available for research into the status of women and the promotion of equality , and that women are represented in groups involved in the selection and appraisal of projects .
The third important issue concerns the opportunities for applicant countries to be included in the fifth framework programme .
Negotiations with those countries , which are desirable for their participation in the programme , must be swiftly concluded , so that they may be included right from the start .
In this connection I would also like to stress the importance of research into health and safety at work , which is also well worth investing in .
Finally I would like to state that I am in full agreement with what Mr Fitzsimmons said just now about nuclear research , which is that we should invest in renewable energy resources .

Mr President , the programme ' Preserving the ecosystem ' would more correctly have been called ' Repairing the ecosystem ' , because with many of these programmes - and I need remind you only of the Structural Funds - we are continuing to destroy and rob the planet before we are even aware of all that it has to offer .
This can be said about the forests and seas , and everything else too .
Of course what makes me particularly angry is the funding which has been provided - ECU 2.125 billion for 130 priorities - which will not do justice to any of the priorities .
This path will not lead us to renewable energy .
We need anything but fusion , on which we have spent billions without seeing any results so far .
What about energy efficiency ?
Obviously , with so little money we cannot make progress on that either .
For the future of course it is important for us to find out what resources and valuable medical substances can be obtained from the sea before they are plundered .
None of these things can be achieved with what we have here , and I deeply regret that . I also think it inappropriate for so much money to be going into computer science .
As for the nuclear industry as a whole , I do not think it is at all right to continue to invest money in it , because it must itself take responsibility for the consequences in accordance with the principle that ' the polluter must pay ' , instead of always making the general public pay in its place .
Mr President , I cannot start my first speech in this Chamber without referring to my predecessor , Dr Alan Macartney , who I know was held in very high regard here both for his work in committees and in Parliament .
There could be no more fitting tribute to Alan Macartney from the people back home than the very decisive result of the by-election which brought me , also a member of Scotland 's party of independence , to this Parliament .
If one of our major purposes is to create the conditions that will encourage economic growth and improve employment opportunities , then small and medium-sized enterprises must and do play a substantial part .
I was pleased to note that SMEs figure in these programmes and , in particular , that a proportion of the budget will indeed be available to be directed particularly towards projects from smaller enterprises .
As a former proprietor of a very small business myself , I am only too well aware of how difficult it can be to find the extra time , energy and finance required to pursue innovative projects .
And as until recently I was also the leader of a local authority in Scotland - a very successful one too - I know from the experience of our economic development and European units that many of our smaller businesses have a wealth of talent and ideas which require more encouragement .
I hope that there can be considerable flexibility in the decision-making processes and in the running of these programmes so that they can indeed be fully accessible to our small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Scots have a well deserved reputation for innovation and inventiveness .
In my particular part of Scotland , the North-East , we have many businesses , enterprises and academic and research institutions working on projects and ideas that are very worthy of dissemination both throughout Europe and in the wider world .
Dundee , for example , one of the two cities in my area , is well and truly becoming a centre of excellence in life sciences .
Aberdeen is acknowledged as the energy capital of Europe .
I know of much work being done to develop projects in a whole range of fields including telematics and renewable energy resources .
Incidentally , I come here from a party which is non-nuclear in its outlook and I support the comments of our colleague a few minutes ago .
We have projects to maintain the high quality of our water supply systems , also referred to earlier in this debate .
We in Scotland have much to offer by way of research and development .
I hope that through participation in these programmes not only will Scottish projects , Scottish businesses and Scottish institutions benefit , but the ideas generated therein will benefit Europe and the world .
I look forward very much to my participation here in this Chamber in promoting Scotland and indeed promoting European projects back home in Scotland .
Mr Hudghton , I did not interrupt you because I wanted to thank you and congratulate you on your first appearance in Parliament .
I wish you all the best as an MEP , but would point out that here in Parliament we all keep to our allotted speaking time .
Mr President , in the context of this joint debate on research and technological development , I will be speaking on the report on the programme for innovation and participation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The decisive role of SMEs in employment and in our countries ' territorial balance can never be over-emphasised .
It is very much better to promote the maintenance and development of a coherent and close-knit fabric of businesses in the countryside rather than to invest vast sums in urban policy with very uncertain results .
That fabric has now been seriously damaged by recession and it is essential to rebuild it , in particular by encouraging the development of the industries of the future , which are currently creating most wealth , growth and employment .
It is essential to be in a position to protect the intellectual property involved here , both at Community level and at third country level , because this is absolutely necessary if the costs inherent in research and development are to be amortised .
And instead of salving our consciences by incorporating into this fifth framework programme for research an SME section which is poorly-funded and will therefore have little impact , it would surely have been better to start by carrying out an audit of the legal obstacles currently facing people starting up in business and of the brakes on the development of SMEs created by certain Community regulations themselves .
Our legal systems simply must be geared towards facilitating the development of SMEs , instead of hindering it , as is seen in particular in the case of some regulations which tend to strangle businesses at birth , the very time when they most need capital .
It would have been useful to give some thought to the essential improvements that need to be made to company law with a view to adapting it to the rules of technological industry and risk capital , a vital instrument in facilitating access for SMEs to private finance for innovation .
A policy geared to making extensive free trade agreements without prior impact assessment and adopting artificially high standards for our small and medium-sized enterprises has undeniable negative effects .
Mr President , I call for a pragmatic policy , not an ideological one , a policy that will really facilitate the development of these small and medium-sized firms . They are now the principal source of job creation in the European Union .
Mr President , research is the future , it is the breath of the human spirit .
However , responsibility is called for !
I am very glad that thermonuclear fusion is not under discussion in Mrs McNally 's report . However nuclear fission safety , control of nuclear materials , the decommissioning of nuclear power stations and waste management are .
We are going to have to decommission a great many nuclear power stations in the future , something that we should perhaps have done much earlier .
Waste management is going to keep us busy for a very long time .
Although we do not have a solution for nuclear waste yet and it will continue to be radioactive for centuries , indeed for millennia , we go on producing more every day !
It is a grotesque , tragic and dramatic form of human irresponsibility .
It is I think perhaps too late for us to carry out research in this area .
I am grateful to Mrs Matikainen-Kallström for pointing out in her report that the routine generation of substantial quantities of radioactive materials may also constitute the biggest obstacle in the development of fusion .
She refers to extremely important areas such as nuclear fission , operational safety , nuclear facilities , radiation protection and once again , waste management , which has been mentioned several times today .
I know that Mrs Matikainen-Kallström has taken a great deal of trouble over her report , but like many of the others who spoke before me , I regret the fact that there is no talk of any key action for renewable energies here .
The waste must certainly be brought under control .
You are responsible on behalf of the people in this respect .
When one tries , as I do , to conduct politics in a Christian-Democrat spirit of responsibility then it is simply impossible - for me at least - to support a programme which admittedly offers us a great many advantages , but also leaves behind for those who will come after us problems that are presently regarded as insoluble .
I would ask my colleagues to have some understanding for the way I am going to vote .
Mr President , referring to the report by Mr Argyros on the special programme for competitive and viable economic development , I would first of all like to note with satisfaction the rapporteur 's effort to address issues concerned with ensuring transparency in the management of appropriations connected with the programme 's activities , promoting the social dimension in the objectives served by the funds made available each year , extending the special actions to branches such as the textile industry , which is a very important industry in Europe and indeed a labour-intensive one , reserving a larger proportion of the budget for improvements in land and sea transport technologies and making research results available to small and medium-sized enterprises so that they can derive benefit from them .
However , I should like to point out that the worldwide economic crisis has highlighted the need for economic development which benefits society while fully respecting the environment . That , indeed , is what is meant by viable and sustainable development .
But now , the word ' competitive ' is being added .
Is that coincidence ?
Surely not .
That word establishes a framework wherein the main effort will be directed in an extremely one-sided manner towards intellectual , scientific and technological development in order to promote the interests and aspirations of large-scale multinational capital .
Competitiveness is ranked above all else , and the rights and acquisitions of working people , the environment and a balanced ecology are all placed in thrall to it .
Development of any kind and environmental protection are conditional upon company profits .
Experience , particularly recently , shows that any reference to competitive development is very worrying for working people and the general public .
It is essential to grasp the point that technology is the product of scientific development and the human intellect , and that it must not be used in ways that pose a threat to nature , mankind and its needs .
Mr President , I shall begin with the Malerba report , on which I have tabled some amendments .
Whilst I am very much in favour of a user-friendly information society , I still have some misgivings .
There is a danger that the resources of the information society and the Internet will be exploited for purposes of electronic surveillance .
It is incumbent upon us in this Parliament to distance ourselves from any attempt to use this programme to facilitate the development of such communication or surveillance technologies .
I also have a point on the Argyros report on competitive and sustainable growth .
I have tabled an amendment on reducing the environmental impact of air traffic .
Parliament is very vocal about developing better fuels for motor cars and cutting petrol use , yet we seem to overlook the fact that aeroplanes are also major guzzlers .
Competitive ways must be found of producing fuels which will spare the environment and reduce consumption .
This should be seen by industry as a positive challenge , rather than a negative threat .
Mr President , the fifth framework programme is primarily designed to promote the interests of a common research policy .
Over time , the structure has become clearer and the subject areas more specific .
Fragmentation into lots of small projects and the overlapping of different projects is to be avoided , and from this point of view the question has to be asked whether earmarking 10 % of the budget for SMEs will really promote scientific development .
The rapid assessment of applications is extremely important for research institutions and especially for businesses , and establishing clear criteria is also important in order to provide a degree of certainty .
It also prevents lengthy discussions on contracts and bureaucratic procedures , both of which are seen as obstacles .
Because of the rapid developments in science , it has to be possible to alter specific programmes half-way through .
The extremely rapid progress made in genetic technology , which could generate new resistances and harmful trends in nutrition , means that further biomedical research and ethical consideration is required .
Scientific research is not seen as something free from value judgements , as is clear from the fact that human cloning has been excluded from the framework programme .
We are delighted about this ; a pause for thought about other genetic technologies is also needed , and full , unbiased information would be extremely welcome .
Sustainable development is an important basis for research , and energy and environmental protection must form an integral part of this .
Cooperation between government , the private sector , industry and the services sector can set a good , encouraging example here , particularly for applied research .
However , there must also be scope for fundamental research , which should be as independent and objective as possible .
As for the future of the nuclear fusion programme , we would point out that the knowledge we have acquired here must be kept for future generations , but in view of the fact that other sources of energy are now in full development , we no longer need to attach high priority to it .
We support the idea of setting a maximum for nuclear research , which will certainly be advisable once we have a clearer and fuller picture of everything that is going on in the nuclear sector .
It is extremely important to think about waste management and safety here .
Mr President , I wish to refer to Mr Malerba 's report on the user-friendly information society , part of the broad fifth framework programme .
I should like to put forward four observations on this report .
First , the total European Union investment - not just that allocated within the fifth framework programme , but overall investment in the field - together with the investment made by each of the 15 Member States individually falls far short of the investment in this sector by our main competitors , the United States and Japan .
We have to realise that information science is at the cutting edge of technology and should therefore welcome this initiative and carry it through .
Furthermore , as the resources available are limited , they must be distributed wisely .
In this respect , I welcome the rapporteur 's suggestion to concentrate resources on objectives 1 and 3 , namely , systems and services for the citizen and new technologies , rather than on objective 2 , which relates to electronic commerce . This requires improved regulations , and thus calls for legislative action rather than investment .
I should also like to point out that the final chapter is ill-defined and therefore somewhat vague .
Our resources must be concentrated at the cutting edge , in those key sectors where investment will bear most fruit .
Finally , I should like to refer to two types of amendments , following on from what our colleague from the Green Group said .
At this stage , it would be extremely dangerous to start a witch hunt concerning the promotion of investment in this important sector .
Many problems are indeed emerging , relating to safeguarding the rights of the individual , the right to privacy , for instance . However , we should bear in mind that the Internet arose as a result of research undertaken by the military , and later developed into what it is today .
Caution is therefore advisable .
In addition , I should like to endorse the rapporteur 's opinion on some of the amendments put forward by the Committee on Women 's Rights , relating , for example , to the introduction of gender quotas . These do seem to go rather too far .
Mr President , I am already very disappointed with the manner in which the European Parliament 's report deals with gene technology .
On top of that , I find the talk of social ostracism that I hear , as opposed to the imposition of bans , very naïve .
We were promised years ago that there were at last going to be standards , and after years of research programmes in this field it could be expected that the Commission would finally establish ethical standards instead of routinely insisting that this is what the research projects are supposed to be contributing to . It is becoming increasingly clear that they are merely waxing lyrical , and their real concern is with making unrestricted progress in this risky and ethically questionable research .
Returning to the subject of research involving foetal tissue for instance , even the federal chamber of doctors in Germany has spoken out in favour of a moratorium .
But the Commission is obviously unable to admit that this type of research is dubious , both scientifically and from an ethical point of view , and that some limits must finally be laid down in the field .
This applies to the softening agent in babies ' toys .
The Commission says that bans cannot be imposed because research is needed , and yet its research programme contains absolutely no attempts at research that could finally put this issue on the agenda , namely environmental medicine and all these other questions concerning for example chemical substances .
Mr President , the adoption of the fifth framework programme was a key moment for research in Europe , as we have all seen .
Parliament managed to make its own voice and that of Europe 's citizens heard , by introducing various themes which are crucial to the development and improvement of life and research in this Europe of ours .
As I have stated on several occasions in all the institutional forums , only through research and technological innovation can we get the better of the unemployment which is afflicting Europe .
Conducting research means creating jobs for the future and improving the lifestyle of our children ; efforts must therefore be made in Europe to improve the attainment and dissemination of research findings , and to facilitate access to them .
Today 's adoption of the specific programmes must be seized as a further opportunity for companies , researchers and all the citizens of Europe .
We naturally welcome a whole range of themes within the various programmes . Among these I would single out an extremely important one : the quality of life and management of biological resources .
Europe has ample experience of research and applications in this field , and I would stress that - over and above all the ethical considerations - biotechnology and genetic engineering are having and will continue to have a crucial impact on the future of medicine and on our future well-being .
I would also stress , on behalf of the committee which I chair , that a good deal of important work has been done in recent years , both on the framework programme , on which agreement has been reached - albeit painstakingly - with the Council , and on the specific programmes where , as you know , several amendments have been put forward .
In conclusion , I hope that the Council will take due note of Parliament 's suggestions , not least when adopting these programmes to which codecision does not apply : it would be a serious mistake not to take account of the opinions of those , like ourselves , who represent the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , I should firstly like to congratulate my colleague Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , the rapporteur , for all her very hard work in bringing the fifth framework programme to this point , including , I am pleased to say , paying a visit to Devon , my constituency , to hear about many research projects engaged in at Exeter University and Plymouth University .
I welcome her interest .
I welcome the outcome of the conciliation procedure .
There were many researchers out there who were anxious about future funding and the prospect of funding being cut off .
We should emphasise very strongly the importance of the fifth framework programme for networking across national borders .
The importance of this work cannot be overstated even though it represents a very small proportion of overall spending in Europe on research .
I urge the Commission to pay more attention in future to providing consistent assessments of bids , to telling unsuccessful applicants why they did not succeed , and to make payments on time because delays cause great difficulties , particularly for small businesses .
I welcome the emphasis on SMEs participation .
We should remember that they face particular difficulties in participating in these transnational large projects .
I welcome Mrs McNally 's support for the work of JET at Culham .
That should reassure the staff who work there and who were anxious about their future employment prospects .
Above all , I wish to emphasise the benefit of the fifth framework programme as a catalyst for progress , innovation , competitiveness , quality of life and employment in Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.50 p.m. )
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure
I have been informed by the Green Group , pursuant to Rule 162 ( 4 ) , that it contests the interpretation of the provisions governing the discharge procedure that was announced to Parliament yesterday .
I would therefore remind the House that , as announced yesterday , the vote on this interpretation will take place at voting time today , in other words at 12 noon .
There is of course no question of us holding a debate on this matter now .
Rule 162 is perfectly clear .
We shall vote at 12 noon .
However , I will give the floor to Mrs Theato , who has asked to speak as chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Madam President , I should like to request that the opinion drawn up by the Legal Service - which contains statements on this point -should also be made available to groups and Members .
I do not know whether all Members have now received this opinion .
Yesterday , it was also submitted to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
That is difficult , Mrs Theato , since the interpretation has been given by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
It is that interpretation which has been contested , and the House knows its mind well enough to decide freely for itself .
It will do that at 12 noon today .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?

Madam President , on 12 January 1999 , Mr Wijsenbeek and I are required to attend the Court of Justice in Luxembourg at 9.30 a.m. in proceedings on a question referred for a preliminary ruling on the basis of Article 177 by the District Court in Rotterdam .
We are therefore faced with a choice .
We would have to leave Strasbourg very early in the morning to travel to Luxembourg and would therefore probably miss the voting , so we must choose whether to go to Luxembourg or stay here to vote .
Who should decide ?
This is a question that I raised yesterday as a point of order .
My lawyers tell me that , according to Rule 2 of the Rules of Procedure , it is Mr Wijsenbeek and myself who should decide .
If it is of overriding importance that we should be here , then we will inform the Court that we regret that we are unable to attend .
If we say that it makes no difference and that we would be fulfilling our parliamentary duties better in the interests of the citizens of Europe and the free movement of persons by going to Luxembourg , then we will unfortunately probably not be here for the voting .
It is up to us to decide , according to our lawyers .
But the Bureau says that on the basis of Rule 5 it must decide for us , and that its decision is that , unfortunately for the Court of Justice , we must be here throughout the voting , otherwise we will be fined half a day 's allowance for failure to attend .
It has thus implicitly ruled that the half-day 's allowance is income - think back to ground 21 in the Lord Bruce judgment - and is therefore subject to national taxation laws .
I promised Mr Gil-Robles yesterday in the corridor here in Parliament that I would let the Secretary-General have a short statement in French and English sometime this week , and I shall be happy to hand it over to you this week , Madam President .
Madam President , I would just like to say that the Court of Justice has indeed summoned me to attend on Tuesday , 12 January 1999 in the Wijsenbeek case .
I would also point out that we have already discussed this issue in the Committee on Legal Affairs of which you yourself are a member , Madam President , and that the case concerns the free movement of persons and the interpretation of Articles 7 and 8 , on which Parliament itself brought proceedings , though its case was rejected as inadmissible .
I and my lawyer , Mr J.L. Janssen van Raay , who also happens to be my colleague here in the House , have ourselves brought proceedings on this issue , because as Members of the European Parliament and as ordinary citizens we are victims of the failure to implement Articles 7 and 8 .
I would therefore ask you , Madam President , both as President and as the party which brought the earlier proceedings - even if they were declared inadmissible - to lend us all possible support and cooperation and not to insist that all Members must be here all the time , because that is a misinterpretation of the Rules as construed by myself and Mr Janssen van Raay .
Madam President , I have a comment on the Minutes , because the presidency yesterday committed an omission which could have serious consequences for relations between Parliament and the Council .
It was on the Council 's common position on the European capital of culture for the years 2005 to 2019 .
The deadline for any reactions expires today , but the presidency requested and was granted a postponement by the Council .
It is not clear why and when this postponement is to begin , because no announcement was made yesterday that the common position had been received .
You can put this right by announcing it now , which would mean that the deadline for reactions is postponed until 15 January .
The Committee on Culture decided unanimously yesterday evening to put before the plenary a declaration of intent to reject the common position .
If we do not react we shall achieve the exact opposite , which is that the common position will go through on the nod .
I would therefore urgently request that you make this announcement today , and I would also point out that this is the consequence of the procedure followed with documents received , which is that the President says that documents have been received and refers to the Annex that is later attached to the Minutes .
We all say yes , and have no way of checking whether what was agreed has actually been done .
It is only now , a day later , that I can officially see what has happened .
Because of this we had the unusual situation yesterday that , after the plenary and before the committee meeting , the services informed me that the announcement had been made , then after the committee meeting they said that it had not been after all .
These sorts of misunderstandings are , of course , extremely slipshod .
Yes indeed , Mr Pex .
We are well aware of the situation , and I can assure you that the announcement will be made today .
Madam President , I refer to last night 's Minutes and the speech made by the newly elected colleague in this House from Scotland .
In his speech he referred solely and continually to Scotland .
Madam President , could you point out to the new colleague that this is a European Parliament and if he wants to continue with his narrow nationalist views maybe he should have been elected to the Scottish Parliament ?
Madam President , I would like to make a further point concerning page 22 of the Minutes .
You will recall that after the rejection of my request that the report be referred back to committee , in accordance with Rule 129 , I felt I had to point out the consequences of a vote of rejection by Parliament , and the President agreed with me that there could be other requests for referral back to committee .
This is not mentioned .
I wish to have it recorded not because I was right but because the question might be repeated , and for future reference I think it would be good to record that this was stated .
If it was not mentioned , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , it is because that is what the Rules say and so it was not considered necessary .
Madam President , I would like to make a point relating to Question Time .
When we know which Commissioners are going to attend Question Time , we ask questions intended for those specific Commissioners .
But in this instance , the European Commission has decided that questions that were intended for Mr Van Miert , since they concerned competition policy , are to be answered by Mr Papoutsis , who is not going to attend Question Time during this part-session .
Madam President , I would like to protest to Parliament 's Bureau because when we Members ask questions intended for specific Commissioners , it is because we know that they are the ones responsible for certain issues .
I know - or at least , I imagine - that we cannot now change the questions , but the Bureau should use its authority to monitor such matters .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , you know that we all have to come here to Strasbourg for one week a month and that we are often deprived of news from our home countries .
The situation has been somewhat improved by the fact that we now have a television in our room broadcasting in all sorts of languages .
There is even a Dutch-language channel , but every time I come here I find that it has been switched off , and I have to make a number of telephone calls to have it restored .
Could the services perhaps ensure that when we arrive on a Monday the Dutch channel is also available ?
I am told that in the new building this will not be a problem , and it is certainly unfortunate for you not to be able to receive Dutch television .
Decision on urgent procedure
Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture , I would like to call on the House to approve the request for urgent procedure for the programme to supply agricultural produce to the Russian Federation , in accordance with the resolution adopted by the House on 19 November .
It appears that there is an urgent need to supply certain regions of the Russian Federation and certain groups - particularly the unemployed , sick and elderly - with agricultural produce .
Therefore , the Committee on Agriculture is asking Parliament to approve this request for urgent procedure .
Does anyone wish to speak against this request ?
If not , I shall put it to the vote .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Discharge for 1996
The next item is the report ( A4-0502 / 98 ) by Mr Elles , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge to the Commission in respect of implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1996 financial year .
Madam President , I should like to request that Mr Elles 's report be referred back to committee pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure .
I would therefore ask you to call Members back so that they can take part in the vote .
I think the reasons are sufficiently well known .
I do not wish to prolong the procedure .
Thank you .
Yes indeed , we shall vote without delay , but after hearing one speaker for and one against , as provided for by the Rules .
Madam President , I can only agree with Mrs Müller 's request .
Her explanation of the reasons for this request was brief . I too will be extremely brief as I explained yesterday why I considered a referral to be necessary .
I am therefore in favour of it .
Madam President , in March we set out the conditions for the Commission to be given discharge .
The Commission has largely met those conditions , which means that there is now nothing to prevent us from doing what we said in March , namely giving discharge .
( Parliament rejected the request for referral back to committee )
We shall now proceed with the debate on the report by Mr Elles .
Madam President , I rise to present my final report on the 1996 discharge .
Last week in the Committee on Budgetary Control , a narrow margin came down in favour of giving discharge while voting across party lines .
Even so , this report itself is highly critical of the Commission 's management .
We must now decide whether these criticisms merit refusal to grant discharge of this budget by the whole House .
There are three specific concerns that remain despite the valiant efforts of the budget Commissioner , Erkki Liikanen , to fill the gap left by the invisible Commissioner for financial control , Mrs Gradin .
First , the perceived lack of democratic control in the fight against fraud .
In all good faith , last October this House adopted the Bösch report , setting out a clear structure for an anti-fraud office - OLAF .
Despite the fanfare of the President of the Commission earlier this month in Brussels , announcing an independent institution to combat fraud , this proposal does not meet the request of Parliament .
Many fear it will make combating fraud more rather than less difficult , negating as it does the independent right of investigation in the case of internal checks .
Second , the perceived lack of coherence and sound financial management in external policies .
Information recently made available to Parliament by a courageous Commission official has confirmed many of our worst fears in several programmes .
The handling of these issues by the Commission has compounded the problem .
Not only have examples found during the discharge procedure revealed a real concern that irregularities are committed without individual Commissioners perceiving the need to take personal responsibility for their actions ; but furthermore , the Commission has refused to make certain documents available to Parliament , the most flagrant disrespect of Parliament being shown in the ECHO case , where the text handed over was so heavily censored as to make it totally illegible .
Last and by no means least is the perceived lack of effective measures for improved administrative and budgetary management .
Not only have recent high-profile cases involving certain members of the Commission with regard to staff appointments caused severe damage to the credibility of the Commission , but also evidence given a few days ago to our committee revealed the scope for abuse in the appointment of high officials in the Commission where , I am afraid to say , it still seems that who you know is more important than what you know .
As testified , the inordinate power over appointments and resource allocations exposes the administrative structure to potential political interference in all matters of management unparalleled in Member States ' public administrations .
These factors can be summarised by the notion that flaws in management organisation have inevitably led to operational distortions in implementing policies .
It is small wonder that staff morale in the Commission is at a low ebb .
In essence , not enough thought has been given since 1995 to how the Commission should be run .
Well qualified and hard-working officials have in many cases been asked to do too much with too little .
The secretive way in which high-level appointments are made has not helped .
These issues must be resolved as soon as possible .
The conclusions of the committee are drawn up with the purpose of establishing a work programme for the Commission over the next 12 months to ensure significant change to modernise the Commission by 1 January 2000 .
Proposals include a revision of the Statute ; a screening report of the Commission services so that Parliament can judge what staff the Commission needs to carry out its responsibilities effectively ; and , not least , a code of conduct for the nomination of high-level officials .
Is it acceptable that certain posts are kept empty , sometimes for years , waiting for the appropriate cabinet member ?
Is it appropriate that certain cabinets set aside a number of flags for themselves at the beginning of the Commission ?
I would say it is not and this needs to be acted on as soon as possible .
This work programme was adopted in the committee by a vast majority .
It is deeply disquieting to have the feeling outside the Commission that any behaviour is accepted without fear of reprimand .
Where we have disagreed is on two essential aspects .
First , some maintain that this discharge report contains many criticisms which go beyond the 1996 year and therefore wish to just treat the discharge as a technical matter with no political overtones .
But specific evidence found relating to the 1996 budget year in many policy areas continues to be revealed by colleagues in their reports to the committee , as well as by journalistic investigation in several newspapers .
Yet still some turn a blind eye , seemingly not wanting to take account of the evidence presented .
The second point is the fallacious allegation presented that the discharge amounts to sacking the Commission - a vote of censure .
But this is illustrative of the manipulation to which many in this Parliament have been subjected , perhaps taking too much advice from those outside rather than looking at the specific provisions of the Treaty .
This discharge procedure is an entirely separate matter from that of censure , being a regular annual process which must be judged on its own merits .
A vote to censure the Commission has been suggested by a few parliamentarians - who are not with us at this time - but it is not a course I would support .
Why , then , did I vote in committee not to grant discharge to the Commission ?
Not only are the substantive issues serious enough to justify not doing so , but the real truth is that the Commission is incapable of undertaking these reforms by itself .
Many of these issues have been on the table for years .
The reformers in the Commission have been unable to make headway against a wide range of vested interests .
They cannot succeed without the active support of our Parliament .
I therefore conclude by making an appeal on behalf of all those , whether inside or outside the Commission , who wish to see modernised institutions based on integrity , ready to implement the euro and welcome new members from the East .
To give discharge for 1996 at this juncture could only be interpreted as a whitewash , a message to continue as before , ignoring Parliament 's requests .
We must now act not only for the long-term viability of our institutions but also for the credibility of our Parliament .
We must have the courage to shoulder our responsibilities , based on facts available to us .
Remember that when you all vote tomorrow you should be thinking of those who elected you and who would be in favour of a people 's Europe .
I urge the House not to grant discharge on the 1996 budget .
( Applause )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the main criticisms of the implementation of the 1996 budget is that in that year - and with the substantial budgetary appropriations at its disposal - the Commission failed to implement the European Union 's external policies effectively .
Neither the appropriations for PHARE and TACIS - the programmes for Central and Eastern Europe - nor those for the Mediterranean countries showed satisfactory levels of execution .
Only 15 % of the aid for reconstruction for Bosnia - and I am taking this as my example - was actually used .
The main reasons were the Commission 's incapacity to take the required managerial measures in good time , and its inability either to deploy its staff effectively or request the additional resources necessary .
Compared with the United States , the reconstruction aid programme for Bosnia , for example , was grossly understaffed .
The European Union 's inefficiency became legendary in Sarajevo .
Whether we still wish to grant discharge in the light of these facts - which belong in 1996 and can no longer be altered for that financial year - is something which the following criteria must decide : firstly , there must be a real improvement in the way in which the European Union operates in the region ; secondly , comprehensive information about the measures taken should also be provided , so that Parliament has a clear understanding of where improvements have been made and where the weaknesses remain .
It is true that , following my report of April 1998 , the number of staff working on the reconstruction of Bosnia was increased considerably .
The Commission is endeavouring to improve matters locally .
But it is still not clear whether the decentralisation of the management of the programme to the area , which we requested , is allowing targeted monitoring of the project .
As the Court of Auditors recently noted , the results are hard to see .
A large number of European non-governmental organisations - such as Caritas and Evangelisches Hilfswerk - do not qualify for the Commission 's reconstruction aid .
The Commission passes on a large proportion of the money released by Parliament to the United Nations relief organisation , which makes it impossible for us to fulfil our monitoring obligations .
The cooperation of the directorate-general brought in to work on the reconstruction of Bosnia could be improved .
Despite repeated requests , Commissioner Liikanen is refusing to give information about the increase in staff appropriations which has been demanded .
He is either withholding the necessary information from Parliament or giving evasive answers .
Madam President , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has discussed the budget in detail and has tried to come up with some improvements for payments under the Social Fund and in the other social items .
We note that there has been a gradual improvement in the situation over the last financial year , particularly as regards the Social Fund .
However , a number of problems arose at the end of the year because there was not enough money to pay for the projects that had been completed , and this is something we are likely to encounter again with this budget .
That was the first point I wished to make .
I also wanted to thank the rapporteur for the way in which he has examined this whole issue in such depth .
In the past the discharge was perhaps just a formality , and I sometimes have the impression that this is still more or less how it is viewed by the other side of the House , but nevertheless the fact is that we are now having a very detailed and important debate on one of the most fundamental elements of the European Union .
There is one point in the social section on which I am not yet in a position to comment , but which I would still like to say something about .
A letter was written to Mrs Aelvoet and sent via the Internet and was thus accessible to anyone in the House who wanted to read it .
A small section of the letter referred to Leonardo da Vinci , a vocational training programme that comes under the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We have of course not been able to investigate this matter , and even when it was discussed in the committee this aspect of Leonardo was not on the agenda .
I would therefore request that it should certainly be looked at more closely , which is what we intend to do in the committee .
First of all , we need to examine whether 1996 was the only year concerned , or whether there were others .
We are going to have to go into this very carefully .
I cannot comment on the substance of the claims , but I believe they are serious enough for us to look into them very thoroughly .
This is another good reason for agreeing with the rapporteur 's cautious approach to the discharge .
Madam President , I was rather surprised that a rapporteur who talked in such detail about the integrity of the Commission should place so little emphasis on the fact that he was speaking on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , because as far as I know the committee voted in favour of giving discharge , albeit by an extremely narrow majority .
I find the reactions in the House to be quite remarkable , because we now seem to be accepting that rapporteurs should no longer speak as rapporteurs but should suddenly be freed from their responsibilities , which is very strange .
To give discharge or not to give discharge , that is the question , and it is a very interesting one at that .
In March of this year , we postponed the discharge and we laid down five demands for the Commission .
The only question now is whether the Commission has done enough to meet those five demands .
The Committee on Budgetary Control itself has dropped three of the five because they have already been met over the last few months , and Commissioner Liikanen in particular has made exceptional efforts here .
There are two areas left where progress still needs to be made ; Mr Elles has described one of them in detail , but the other goes way beyond the scope of the five demands we laid down last time , and we really cannot expect the Commission to solve its entire staffing policy problem in just a few months .
That would be quite ridiculous , and no one can expect it of the present Commission or its successor .
There is so much to do , and it has already largely resolved one of the most serious scandals , that of taking on staff outside the Commission without proper provision in the budget .
Agreement on this at least has been reached with the Committee on Budgetary Control , but there is still plenty to be done .
There is still the problem of the provision of information .
The flow of information from the Commission to the Committee on Budgets during the discharge procedure must be considerably improved if the discharge is to be meaningful , and I think we need to work towards an interinstitutional agreement to be able to deal with the discharge properly .
But again , these are two problems that could not have been solved in the short time since the discharge was postponed and on which further work will have to be done over the next few months or , when it comes to the staffing problem , even years .
A lot of issues have blown up since the discharge was postponed in March .
Newspapers such as Libération , Focus and Stern have revealed the various scandals and stories of mismanagement , the Court of Auditors ' report on PHARE and TACIS and nuclear safety .
So there was some justification for including all sorts of other issues in the discharge debate , but I think that these are generally things that need to be examined in more detail and should be included in the 1997 discharge procedure which is just beginning .
So we must not be influenced by the tabloid press into changing our conditions for giving discharge .
If we think that the Commission has not done enough to meet our demands , then we can draw the necessary political conclusions from this and dismiss the Commission , rather than postponing the discharge again or refusing to give it or tabling a motion of no confidence .
Simply refusing to grant discharge is far too easy .
Article 206 is very clear on this point and says that discharge must in the end be given .
It may be postponed , but it cannot be refused .
This is why the no-confidence motion is the only instrument left .
This does not alter the fact that the resolution before us is extremely critical of the Commission .
The Socialist Group has tabled a large number of amendments to try to establish a better balance between the decision to give discharge and the text of the resolution .
We hope that these amendments will be approved and that the necessary balance will be created .
Madam President , this Parliament has the task of monitoring how the Commission handles European taxpayers ' money .
The responsibility is ours alone .
The Council merely gives us a recommendation , but we have to decide whether we can give the Commission discharge in respect of its implementation of the budget or not .
However , to make this decision , we need to have the necessary information .
Since this was not the case , we had to postpone the discharge in March ; nor were we in a position to decide in September , as announced .
It is now December , and we still do not have all the information we have requested , despite the Commission 's recently sending us a document - which it considered to be exhaustive - with a view to obtaining the discharge .
On the other hand , Parliament can only have felt cheated , for example , when it received the UCLAF documents on ECHO which had been tampered with .
I ask you : can it be right for the institution under audit to determine on what and to what extent it wishes to be audited ?
It is also about informing the competent judicial authorities .
In two resolutions in February and March , we called on the Commission to inform the competent judicial authorities swiftly whenever there was the suspicion - and I emphasise , suspicion - of fraud .
Until it was ensured that this was the case , discharge could not be given , according to the resolutions .
The Elles report unambiguously states , in paragraph 7 , that this very condition has not been fully complied with .
The ECHO case illustrates this , but so does the MED affair .
We still do not know whether the Commission has handed over all the documents to the judicial authorities .
This puts its credibility at risk and damages the confidence that steps are being taken against cases of suspected fraud in its own ranks .
It is the same story with the Commission 's response to the Bösch report on establishing an Anti-Fraud Office .
The Commission 's proposal of 2 December will have exactly the opposite effect of what it alleges it will achieve .
The resources and powers are poor enough as it is , and they are being eroded instead of consolidated .
When we vote on giving discharge to the Commission on Thursday , you will know the facts , as they are listed point by point in the Elles report .
Each of us then has to be answerable for being able to give discharge under these circumstances .
Based on what I know and after repeatedly scrutinising my assessment , I cannot accept the responsibility for doing so .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Elles .
I think that Parliament has seldom been so focused on the importance of the discharge as it has been in his report , and I welcome this .
My first question is this : what happens if the discharge is not given ?
Would the Commission regard this as a motion of no confidence , or would it simply disregard it ?
It is important for Parliament to know this .
I and my group also think that what the Commission has done since April this year , when conditions were first laid down for granting discharge , is important .
I feel that the Commission has shown good will in trying to solve the problems , but is this enough ?
No , clearly not .
The resolution before us makes a number of very critical points which I think the Commission will take very seriously , because it is Parliament 's right ultimately to decide on whether or not to give discharge , and the deadlines it mentions are going to have to be taken very seriously indeed .
I think that the interpretation given to Article 206 of the Treaty is also of crucial importance .
How far can the Commission go in providing Parliament with information without harming the personal interests of officials ?
I think that we need to have a sort of covenant or , as Mr Dankert said , an interinstitutional agreement so that everyone knows what the position is in future .
Of the points made in the report , I think that the most important are the ones relating to the personal interests of officials and , secondly , the organisation of the Commission itself .
How do officials gain promotion ? What can prevent them from doing so ?
There is a great deal of unease about this issue , and I think it needs to be sorted out as soon as possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if today 's debate on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1996 financial year is one of dramatic intensity and not without passion , it is because , unquestionably , we have gone beyond the bounds what is acceptable .
This debate has gone beyond technical issues to become political in the true sense of the word .
Successive audits by the Court of Auditors , which since 1994 has declined to provide positive overall assurance as to the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the payments for the financial year , have condemned the way in which the Commission manages the operating appropriations allocated to it , whether for humanitarian interventions or the PHARE , TACIS and MEDA programmes or indeed the reconstruction programmes in the former Yugoslavia .
Not only are these appropriations used inefficiently or diverted from their target , but the lack of transparency in management has allowed real misappropriations of funds to the detriment of both the beneficiaries of the programmes and European taxpayers .
The compromises shown on a daily basis in the selection of operators call into question the highest authorities of the Commission , and there are serious flaws in the appointment of officials which cast doubt on the credibility of the institution .
The almost total absence of communication and coordination between the different Directorates-General and services of the Commission increases the lack of transparency in management and prevents monitoring procedures from functioning normally , encouraging the widespread lack of accountability among administrators .
All these shortcomings were thrust into the spotlight by the committees of inquiry set up by the European Parliament , for example on the tragic BSE affair and on fraud in Community transit .
Yet the Commission , instead of dealing with the problem head-on by undertaking a drastic reform of its structures and procedures and opting for transparency , still maintains its haughty or even contemptuous attitude towards the monitoring bodies and towards Parliament .
All the current operational problems were exposed by the European Parliament .
Need we point out that the serious fraud in the management of appropriations for tourism was exposed because one of our colleagues brought an action before the Belgian criminal courts , thus forcing the Commission to provide documents which it had hitherto refused to make available to the European Court of Auditors or to Parliament ?
Officials who contributed to the inquiry are today being punished unjustly .
In the light of the gravity of the facts exposed and the obvious reluctance of the Commission to cooperate with the European Parliament , we must refuse to grant a discharge .
In March we gave the Commission respite by postponing the discharge to allow it to mend its ways .
It only half-listened .
Some of our colleagues today wish to grant the Commission a conditional discharge .
This is pointless and shows great hypocrisy .
Why would the Commission , whose mandate comes to an end in less than a year , achieve in the space of the next three months what it has so delayed doing hitherto ?
And what means would we have to sanction the Commission if it appeared that , once again , it had not followed our recommendations ?
Would we have the political courage to vote for a motion of censure during our last part-session in May ?
Those who propose such prevarication actually want to allow the Commission to escape all political sanction .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , to which the matter was referred at the request of the chairman of the Socialist Group , has given the opinion that any amendment in plenary that goes against the recommendation of the Committee on Budgetary Control , which proposes that the discharge should be granted , should be declared inadmissible . This vote was obtained under dubious circumstances ,
whereas a previous vote had not approved this discharge , the votes being shared equally .
As for Mr Dankert , a former president of Parliament , he has the impertinence to tell us that we do not have the right to vote against granting discharge , although there is a precedent : in 1984 we refused discharge , and we refused it again following a report by Mr Wynn concerning the discharge by the EDF .
When procedural devices are used to prevent a parliament from expressing itself , democracy is in danger .
I am sure that you will not fall into this crude trap , that you will assume your full political responsibilities towards your electorate and that as a result you will refuse to grant a discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the budget for the 1996 financial year .
Imagine , in a private sector company , an executive being granted discharge for its administration when the auditors refuse to testify , as did the Court of Auditors , to the regularity of the accounts .
By granting a discharge under these conditions we would be failing to fulfil our obligations under the Treaties to protect the interests of the taxpayers .
( Applause )
Madam President , we see the discharge process as an eminently political rather than an administrative process .
Nor can this process be analysed in the light of immediate interests , whether or not there are elections in the offing , or the stage which the Commission 's term of office has reached - or , even , whether there might be a motion of censure .
We think that the European Parliament should regard the present discharge process purely in terms of the powers conferred upon it by the Treaty and it should exercise those rigorously and responsibly .
In these terms , the question before us is only what position to take in the light of the irregularities and instances of fraud that have been brought to light - and since we know that the Commission is undeniably responsible and that the Commission has failed to act , in particular to inform the European Parliament and the judicial authorities of the Member States .
We should also ask ourselves whether the answers given by the Commission are enough and whether they are in keeping with the seriousness of what has taken place and whether our minds can be at rest for the future .
For us , the response is a definite ' no ' to all of these questions - for if we did grant the discharge in this present situation not only would the European Parliament be failing outright to assume its responsibilities but , inevitably , it would be seen as jointly responsible for the acts that it has itself been denouncing .
Furthermore , that would be in complete contradiction with the assessments which - despite everything - the Committee on Budgetary Control adopted last week .
Therefore , we believe that the European Parliament , at this moment and given that it does not have the slightest guarantees , should not grant the Commission its discharge .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my group is determined not to grant discharge to the Commission .
It is no longer a question of whether we have enough evidence to do this , but how we judge these facts politically , and what the view of the majority will be .
I say to my fellow Members - and I am also thinking of those sitting in their rooms in front of their television screens - that this is Parliament 's finest hour .
We all need to weigh up the facts , but what standards should we apply ?
Each and every one of us has different loyalties to take into account : loyalties to individual Commissioners , to our party or to our government .
But as Members of the European Parliament , should we put personal , party political or national interests before the interests of Europe ?
Should we disappoint the citizens of Europe who are now expecting Parliament to send out a clear signal ?
Do we not also have a responsibility to the many excellent staff at the Commission ?
Doubt has been cast on their ability to do the job for which they are qualified , just because a few are not called to account .
All too often these days - and in particular from our esteemed colleague , Mrs Green - I hear that Europe would be plunged into chaos if discharge were not given to the Commission .
Quite honestly , I take a very dim view of dramatising the situation .
It only obscures one 's view of the essential point .
What is the essential point in this case ?
Obviously , it is the supervisory role which Parliament is assigned in the Treaty .
The citizens of Europe trust that this role will be fulfilled .
The atmosphere between the institutions is not exactly sweetness and light the whole time , but for all that , to talk immediately in such apocalyptic terms does not help one bit .
So , not so fast , not granting discharge is not a death sentence , but a yellow card for bad behaviour .
But we must send out this signal , so that the public knows that it can rely on Parliament .
Nor does it make any sense to say that we cannot be too hard on the Commission in view of our own problems .
Certainly , we should not get on our high horse , but this is about the Commission 's failings alone .
We will not put an end to them by shamefaced introspection .
Let us judge the Commission for ourselves , and then in the future we will also apply the same standards even more so to ourselves .
In any case , my group will have no part in an organised display of irresponsible behaviour .
That is why we will be voting against giving discharge .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament - demonstrating a sense of responsibility and awareness of its powers - voted by a large majority last March for a postponement of discharge . It did so pursuant to Annex V of the Rules of Procedure , which was perfectly acceptable then ; I fail to understand why it has suddenly become so bad now .
The rapporteur , Mr Elles , had drawn attention to a number of grave problems , and Parliament performed its supervisory role to the full .
It seems to me that since then the Commissioner , Mr Liikanen , and the officials and Commissioners responsible have spared no efforts in attempting to respond to the serious and thoughtful stance adopted by Parliament in accordance with the Treaty .
Over the past few weeks , however , some have been seeking to transform this important and serious exercise into a purely political affair .
We have seen senior officials - people who may well be gone from the Commission a month from now - passing through the Committee on Budgetary Control , denouncing this and that , and the dossiers are mounting up .
Now , if this matter is to be played up into a political issue , where both institutions have everything to lose , well , the time is ripe and that is clearly the preferred option , not of a majority but of a rather odd cross-party minority extending from the far right to the far left of this House , taking in a number of groups on the way .
I doubt that Europe will emerge strengthened .
Madam President , I take an extremely dim view of the fact that the handling of discharge has been transformed into a political issue . Had the other side won 14 to 13 in committee , discharge would undoubtedly have been granted , but since that side was defeated it now becomes an irregular vote .
I believe that it was irresponsible to place us in this situation : either this exercise is not conducted at all , or it is conducted on the basis of a broad consensus in this House , so that the message reaches not only the Commission but also , if I may say so , the governments and public opinion .
We are a fortnight away from the introduction of the single currency and , as it happens , six months away from elections , and I am entirely convinced that Mr Pasty is initiating his election campaign .
His group has always opposed the building of Europe ; fair enough - whether or not this is an anti-Commission election campaign does not change the background .
I do not believe that this is an effective way of conducting our debates .
Our resolution , which will be put to the vote on Thursday , remains critical - as we have always been - and demanding of the Commission ; it calls on the Commission to improve its internal operations , and I am convinced - or rather , I hope - that in his reply Mr Liikanen will tell us his thoughts on some important parts of the document being put to the vote .
But please let us not transform this vote into an exclusively political one , as some have attempted to do .
I would say to certain members of one of the most active groups in this House what the Gospel says : ' Let he who is without sin cast the first stone ' , if I remember rightly .
I think we must be just a little more consistent with what has gone before , and not seek to transform this exercise into a settling of scores , which has no raison d 'être .
Political and national elections are one thing , ladies and gentlemen ; our debate is another !
As permitted by the Rules , Mr Pasty has asked for the floor to make a personal statement .
Madam President , I cannot simply ignore the remarks just made by Mr Dell 'Alba to the effect that my group has always been against European construction .
This is completely incorrect .
To denounce , as I have done , the failures of a European institution in fulfilling its duties towards European citizens and taxpayers , is not , in my opinion , acting against European construction but , on the contrary , in favour of it . After all , the construction of Europe will not be able to progress without sufficient confidence in the European institutions , the Commission of course and also Parliament , and Parliament must exercise its responsibilities .
It has responsibilities under the Treaty and it must exercise them .
Madam President , the majority of the Committee on Budgetary Control propose that we grant a discharge to the Commission for the 1996 financial year .
It does so , as it did in 1994 and 1995 , even though the Court of Auditors has declined to provide positive assurance as to the regularity of the accounts .
Therefore , we are effectively in a situation in which , although the accounts are claimed to be incorrect , we would grant a discharge and we would do so by using procedural devices , by saying that amendments are not allowed , by saying that the Rules of Procedure take precedence over the Treaty , by using devices .
I am in favour of refusing to grant a discharge , for the reasons given in particular by Mr Elles and Mr Pasty .
Refusing to grant a discharge is not to target one Commissioner or another .
It is not to target the Commissioners personally , it is to give a verdict on a system , a system guided by the philosophy that we need to spend more and that not spending more means curbing European construction , a system in which questioning the operation of an institution such as the Commission would be considered as holding Europe back , whereas of course it in fact allows it to advance .
Never before have there been so many irregularities , so many scandals within the Commission .
Never before have we seen so many officials denounce anonymously to Members of Parliament what they see , what they hear .
This is why Parliament must exercise its responsibilities .
It is because some people want to grant it powers that it is not capable of exercising when it has them that I will vote against granting a discharge , and I am grateful in advance to all those who are going to hand a convincing argument to people like me who believe that it is the Member States who can best monitor things , that is , all those who are preparing to vote in favour of the discharge .
Madam President , the Elles report , which provides us with a list - very probably incomplete - of the numerous tricks the Commission was guilty of in 1996 , is of exceptional importance because of the gravity of the facts it contains .
We are aghast at the Commission 's inability to manage huge sums of money , paid , we must remember , by the taxpayers , and at the great skill it has displayed in concealing this .
We are appalled by the contempt in which the Commission holds Parliament .
We are outraged to learn , from the media , that European officials who might have been tempted to reveal to Parliament the criminal acts they have witnessed , are being threatened by their superiors .
Numerous questions addressed by the European Parliament to the Commission , such as those concerning Mrs Cresson directly , or the Périlux affair relating to humanitarian aid , or indeed the dubious management of funds intended for statistical studies , have still not been answered .
But of course the Commission does not have a monopoly on embezzlement .
What can we say about the skulduggery surrounding the construction of the International Congress Centre in Brussels and , even more so - in fact much more so - the construction of the large ' object ' just a short distance away from here , which may one day end up being our headquarters ?
If the Eurosceptics were short of arguments we have certainly given them some .
Mr President , the issues which led to us deferring the approval of the accounts in the spring have for the most part been resolved to our satisfaction .
The questions which the Commission has still not dealt with are all ones which only affect the accounts indirectly , or not at all .
It has therefore now come as a bolt from the blue that an unholy alliance of Conservatives , Liberals and extremists is threatening to reject the accounts for 1996 .
Everyone in the Committee on Budgetary Control agrees that the Commission has acted in a way that is very much open to criticism , but the point now is to join together in finding constructive solutions to the problems that have been revealed .
At worst , rejecting the accounts now may mean that good Commissioners like Mr Liikanen , who is the first Commissioner ever to have shown some interest in clearing things up , will be forced to resign .
In such a case , however , I would like to see one or two others go as well .
At best , it may result in the EU having a lame-duck Commission for six months , a period in which there are more important things on the agenda .
I would just mention the introduction of the euro , the work on enlarging the EU to include the new applicant countries and the forthcoming elections to our own institution , and perhaps that is why this joker is being played here - there are some people who want to make a name for themselves in an election campaign at home , and this issue is being used for that purpose .
The voting yesterday and today shows that there is a clear majority in Parliament in favour of closing the accounts for 1996 .
However , this does not mean that the Commission is now being given a permanent carte blanche for all the years to come .
It means that the European Social Democrats will monitor the Commission night and day in order to uncover the truth for the benefit of the ordinary citizens of Europe .
I would advise the Commission to be on its mettle in the future .
We shall be constantly snapping at its heels , and while we were a watchdog before , now we shall be one with teeth , so that we can clear up all these matters .
The Commission has shown the will to do this , for which I think it should be rewarded , and so everyone else should stop using this for their own personal election campaigns .
Mr President , the European Parliament must remain a place of negotiation and compromise .
Within the interinstitutional balance , this is the place for negotiation and compromise .
We are not a House of confrontation , as a national parliament would be , because we do not have a government here to support or oppose .
The Commission has not been elected by us , but it is our duty to help it work better .
The greatest achievements of this Parliament have come about as a result of cooperation with the Commission .
Parliament and the Commission are the only two truly European bodies and , where possible , we must work in the same direction .
This is not the ideal time to go our separate ways .
We cannot close the door to negotiations with the Commission by refusing to grant discharge .
The Elles report includes a proposal for a work programme in paragraph 26 .
This work programme is the key to the future relations between Parliament and the Commission , but it cannot be implemented in a context of interinstitutional confrontation in which the Commission is condemned or censured - as certain political groups have already said they want to see happen - or , simply , in which the Commission is in a weaker position for what remains of its mandate than it is in today .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we want the Commission successfully to complete its reorganisation - which is obviously essential - if we want it to respond to the many accusations of poor management , and if we want the European Parliament to have greater democratic control over the Community institutions , then we must not close the only door we have left to negotiation .
Therefore , to keep this door open , I would urge you to grant discharge under the same terms as the Elles report was approved in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Mr President , the question of whether or not to grant discharge is one that turns on Parliament 's role as an authority which exercises budgetary control .
It is in fact our credibility which is at stake , because if we give a discharge to the Commission , we shall be assuming joint responsibility for all the outstanding problems .
Our work has not been particularly encouraging in the last nine months , when I think of how we have had to drag information out of the Commission and how we have had to fight for the slightest changes .
The worst thing , to my mind , has been the attempts to disclaim responsibility for various mistakes and scandals .
It has also been disappointing that , although we have repeatedly given new deadlines , there are a great many things which have not been followed up by the Commission .
In my view , this is not a question of wanting to send the Commission packing .
My aim is to ensure that the problems are resolved , that the EU is adapted to new tasks , to the major challenges that are facing us , and that the EU is prepared for and copes with its enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
It is above all the European Parliament which , as the institution that represents our electors , will be held responsible by our taxpayers for how we use money in the EU .
The point is therefore for us to live up to our responsibility and do what we can to bring about a sound and effective administration .
There are some things which have been resolved after a long campaign of pressure .
However , there are still some serious outstanding problems and an ineffective administration .
It is completely unacceptable that two , three or four years should go by before political decisions are put into practice .
There are the problems with staff policy , and there is a lack of internal procedures where irregularities and corruption are suspected .
The proposal which the Commission has put forward regarding changes in UCLAF is an insult to all those who wish to have a clear approach , because what we have here is the Commission wanting to keep full control over what is to be investigated and how it is followed up .
Some people have talked about the consequences of refusing to grant discharge .
I believe that granting a discharge would have the most consequences , because that will not solve the outstanding problems and we would be playing our hand poorly on behalf of Parliament .
If we can now accept what it takes for us to refuse discharge for a second time , and ultimately we will find it hard to explain to our voters how it fits in with our responsibility to ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I do not consider that we are talking about a political issue or about an institutional dispute between the bodies .
Anyone who claims that the subject we are debating is a difference of opinion between socialists and populists , or claims that it just concerns a shift of balance between the bodies , is in a way trying to force the hand of the Members .
Indeed , the Commission is the supranational body best suited to our purposes and is Parliament 's best ally .
Indeed , I could add that the Commission is one of the best bureaucracies I know .
However , it suffers the weakness and , if you will , the isolation of unaccountability . This is brought out very clearly in the Court of Auditors report , which refuses to confirm that all is going well .
And this is where Parliament can play a very simple part , by striving to secure the trust of Europe 's citizens in our institutions and in the building of Europe .
Anything else , I repeat , is rhetoric and blackmail .
Consequently , we cannot approve discharge .
Mr President , of course it is not Parliament 's business to investigate fraud ; that is not what we are doing .
According to the Treaties , however , the European Parliament does have a horizontal remit to check that taxpayers ' money is being correctly spent within the EU .
Political conclusions must then be drawn .
The question we have to ask ourselves is this : has the Commission managed to administer the European taxpayer 's money in the best possible way ?
I think not .
As the days go by , more and more reports of alleged fraud and suspected irregularities are coming in .
Yet the Commission is not coming forward with all the documents - and that is precisely the problem .
Lack of transparency within the Commission , its failure to produce all the information , simply encourage corrupt practices and nepotism . It is the institution itself and ordinary taxpayers who are the losers .
What is needed is access to documents and an open system of administration .
Those who vote to grant discharge are effectively acquitting the Commission of the many allegations made against it . They are flatly dismissing criticism of the way the Commission spends our money .
I am very disillusioned at the way in which the PSE Group seems to be shielding the Commission , tolerating both its cavalier attitude towards taxpayers ' money and its secretive style of operation .
The Green Group and I will naturally be voting against discharge .
Mr President , as democratic nationalists and regionalists , we are unable to give discharge today .
In granting discharge , the European Parliament would be guaranteeing its citizens that their money was being spent as economically and efficiently as possible and that the institutions were doing everything in their power to provide the best possible protection against fraud , corruption and organised crime , and we feel that we cannot , in all conscience , say that today .
The people of Europe have little confidence in the European institutions , accusing them of being overly interfering and wasteful , and of delaying and failing to act effectively when action is required .
Giving the Commission discharge now when everyone knows that there are major abuses and inefficiencies in handling European funding would rightly be seen by the public as a failure to take things seriously .
Our responsibility as representatives of the European Parliament is at stake here .
Giving discharge would be circumventing a number of reasons which Parliament gave earlier for not granting discharge .
The Commission has clearly argued that improvements have been made , which we acknowledge , but there is still a lack of democratic responsibility in the areas of combating fraud , tourism , MED , ECHO and so on .
Need we go on ?
We also feel that the new proposals are not adequate and do not provide appropriate measures for improving administrative and budgetary policy .
Commissioners , you must realise that cronyism and nepotism are clearly endemic , and the public are no longer prepared to tolerate the combining of interests that this involves .
As far as Parliament is concerned , there is still not sufficient access to the information we need if we are to carry out parliamentary controls properly .
The Commission has threatened that if discharge is not given the Commission will resign .
What sort of a threat is that ?
Clearly everyone must take his or her own responsibility here and now .
We are currently being asked whether we can give discharge with a good conscience .
If not , and if there are consequences to be drawn from this , everyone will have to decide for themselves .
There may be a motion of no confidence , or maybe not .
That is not the issue at present .
The Commission can draw its own conclusions , either collectively or individually .
We certainly regret that motions of no confidence cannot be tabled against individual Commissioners .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would say to Mrs Müller that it is always Parliament 's finest hour when we hold debates here , not only when we are discussing Article 206 .
Article 206 stipulates that for the purposes of giving the discharge , Parliament shall examine the accounts - the financial statement and the annual report by the Court of Auditors - for 1996 , so not for subsequent years .
Now you have claimed today , Mrs Müller - and this is something I cannot overlook - that granting discharge is an organised display of irresponsible behaviour .
Those are the very words you used .
I categorically refute this , because granting discharge is not an irresponsible act ; it provides an answer to the following question : is the discharge procedure an act of revenge on the existing Commission , or is it an invitation to establish new systems within the Community to ensure that the mistakes of the past are not repeated ?
I am surprised to see all these colleagues taking the floor today , when I have never before heard them speak during the political debate of the last nine years on developing new procedures .
Mrs Müller , I can tell you that it was the Committee on Budgets which was responsible for making sure that the director-general responsible for tourism at that time was driven from his post , because we entered the appropriations for Commission salaries in the reserve .
Five days later he was gone .
So do not come to me with the same old story where this issue of the discharge is concerned .
We listed six points on 31 March .
Replies were given to four of those six points ; questions do actually remain on the other two , and we need to find answers to them .
The first point is the BATs .
Nobody in this House needs to tell me anything about what the Commission has done in recent years .
It has spent around DEM 460 million - ECU 230 million - on staffing outside the structure of the budget .
Contrary to the opinion being propagated far and wide by the PPE Group , this does not constitute fraud . The fact is that money was illegally taken from the budget for equipment and spent on staffing .
In the 1999 budget procedure , we have an arrangement stating this : transparency is now restored with regard to the ECU 230 million .
If there is a further arrangement on BATs - which is not envisaged at the present time - this will automatically entail disciplinary action being taken within the Commission .
That is the result of politics and not of revenge !
That is why I conclude - on the basis of the list of criteria which we drew up in this House on 31 March - that we can actually grant discharge .
I also believe that from a political point of view - because we are not just bean-counters , we are politicians - it is right to say that we do need a Commission in the Agenda process .
Mr President , this debate has shown that the procedure on the 1996 discharge has been the most difficult ever .
I wonder whether it would have been a good idea to relay it to all the Commission officials .
Last March Parliament was quite correct to defer discharge and gave five reasons for doing so .
Now we have to decide whether the Commission has performed sufficiently well on these five points to merit discharge .
This calls for all of us to make some highly subjective decisions .
We have before us a report which had 106 amendments in committee - a record for the discharge .
Lord Tomlinson and I , the joint rapporteurs on transit fraud , are happy that the Commission has progressed sufficiently on the matter of computerisation .
We do not blame the Commission for the fact that their consultants failed .
Mr Pasty questioned whether there could be a conditional discharge .
Every discharge decision is conditional in that it is accompanied by a report with paragraphs of resolution which the Commission undertakes to deal with on receipt of discharge .
So that is a condition ; and there are many strong paragraphs in the resolution .
I am glad the Committee on Budgetary Control approved discharge last week , albeit by a small margin .
I believe that the House should confirm that vote on Thursday , by granting discharge to the Commission for the year 1996 .
Mr President , if citizens are to have faith in European cooperation , then freedom of information and good governance must prevail .
We are now debating whether to grant discharge in respect of financial management in 1996 . No one would dispute that there are grounds for the tough criticism which Parliament has addressed to the Commission on a number of points .
And there is broad agreement in the House on the additional measures necessary to reassure us , as the elected representatives of Europe 's citizens , that fraud and mismanagement will not occur in future .
There is equal consensus on the need for transparent administration .
The issue today , though , is how we can best achieve the changes we are advocating .
I am convinced that most people , on reflection , would rather see a parliament working positively for change than one which allowed anger and irritation to gain the upper hand .
Parliament 's attitude to date has , I feel , been particularly constructive .
Unflinching examination of the workings of the Commission has initiated a whole range of action and , in our report , we are now laying down a series of clear conditions for granting discharge .
And I doubt that this House will rest until its demands have been met .
We would not however be behaving with any degree of responsibility if we refused discharge or submitted a motion of censure - which would be a logical consequence of such a decision .
Two elements need to be borne in mind . Firstly , forcing the Commission to resign while Europe has weighty matters on its agenda would be very serious indeed .
We cannot afford to deprive the EU of leadership at such a juncture .
Secondly , a vote of no confidence is an indiscriminate instrument .
The entire Commission would be tarred with the same brush - including , for example , Commissioner Liikanen , who has demonstrated both the will and the capacity to come to grips with the problems .
There would be no sense in such a move .
The European Parliament should set aside this meaningless and potentially damaging posturing and rely henceforth on its own ability to engineer true change .
Mr President , I regret that the 1996 discharge procedure is not focused on the matter in hand , but has become a political football in the debate here in the plenary .
The only explanation I can find for the Socialist Group 's coordinator in the Committee on Budgetary Control stepping down is that she cannot reconcile the way this issue is being dealt with in her own group with her conscience .
The facts are clear and sufficient .
This is not about individual cases , but about the organisation of the Commission 's work as a whole , which makes the cases we are talking about here - which have occurred in connection with MED , ECHO , Leonardo and so on - a possibility , which creates favourable conditions for them , and which in principle does not prevent them from happening .
I emphasise quite specifically that this is not about the Commission per se as a whole , but about the criticisms levelled at several Commissioners .
We are thus expecting the Commission to state its position on this .
Mr Samland , it is clear that we are discussing the 1996 discharge .
You emphasised that .
We know that some things have changed in the meantime - and for the better .
But the fact is that there has not been an improvement on every point .
That is why we are not assessing the situation in 1998 ; that will come later .
I ask all Members still in doubt about which way they should vote whether they believe that anyone will take us seriously in the future , when we have debated these serious accusations against the Commission today , if we grant discharge in respect of the 1996 budget ?
To do so would actually be to give the Commission a clean bill of health , a confirmation that everything was in order in 1996 .
The agitation of recent weeks would then actually have been nothing but play-acting .
In accordance with the Treaty , we , the European Parliament - as Mr Pasty said - have a responsibility to the taxpayer to confirm that the Commission is using the appropriations in a proper manner .
I cannot accept responsibility for this and will therefore also be voting against granting discharge to the Commission .
Mr Dankert , the fact that we are having a legal dispute is something which should , in principle , go down as a black mark against us , because it actually shows the spirit of the European institutions and those who created these treaties .
We in Europe are always right and we in Europe always act as we should .
That is the only way I can understand the interpretation , at least the one now preferred by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
What I mean to say is that we must also be able to contemplate doing the opposite of what we are discussing today , namely refusing discharge .
I must ask those Members on the other side of the House in the Socialist Group , whether it is in accordance with democratic principles - at least this is what I have heard - for dissenters within your group , such as Mrs Wemheuer and Mr Bösch , not to have been allocated any speaking time by their group .
In our group anyone can speak , whether they support or oppose granting discharge on the budget .
( Applause ) Mr Samland , if you are accusing us of seeking revenge ...
( Heckling ) ... then of course you really are wide of the mark .
You yourself pointed out in your speech that we only settled the BATs issue in the 1999 budget procedure , so that will only apply in the 1999 budget year .
Today we are discussing the discharge for the 1996 budget !
That is why I see it as populism on your part to accuse us of seeking revenge .
I do not believe that this has anything to do with revenge ; you have to face the facts - we are talking about 1996 .
( Applause )
Mr Blak has the floor for a point of order , which I hope is indeed a point of order .
If it is to make a personal statement , you will have to wait until the end of the debate .
Which Rule are you raising this under ?
Mr President , I am sorry to ask for the floor on a point of order , but the Socialist Group has now been attacked several times ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Since this is not a point of order , you will have the floor at the end of the debate .
Mr President , I think the Socialist Group position is extremely clear and that is why it has been given very forthrightly this morning .
One of the main roles of the European Parliament is to check the Commission to ensure that taxpayers ' money is being spent properly and with accountability .
This is no easy task when we are presented with obstacles of the kind evident during the 1996 budget procedure .
Perhaps the most serious charge of all against the Commission is the lack of democratic accountability in that Parliament has been hampered in its attempts to gain access to information which would point to or dispel allegations of fraud .
The reluctance with which the Commission has forwarded documents gives cause for concern and the attempts to conceal , sometimes admittedly with reason , the names of officials being investigated has descended into farce .
The problems encountered in the execution of the MED and ECHO programmes need major structural answers to ensure systems are in place to avoid a similar situation arising .
There can be no question that the implementation of the external policies has had a negative effect on the EU 's reputation .
Nevertheless , since the postponement of the discharge in March , improvements are evident in some fields including the transit system and the SME sector .
For the European public , fraud is a serious issue .
We need to tackle it seriously or the whole boat will go down because of a few wreckers who are out to destroy the European voyage .
The pressure will in future increase , not decrease , to keep the accounts clean and transparent .
With the firm note of warning in the Amsterdam Treaty , we must heed the Court of Auditors ' view on the global assurance of accounts .
This will be a new formal departure in future .
Lessons must be learned , in particular , as Mr Elles has highlighted , in the field of staff appointments .
But I will be voting along with my political group in accordance with the committee 's position to grant discharge .
I believe that not granting discharge should be linked to rejection of the Commission as whole .
That is what would happen in the business community - the company would be closed .
The Commission has moved a long way since March .
Mr Liikanen , in particular , has been tireless in his efforts to clean up the act and , with the introduction of the single currency on the horizon and the need for an agreement on Agenda 2000 , this is not the time to create turmoil and havoc in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 1996 budget year was certainly not a glorious chapter in the history of the European Union .
The BSE crisis was at its height .
It was also a year of scandals .
What can , what must the European Parliament do to force the necessary changes ?
In spring of this year , Parliament postponed the discharge and drew up a list of demands .
Some - though not yet all - of these demands have been met .
This may not be enough .
So should we refuse discharge ?
Yes , possibly .
But - as today 's debate and the debates of recent days have so clearly shown - for many this is obviously not only about a technical process .
Today 's rhetoric has shown that Parliament wishes to make its mark by saying that we have to send the Commission packing .
At the time of the BSE crisis , we chose the constructive method of work programmes .
After two years , this has - thank goodness - proved to be the right decision .
Today we have come so far that we are now already in a position to discuss reopening beef markets in the Union .
That is why constructive cooperation is also the option we should choose in the discharge procedure .
In my opinion , paragraph 26 in the Elles motion is actually the decisive one .
It contains the Commission work programme .
As several others have already requested , I would also very much like the Commission to tell us its views on paragraph 26 , and when and how it believes it will be able to perform these tasks .
Mr President , I must first say that this year 's discharge procedure has been unlike any other .
For the first time , we have been inundated by special reports from the Court of Auditors denouncing malpractices and irregularities in the Commission 's administration , and giving the figures .
It must be said that we on the Committee on Budgetary Control are neither policemen nor detectives , but faced with the pile of special reports produced by the Court of Auditors , we have a duty to take action .
And I say all this despite the fact that , like other speakers , I too wish to stress the very positive part played by Commissioner Liikanen , who has really tried and is trying , for the first time in history , at least from what I have seen over the past nine years , to give us facts and figures and to see something done about it .
But the problem is that Mr Liikanen cannot achieve much because there is a system in the Commission which ensures that even the best efforts are frustrated .
Commissioner , I doubt whether you will be able to achieve what you will promise us here , in good faith , to do .
That also explains the reactions from within the Commission .
For the first time on the Committee on Budgetary Control , we have accusation made by specific individuals which cannot be disregarded and which must be taken very seriously .
Even the press in Europe is saying that a vote for discharge would be ' suicide du Parlement européen ' - suicide for the European Parliament - and it explains why it regards it as ' suicide ' : some will vote because there is a majority of socialist Commissioners , while others will vote according to supposedly national interests .
I think such a development is quite unacceptable , and that is why at present I believe that refusal to grant discharge would strengthen the hand of those who desire it - the majority of the Commission - so that they can set about internal restructuring .
It would help people like Mr Liikanen and others to achieve what must be done internally , so that we who are Europeans can see ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking James Elles for the efforts he has made to reflect in his document all the reports that have been presented on this issue , which were guided throughout by the invaluable work of the Court of Auditors , the specific assistance provided by UCLAF , the help given by Financial Control - which was not always fully made use of - and the participation of all the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I firmly believe that , irrespective of the result of the final vote , Parliament 's view is and will be unanimous .
The European Commission 's management can and must improve .
Parliament 's reaction to the lesson learned must be unanimous : we cannot continue to approve budgets that meet the Commission 's material demands , yet deny it the human resources needed to ensure that they are properly managed .
Together , we need to be able to find the correct relationship between cost and efficiency .
A reorganisation such as that required of the European Commission can only be tackled with the conviction , the will and the strength of the Council , the Commission and , of course , Parliament .
And that will not be possible while the Treaty and our Rules of Procedure are not aligned , while the responsibility is shared and everyone must be treated in the same way , and while the Commission 's weakness is such that it prevents it from taking any decisions .
I therefore think that , for the credibility of the institutions and the Union itself , it would be better for those in charge , who are ' out on bail ' , to solve the problems created . If it turns out that they do not fulfill the commitments they have made to Parliament , the guarded trust we have put in them in this part-session should be withdrawn .
Mr President , it does not seem to me that the question is being asked in the most usual terms .
Despite the 1984 precedent , despite the wording of our Rules of Procedure , both of which take quite serious liberties with the Treaty , it seems to me that the problem does not lie in giving our opinion on whether to refuse to grant discharge .
Rather , we are in a situation where in fact we either grant the discharge or we do not grant it , and I believe Mr Dankert is right to say this , even if the conclusions I draw from this are politically the opposite of his .
Granting the discharge means closing the dossier .
Not granting the discharge means leaving the dossier open .
Where this issue is concerned there can be no definitive refusal , no refusal that applies for the entire administrative future .
After all , if this were the case , we would have to accept that the discharge procedure , which in fact consists of approving the results of the financial year and accepting the balances that must be carried over to the following financial year , could mean that the accounts presented to us were found to be definitively irregular , which is obviously out of the question .
The question we are faced with for the moment is : should we grant a discharge today ?
The answer is obviously that we should not .
Parliament is not sufficiently well informed of what happened in the course of the 1996 financial year .
We have control over the clocks and the calendar .
We have no reason to stop the clock , to stop taking evidence , when each day brings us more information , true or false , on the financial year under consideration .
I will vote not to grant discharge but that does not mean that I refuse it definitively .
Mr President , the Elles report includes numerous points concerning which the Commission has already stated its position in meetings of the Committee on Budgetary Control and also in written form .
I hope that all Members have had a chance to read our written replies to all the questions about the draft report which we received earlier .
I do not wish to reiterate here what was said in that context , except to correct one point .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , and also Mr Pasty to some extent , gave a wrong interpretation of the Court of Auditors ' report on DAS .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy said that the Court of Auditors did not give a positive declaration on the accounts of the Communities .
That is wrong .
When we talk about the Court of Auditors ' report we must be extremely exact .
Otherwise we abuse the powers of an important external control institution .
What did the Court of Auditors say ?
As far as the accounts are concerned , it gave a positive declaration .
As far as commitments are concerned , it gave a positive declaration .
As far as own resources are concerned it gave a positive declaration .
But where it has not been able to give a positive declaration , is in underlying transactions .
There I would ask you to read the Court of Auditors ' report for this year , which states that in the field of agriculture , these normally take place at the level of final beneficiary in Member States .
They have no impact on the budget because the recovery of the clearance of accounts is on the same level as the level of the errors found .
Secondly , on the structural funds , it says that there the level of error is higher .
They do not always have an impact on the budget but it is still too high .
We must draw the right conclusion .
Together with you , we have tried to change the system for management of structural funds .
For the year 1998 the Commission has accepted the eligibility sheets and will apply the system of corrections to put things right .
But , even more important , now that the whole reform of the structural funds is in the hands of the Council , your opinion is also needed .
We need a clear system where if Member States detect an irregularity , they can transfer the money to a good project .
If they do not , the Court of Auditors or the Commission will recover the money for ever .
We need systems which control well and we must find these systems .
I also want to say that I am ready to receive criticism of the Commission , but that the Court of Auditors has criticised the Member States little more than today 's debate in this area , and also as regards 1996 .
I come now to paragraphs 26 and 27 and also the amendments which were mentioned .
Firstly , a point on the fraud investigation office . I have very little to add to what President Santer said when he presented the proposal on 2 December .
The Vienna European Council last weekend welcomed the Commission proposal and advised the institutions to examine the proposal with a view to taking a decision without delay - I stress , without delay .
I would like to make it clear that , according to the proposal , the office will enjoy full freedom to conduct internal investigations on its own initiative inside the Commission and other institutions .
This legislative procedure which has started offers Parliament and the Council a good opportunity to express their views , which of course will be fully taken into account .
We shall see what will be the final outcome of the legislative procedure .
Point B on the Staff Regulations : the Commission has had some internal social conflicts in that very sensitive and difficult area .
In order to resolve a conflict we set up a reflection group on personnel policy chaired by Sir David Williamson , former Secretary-General of the Commission , and the group submitted its final report on 9 November .
The group was composed of representatives of the trade unions and staff associations and of the administration .
The report is the starting point for modifications of the Staff Regulations .
Before proceeding to legislative proposals to the Council and Parliament , the report must go through an extensive consultation process with the other institutions and with representatives of the staff .
The European Parliament has reiterated its will to be thoroughly consulted in this area .
Consultations with the staff are already under way and interinstitutional consultation has started in parallel .
The College of the Heads of Administration has already discussed the report and the first meeting at the level of the Directors of Personnel for all institutions will be held the day after tomorrow , Thursday 17 December .
Conceptually , the Williamson report can be split into two parts .
The first part is about modernising the European public service .
It covers the re-examination of the structure of the Commission 's human resources , recruitment , training , review of career development and the policies of equal opportunities and non-discrimination .
In addition , a review of the balance of incentives and sanctions will be carried out .
These include both disciplinary procedures and professional incompetence .
The second part concerns the allowances of the officials of the European institutions .
As far as the salaries of officials are concerned , they are guided by the rules which were adopted by the Council in 1991 for ten years and annexed to the Staff Regulations .
On the basis of the interinstitutional consultation and the social dialogue , the Commission intends , by the end of January 1999 , to present an indicative timetable for presenting communications on the reforms to Parliament and to the Council .
The idea is first to present communications on the contents and then , on the basis of the discussion , to make the final proposals for modifications .
Point ( c ) on the evaluation of the Commission 's services - at the end of 1997 the Commission launched a vast evaluation or , as is often said , screening of its services .
As a result we will have a clear picture of present missions , resources and working methods of each directorate and unit of the Commission .
The report from each DG will be ready at the beginning of next year , which is obviously the timetable you wish , and the conclusions from this exercise will be drawn during the first half of 1999 .
The President of the Commission has given a commitment to present to the next designated President , on the basis of the evaluation , a global concept of how to organise the portfolios of the Commissioners and how to structure the directorates-general in accordance with political priorities .
That is a major task .
Much depends on the will of the President designated .
But what is important is that the President of the Commission is committed to doing this .
I agree with you that the borderlines of the tasks of the European public administration need to be clearly defined .
In any case the Commission must retain the power of decision and control of its activities .
Regarding point ( d ) of paragraphs 26 and 27 on nominations , two principles should guide the nomination of officials within the Commission , the European Parliament , the Council and the other institutions , namely , autonomy of the institutions and transparency .
The principle of institutional autonomy is established by the Treaty and the case law of the Court of Justice .
The Commission considers that this principle is of fundamental importance in ensuring its independence in the spirit of the Treaty .
The rules for nominations are laid down in the Staff Regulations which are common to all the institutions .
In the spirit of transparency a report on nominations of members of the Commissioners ' cabinets has already been forwarded to Parliament as a follow-up to Parliament 's resolution on the first reading of the budget .
The Commission is willing to act in all transparency in the field of nominations while respecting the provisions of the Staff Regulations .
On the difficult issue of relations between Commissioners and the services , the Commission is currently preparing a code of conduct which will further clarify relations between the Commissioners , their cabinets and directorates-general .
The proposal for the code of conduct will also be transmitted to the next designated President of the Commission .
A more general code of conduct on the ethical principles of officials is also under preparation .
The Ombudsman has given us important guidance in that area .
The qualifications for each post within the Commission are laid down in advertisements for vacant posts .
I agree that experience in management should be made a central criterion for any appointments of senior officials .
This should include experience in both financial and human resources management .
Here I agree with the criticism that we must do better .
Too often in the past expertise has been learned in the rather narrow field of important dossiers , however , management of a large service requires knowledge of the dossiers and the capacity to manage resources and budgets .
In this context I should like to mention that if the budget is adopted on Thursday , as the Committee on Budgets proposes , we will introduce a major management training programme next year which will be obligatory for every official working in a management position .
Regarding the Financial Regulation , last July the Commission adopted a working document on global revision of the Financial Regulation .
On the basis of interinstitutional consultation , where we are still waiting for comments , the Commission will formulate a legislative proposal for global reform in 1999 .
As to the Financial Regulation and the personal responsibility of the Commissioners , the Legal Service of the Commission has taken the view that Members of the Commission have personal financial liability when they act as authorising officers deciding on entering into commitment of expenditure .
In point ( f ) , Parliament calls for Commissioners ' declarations of their financial interests to be transparent and publicly available .
The Commission accepts Parliament 's request .
Another point which has been taken up by two or three speakers is the agreement on the exchange of information between institutions .
The Commission views this proposal positively .
During this debate we have heard a lot of references to letters , press articles , rumours and even parliamentary questions .
Some of them may be true but many of them could also be totally false .
In the spirit of transparency , it is very important that Commission officials are invited to appear before the Committee on Budgetary Control whenever a reply is needed .
If you are not happy , say so .
It is very difficult to fight against false information if you do not have the opportunity to respond .
You know what I mean .
For us , not all the work has been done .
This report is on the year 1996 .
Many issues come from the past .
Much remains to be done .
We must improve financial management ; we must get good value for money for European taxpayers .
We have a huge task in front of us .
We need a strong Commission for these tasks in negotiations for Agenda 2000 .
Thank you , Mr President , for also giving me the opportunity to thank Mr Liikanen for his comments .
I should just like to make one point clear : whether we grant the discharge or not , I still hope that the Commission will make these efforts , irrespective of how we vote .
I should also like to point out a discrepancy in the translation of Mr Elles 's report .
It is in the English version .
Paragraph 23 has not been changed to reflect the result of the vote and the words ' give / refuse ' still appear there .
The ' refuse ' and the stroke ought to be deleted .
That is how we voted .
I would ask you to check this in the other language versions too .
That will be done , Mrs Theato .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 9.30 a.m.
Thank you , Mr President , for giving me the chance to correct one or two misunderstandings .
Mr Tillich made a number of comments about our practice with coordinators .
I would like to say that the situation in the Socialist Group is that if someone is chosen as a coordinator , they look after the interests of the group and their colleagues , not their own personal interests .
If a coordinator steps down because he wants to operate in a different way , another coordinator is chosen , and in this case I was selected .
I would like to say that I am very disappointed that another group is attacking us in such a personal way .
If a Member does not wish to be a coordinator , they are released and can step down , and the other person takes over .
That is democracy , and anything else is not !
Mr President , with regard to this debate , it was announced that the vote on the interpretation given by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure on voting rules would take place at midday .
We were also told that the document would be available from 9.00 a.m. or 9.15 a.m. today .
I went to the Distribution Service barely 5 minutes ago with some of my colleagues , and they have no idea whatsoever where this document is !
No one has it .
It would be desirable , Mr President , for us to have copies of documents before voting on them , otherwise our task will be made extremely difficult .
Mr Monfils , I can tell you that the interpretation of the Rules of Procedure is included in the Minutes of yesterday 's sitting , on page 24 , so I would ask you to look at the Minutes .
Mr President , during this debate , the rapporteur spoke for seven and a half minutes .
Since rapporteurs normally speak for five minutes , I presume that the last two and a half minutes correspond to the speaking time for his group .
I think that it would have been much wiser to separate the two speeches by Mr Elles , because his final remark was to call on the House to refuse to grant discharge .
This is something that Mr Elles can obviously do in a personal capacity but as rapporteur , it contradicts the vote by the Committee on Budgetary Control , and I would like this to be recorded in the Minutes .
As you know , Mr Colom i Naval , it is up to the groups to distribute speaking time and it is common practice , where appropriate , to extend the speaking time which a rapporteur has in that capacity by part of the speaking time allocated to his group .
Clearly , a rapporteur is free to organise his speaking time and set out his comments as he sees fit .
Mr President , I took the precaution of submitting my question in advance and would have liked it to be recorded .
But first I would like to make a personal statement .
Commissioner Liikanen said that I gave a wrong interpretation of the Court of Auditors ' report .
The only thing I said was that the Court of Auditors had not given a positive declaration on the regularity of the accounts for the 1996 financial year .
I am not the only person who said this , Commissioner !
Paragraph 1 of the resolution of the Elles report points out that , for the third year in succession , the European Court of Auditors has declined to provide positive global assurance as to the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the payments for the financial year .
I am only repeating what was stated in the report .
I would like to raise a point of order at the end of this item , Mr President .
I should simply like to clarify something once more for Mr Colom I Naval 's sake .
It was clearly stated on my list of speakers that Mr Elles would have five minutes as rapporteur plus two minutes for the group .
This is just for the record .
I do not think that he in any way intended to be misleading .
Mr President , I would like to say to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy that the phrase in the Elles report is correct .
It talks about underlying transactions but you are talking about the accounts .
There is a difference .
The Court of Auditors gives four different opinions on the accounts , which are positive , and on payments and underlying transactions , which are not positive .
I hope that they will be in the near future .
Mr President , I would like to make a request pursuant to Article 3 ( 2 ) of Annex V of the Rules of Procedure .
A number of amendments to the Elles report were declared admissible , exactly 22 according to the information I have been given .
Others were declared inadmissible .
It is your responsibility to apply the annex to the Rules of Procedure , which provides that amendments must be forwarded to the Committee on Budgetary Control so that it can deliver its opinion .
I would ask you to confirm that the amendments will be given to the committee at this afternoon 's meeting so that it can give its opinion on the 22 amendments which , moreover , were tabled by all the political groups .
There are 11 from the Socialist Group , the very people who wanted to prevent us from tabling amendments on the operation , and from practically all the other groups in Parliament .
The matter will in any event be considered before the vote on Thursday , you may be assured of that .
1999 General Budget
The next item is the report ( A4-0500 / 98 ) by Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Viola , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 1999 , as modified by the Council ( C4-0600 / 98 ) , and on draft Letter of Amendment No 1 / 99 to the preliminary draft budget for 1999 - Section III Commission ( C4-0666 / 98 ) .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to begin by thanking all those who have helped me in this House for their work throughout the 1999 budgetary procedure .
I would particularly like to thank those in the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets whose untiring work has allowed us to reach this second reading as anticipated .
I thank you all .
The 1999 budgetary procedure is coming to an end with the European Parliament 's second reading .
I would like to give a brief assessment of it but , more particularly , I would like to look once again at an essential question .
We began this procedure calling the 1999 budget a ' bridging budget ' to the year 2000 and the new financial perspective .
The 2000 budget should represent the basis for the new financial perspective , but the 1999 budget also needs to be rigorous while meeting the priorities of the European Parliament .

These guidelines involved certain essential conditions , one of which was the mandate given to Mr Colom by Parliament to negotiate the new financial perspective and to introduce an instrument of flexibility in it .
Therefore , at its first reading , Parliament introduced a strategic amendment that increased non-compulsory expenditure and payment appropriations in accordance with paragraph 17 of the current Interinstitutional Agreement to act as a safeguard . This aimed to guarantee , on the one hand , that the Council negotiated an instrument of flexibility and , on the other , if this new agreement was not reached , that the level of non-compulsory expenditure would not be reduced , because this would put at risk Parliament 's ability to fund its own priorities .
The bridge that was thus built by the European Parliament was not accepted by the Council as we had hoped , but I would point out that we have actually achieved something .
We have succeeded in building a new culture and a new confidence , because it appears that the Council , through its desire to negotiate , is accepting the idea of Parliament as a genuine political interlocutor .
The Council held its second reading on 24 November , after the traditional conciliation , with a common approach with Parliament to the global aspects of the budget , but without making any progress on the strategic amendments .
I would like to review the various categories of the Council 's reading and contrast them with Parliament 's position before its second reading .
I said in my first speech , before the first reading , that I was somewhat disappointed with what had happened with the ad hoc procedure for agriculture since we had not managed to hold a serious debate in July , as Parliament would have liked .
Nevertheless , I must point out that the ad hoc procedure before the Council 's second reading has shown itself to be a very valid instrument since the Council has agreed with Parliament 's views about not increasing agricultural expenditure .
The Council has also allowed Parliament an agricultural reserve , of which EUR 20 million are destined solely for agri-environmental measures , which are a priority for the European Parliament .
So - to give my shortest speech in this respect - as far as Category 1 , agriculture , is concerned , Parliament 's position is more or less in line with the Council at its second reading .
I believe that we have reached an agreement that both parties can accept .
Moving on to Category 2 - which in the financial perspective is usually called ' the Edinburgh package ' - I must nevertheless say that Parliament is introducing a ' package amendment ' comprising a reserve of EUR 1 500 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 250 million in payment appropriations , as well as a reduction in payment appropriations of EUR 500 million .
This is based entirely on the information provided by the Commission in September on the situation regarding the non-implementation of the Structural Funds .
In all the dialogue and conciliation discussions we have held with the Council , this was never mentioned .
It was never brought up for discussion as it did not pose any problems .
Surprisingly , the Council accepts the reduction but rejects the reserve for the Structural Funds . This means a change to Category 2 that leaves Parliament free at second reading to take a majority vote in the House .
Yesterday , the Committee on Budgets voted against reintroducing the reserve but in favour of reintroducing the payment appropriations because , as I have said , the amendment was an overall package and a reduction in payments does not make any sense given the delicate situation that exists as far as payments are concerned .
It loses all justification if there is no reserve .
As regards Category 3 , I told the Council at first reading that this was the ' Cinderella ' of all the categories .
It involves the Union 's internal policies , the policies with a European dimension , and I must say that it seems as though the prince , with his glass slipper , has found Cinderella and turned her into a princess . Under the agreement we negotiated with the Council on this category the Council has accepted practically all of Parliament 's priorities .
Some lines have even been increased by 49 % .
It is worth pointing out that we reached an agreement on the fifth framework programme on research , and included sections of the policies under the third pillar in Category 3 , as Parliament had wished , thus anticipating the Treaty of Amsterdam . The Council has also agreed with Parliament about maintaining the funding of the Socrates and Youth for Europe programmes .
I believe that this is an extremely satisfactory result for Parliament and I would like to thank the Council for its willingness to negotiate . We will thus be happy to vote in favour of this category on Thursday .
I would now like to look at what is , in my opinion , a serious political issue .
It is a serious matter that in Category 4 , Parliament has been forced to reduce the PHARE programme .
It is serious because the political message that this sends out is not pleasant either for Parliament or the Council , but it was necessary in the interests of budgetary efficiency and in the light of the overall operation of the programme .
In this case , we are providing for EUR 150 million less than the level of funding fixed in Cannes , but the Council has agreed to Parliament 's proposal to fund its priorities in terms of external actions from this reduction in the PHARE programme .
In Category 5 , Parliament is maintaining its position on the creation of a specific line for pension funds .
I believe that it is a shame that during the entire budgetary year we have not been able to make even the slightest progress on this issue , which is necessary so that the Union 's officials can have guaranteed pensions .
After the conciliation of 24 November we still had not reached any agreement with the Council on the strategic amendment , and a new conciliation procedure began on 8 December . It was a historic occasion because this was the first time in 10 years that a conciliation meeting took place after the Council had held its second reading .
I would like to thank the Presidency for its desire to keep the doors open and to agree to have Parliament as a political interlocutor , as I said at the beginning .
After the outcome of the conciliation procedure I , as rapporteur , am withdrawing the strategic amendments for second reading .
However , as in all negotiations , we know that both parties are leaving something behind .
I would have liked - as I believe the whole of Parliament would have liked - to achieve something more concrete .
I recognise that the planned timetable has not been adhered to .
We had thought that in Vienna we would have something more specific on the table , which would in turn have made a more specific conciliation procedure possible .
However , I believe and I hope that Mr Colom will go into more detail in the text of the agreement we have reached , and I think that there will be instruments to provide flexibility .
We have obtained a historic unilateral declaration from the Council , which is finally going to do what it has promised , and I believe that that may be enough to allow us to reach an agreement in the course of the negotiations .
Mr President , on Thursday Parliament is going to vote at second reading on a budget that complies perfectly with the current Interinstitutional Agreement .
It is a budget that will demonstrate that budgetary rigour is entirely compatible with the European Parliament 's political priorities , but , in particular , it is a budget that is compatible with the interests of the people of Europe .
Mr President , I should like to begin by expressing my satisfaction that we have managed once again this year to approve the budget for the other institutions with just one reading , given that all of our amendments have been accepted by the Council .
This is a sign of harmony and successful cooperation , which I hope will be repeated in future years as well .
The motion for a resolution , on which we shall vote on Thursday - which shows that there are no particularly significant or outstanding problems - touches on certain matters which have already been addressed before , the aim being to establish some general rules enabling solutions to be found for certain unresolved problems during the course of next year 's budgetary procedure .
Here , taking up what Mrs Dührkop Dührkop said , I do regret that the Council has rejected the possibility of setting up a pension fund for staff of the European institutions .
Parliament views this as a missed opportunity to solve a problem which should be dealt with as a matter of urgency .
We are now waiting for the Commission to present , by 31 March , a proposed reform of the pension system , because this remains a priority not only for Parliament but also for all the other bodies of the European Union .
Another outstanding problem , to which the resolution refers , is the translation work of the Court of Justice .
The Court needs to provide us with concrete proposals as a basis for thorough discussions leading to the adoption of measures to facilitate its translation work .
We therefore call on the Court to devise a computer-assisted translation system with a view to overcoming the backlog of bureaucratic and administrative texts , and thereafter to seek other ways of relieving the clearly onerous workload of the lawyer-linguists .
It must be said from the outset that the budgetary authority is not in a position to solve the Court 's wide-ranging problems through an intensive recruitment policy , which would be virtually impossible over a single budget year ; it would however be possible if it were staggered according to a multiannual plan .
The European Parliament - and this is another noteworthy aspect of the resolution - also wishes to make a point to the Committee of the Regions , given that the problem of the forthcoming expiry of the Secretary-General 's term of office has arisen ; the possibility of falling back on Article 50 has been mooted , with considerable financial implications , as it is estimated that the operation has already cost ECU 320 000 .
Our resolution obviously stresses the need to find alternative solutions which are financially acceptable , technically feasible and will avoid a vacuum in the leadership of this body , whose workload is set to increase as a result of the new Amsterdam Treaty .
Furthermore , the resolution underlines the need to carry forward the existing policy on buildings , which amounts to taking on rapidly the ownership of the buildings used by the various Community institutions , as well as the relevant payments .
Yesterday we noted with satisfaction the adoption of the supplementary and amending budget and the availability of the sizeable sum of EUR 150 million , which will serve - for example - to bring forward the purchase of D3 . This operation will generate an estimated saving of EUR 40 million over the next ten years .
This policy has already borne fruit and , if it is pursued further , will bring additional , appreciable savings for the Union 's budget .
We are therefore pleased that our amendment allowing the construction of the new building for the Court of Auditors was accepted .
Now that the debate on this first EU budget in euros is coming to an end , Mr President , we can say that we are satisfied to have drawn up a rigorous and well-balanced budget for the other institutions , one which does justice to the budgetary efforts made by the Member States .
I should like to end by thanking my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets for all their help and , above all , the staff of the Commission for their much-needed assistance with our work .
Mr President , this year 's debates on the budget are certainly taking place against a rather tempestuous background .
Sometimes the sea does become calm , and happily it does so before it is too late .
That is true to a certain extent , in any case , of the part of the budget for which the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy is responsible , which has been in considerable turmoil , in particular where the implementation of human rights programmes is concerned .
Fortunately , Parliament and the Council agreed a compromise formula for technical assistance which meant that the legal bases issue could be settled .
This allayed our main concerns with the 1998 supplementary budget and the 1999 budget .
Of course we would have liked to have seen more , but what is important is for these issues to be resolved this year .
For it would have inflicted great damage on the European Union if in this year of all years , the 50th anniversary of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights , and in this particular week , when we are awarding the Sakharov prize for the tenth time , there had been difficulties here .
No one will deny that improvements can be made , but any support is welcome where human rights and work on forging links with the other countries of the world are concerned .
I have just returned from Latin America , where I was once again able to see the value of this work for myself , whether it is election supervision , human rights or the work of our institutes .
We will be monitoring the implementation of the 1999 budget very carefully with these points in mind .
I should , however , also like to express my particular thanks to Mrs Dührkop Dührkop for her excellent cooperation in this matter , which has shown once again that Parliament is aware of the significant role it can play on these difficult issues , and is supporting a cause across all national boundaries , which all of us , as good democrats , need to fight for throughout the world .
Mr President , the agriculture heading has not given rise to any particularly heated debates during the various phases of our examination of the 1999 budget - is this the calm before the storm , or have procedures improved ?
The latter , I think .
By continually analysing expenditure in the current year and allowing special scope in the budgetary procedure for drawing the appropriate conclusions at the right moment for the new budget , we manage to prevent too much from being earmarked for agriculture , while also having the certainty that if things develop badly , sensible provisions will be made .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture , I have helped to make sure that the procedure introduced last year whereby the Commission sends notification of amendments between the first and second readings has been followed to the letter this year too , and we have received specific proposed amendments to a considerable number of budget items .
A total of EUR 513 million have had to be added to the original total for Category 1 .
The Council and the European Parliament delegation agreed , however , not to include this relatively small adjustment from the draft budget in the total budget amount for Category 1 , but to revise the various items in the earlier total on the basis of the most recent estimates .
The Commission then put forward the required proposals .
This is in line with Parliament 's desire not to solve the problem by making a linear reduction , cutting a small percentage from all agricultural expenditure in the budget , but by making specific reductions to a number of items .
Furthermore , the fact that a surplus of ECU 1.4 billion has now been identified in Category 1 of the 1998 budget is an important factor for revising the rather poorer outlook for 1999 , and on the basis of our close observation of market developments up to now , we can already tell that we are going to have to live with a little uncertainty about agricultural expenditure in the future .
But this margin can be considerably reduced , compared with the excessive margins of agricultural spending in the past , when very considerable amounts would be held over and repaid to the Member States every year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have not entered the appropriations for security within and around the buildings of the European institutions in the reserve .
Nevertheless , I should like to point out that action urgently needs to be taken here .
As the rapporteur on the budget for the Economic Affairs Committee , I think that we can be very pleased with the benchmark data for the next budget .
In its proposal , the Commission had already allocated sufficient appropriations to the principal economic lines .
Parliament has successfully defended these appropriations .
Title B5-3 on the internal market was increased by EUR 13.8 million , and title B5-5 on the labour market and technological innovation by EUR 12.2 million .
I am particularly pleased with the agreement reached on stimulating small and medium-sized enterprises .
The line designated for this purpose , B5-512 , was increased by a full 60 % .
However , we are also looking at the interrelationships and indicators for a healthy overall economy in a wider context .
Therefore , education and the youth exchange programmes are important for providing human resources , which our internal market so urgently needs to remain competitive .
Title B3-1 - Education , vocational training and youth - was allotted additional appropriations of EUR 136.4 million , and even though I have great sympathy for the demand expressed by European youth organisations for a further increase , in this budget we have in fact paved the way for these education and vocational training initiatives actually to be continued and extended .
For the economy , the principle of austere budget management is , after all , of particular importance .
Let us not forget that in just over two weeks , 11 countries will join together in a currency union .
I believe that this is a basis for a successful Europe !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . I should first like to thank our colleagues in the Budgets Committee and the rapporteur for making it possible for this complicated budget procedure and the conciliation procedure on research to at last be brought to such a successful conclusion , with the result that we shall be voting on the research programme today at midday , and then on Thursday we will be able to enter the appropriate figures in the budget , which means that our research policy will continue to run , uninterrupted , next year .
I should , however , like to draw your attention to a problem : in its explanatory statement on the draft budget for the second reading , the Council pointed out that , in its opinion - and as far as I know the Commission has endorsed this view - the remarks on the budget lines were only intended as an indication , meaning that they are not binding for the purposes of implementation .
In practice , this would mean that all the specific tasks and objectives which Parliament has included in the remarks , and the appropriations and percentages accordingly placed in the reserve , would , at best , be pipedreams .
I am thinking in particular of research .
We have few budget lines , but each has a large amount of money , and our remarks here are to be treated only as an indication .
I do not think that this is the end result of the budgetary procedure which we in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy had in mind .
Mr Liikanen , I have just listened carefully to your speech on the Elles report .
Here too , you could send out a clear signal for Parliament .
Our remarks are not pipedreams ; they are entirely genuine demands made by Parliament in the budgetary procedure . I make the same claim on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , that is , that our remarks on managing the appropriations of the fifth framework programme of research should not be taken merely as an indication , but should be binding .
I have prepared an amendment to the motion to this effect on behalf of my group , and hope that it will also meet with the agreement of the House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the rapporteur of the Committee on External Economic Relations , I should like to make just two points today , which we were not able to deal with in October at the first reading .
We had submitted several amendments concerning the remarks for trade cooperation with Latin America , Asia and South Africa , also including investment .
Our proposal was to involve economic and social groups , chambers of commerce and industry , employers ' organisations , unions , consumer organisations and environmentalists in these programmes .
We made these proposals , which are in fact modelled on the ACP States , amongst others , - so they are on the same lines as the provisions which apply to the ACP States and Turkey - in order to secure greater participation of economic and social groups in the work of reconstruction .
Unfortunately , the Budgets Committee did not accept our proposals , although they would not cost a penny and do in fact reflect a broad consensus within the Committee on External Economic Relations , having been drafted by the various groups within the committee .
My main request to the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , and also to the rapporteur , would be to incorporate this idea , possibly in the motion .
These are sensible proposals and they correspond largely to what is already common practice in the ACP States .
I should also like to make a second comment .
It will only be possible for us to open up the Japanese market if young managers - above all those from small and medium-sized enterprises - are educated about the specific features of the market and also have the opportunity to adapt to them .
Until now , such initiatives have been promoted to great acclaim by the European Union , making it possible for training and instruction to be given to between 30 and 40 managers every year .
This proposal was not taken into account because there is no legal base at the present time .
I hope that the Commission will table the necessary proposals and that we will have a legal base as soon as possible , so that we can reinstate this budget line .
Mr President , I am delighted that the Council has agreed to our proposal to increase the environment budget , making more money available for the fifth action programme on the environment , LIFE and other programmes .
This is all very well , but the fact remains that the environment receives only 0.2 % of the overall budget , which is why we are having to think about integrating the environment into other sectors .
For this reason , I am most surprised that the Council has not approved the very proposals that were designed to ' green ' the budget , and the Committee on Budgets is therefore retabling five amendments relating to the environment aspects of the Structural Funds , environmental protection and the allocation of Structural Fund money to environmental protection under the habitats and birds directives .
We would also like to see at least 10 % of the MEDA funding going to environmental projects .
A better environment begins with each of us , and this is why I have tabled an amendment to the resolution - also accepted by the Committee on Budgets - on the ' greening ' of the institutions themselves .
The Council , the Commission , the Committee of the Regions and Parliament itself can still do a great deal about saving energy , recycling waste and mobility .
If we can do this in a credible way , we shall be setting an example for the Member States and we can promote a genuine environment policy .
Finally , I am pleased that the Council has also agreed to increase the budget for consumer and health policy .
I regret the fact that it has put both amounts in the reserve , but fortunately , thanks to our intervention , the Committee on Budgets is to take the amount for consumer policy out of the reserve again , and the legal basis for this is expected shortly .
It is a pity that we were not able to achieve the same thing with the health-care policy .
I shall finish there , Mr President .
Thanks to our excellent cooperation with the rapporteurs , Mr Viola and Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , I am satisfied with the overall result .

Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I would like to begin by thanking Barbara Dührkop Dührkop , the general rapporteur , for her tremendous help and support .
I would also like to thank my own group coordinator , Terence Wynn , and my committee secretariat for their help and encouragement .
As a committee we have not achieved everything that we wanted to achieve but , at the end of the day , we have achieved a budget that we can certainly live with .
I do , however , have a number of concerns .
First of all in relation to the budget heading on tropical forests , I note that the Commission proposals to increase payment appropriations , i.e. by 5 million euros , were not accepted by the Commission .
Therefore , I would expect that the Commission , by one means or another , to be able to transfer and agree to the topping-up appropriations which might be necessary as far as our external policy is concerned .
Secondly , on gender , I hope that next year we will see an increase in the budget heading .
We have seen a decrease this time which was gravely disappointing as far as my committee is concerned .
Finally , on the issue of land mines , there were numerous arguments about the number of budget headings we should have .
I am informed that there are currently something like 12 or 13 budget headings that mention land mines .
I am told by the Commission that they have plans to bring all of these under one heading and that they are proposing a sum of something like 35 million euros to be spent on mine clearance and rehabilitation programmes .
I very much welcome this , it has been something that the Development Committee have pushed forward for some time .
The sum of 35 million euros , if we can keep this for a number of years , will go a long way to clearing the world of what has been an horrendous scourge for millions of people in the developing world .
I would like to express my thanks once again to the general rapporteur .
It has been an extremely successful budget procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I can confirm , on the occasion of the second reading of the budget , that I am as satisfied as I was at first reading .
In this respect , I would like once again to thank our rapporteur Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and the members of the Committee on Budgets and their chairman Mr Samland , who were much more sensitive to our committee 's demands this year than they were last .
I would like to highlight three particular reasons for my satisfaction , all of which are priorities for the Committee on Civil Liberties .
Firstly , we asked for measures to be continued and for an increase in resources to combat violence towards women and children , sex tourism and criminal use of the Internet .
The solution that was arrived at for these items is satisfactory .
Secondly , we wanted measures to be continued and resources to be maintained for the integration of migrants and the fight against racism and xenophobia .
As you know , ladies and gentlemen , these budget headings were in a very delicate position because of the absence of a legal basis .
The solution that has been arrived at here is also satisfactory .
However , our main reason for satisfaction is that for the first time , at Mr Brinkhorst 's insistence , the Committee on Budgets yesterday approved the creation of a European fund for refugees .
I must thank Mr Brinkhorst for this .
Everyone knows the importance of the refugee problem for the European Union , and everyone also knows that the Council has committed itself to taking measures with a view to equal burden sharing , and this European fund for refugees is the best way of achieving this .
Consequently , I do not understand why the Council persists in rejecting this instrument , which is both necessary and sound .
Mr President , I should like to pay the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , a compliment .
She has worked very hard on her report during this budget year .
I should like to thank her for her ready cooperation , and I also extend thanks to the Commission and the Austrian Presidency .
From the point of view of the Committee on Budgetary Control , it is apparent that we still have much to do .
The very fact that in the 1998 budget we have still overestimated agricultural expenditure by ECU 1.4 billion shows that there is scope for further measures here .
Despite our actually brokering an agreement with the Council in the 1998 budgetary procedure to reduce the allocation which the Commission had entered in the budget , we still have a surplus .
That is why I also welcome the fact that the Commission has used a new kind of justification for utilised , non-utilised and partially utilised budget lines in the Notenboom procedure .
I should like to call on the Commission and request that it continue to do this in the monthly reports during the implementation of the 1999 budget .
This would mean that the European Parliament would be better able to monitor expenditure on a month-by-month basis .
The individual committees would be more involved in monitoring appropriations and the process of implementing the budget .
Communication between Parliament and the Commission would improve .
Allow me to make just two further comments on the strategic reserve .
Overall , we are certainly not exactly ecstatic about the result .
We can , however , credit the European Parliament with success on one count .
The Council has realised that it has to respect the European Parliament as a partner and as one arm of the budgetary authority .
In the future , it will no longer be enough simply to take account of the interests of individual Member States within the Council ; the will of the European Parliament will also have to be respected .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , I would like to add our appreciation to that already expressed for the rapporteur , Bárbara Dührkop .
The Committee on Fisheries has collaborated with the general working party for the 1999 budget during the various stages of the budgetary procedure , mainly through the original draftsman for the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Apolinario , who is no longer a Member of this Parliament .
Although the only amendment tabled by the Committee on Fisheries is an amendment proposing a slight increase in appropriations for monitoring actions , we would like to take this opportunity to repeat a series of priorities that form the core of the committee 's actions .


I will list them in no special order : firstly , actions that monitor actual compliance with Community rules ; secondly , specific actions in the areas of non-industrial and inshore fishing ; thirdly , research , which is closely linked to the development of the fifth framework programme ; fourthly , the Structural Funds , an issue we have already discussed on many occasions ; and finally , the question of international agreements , which I would like to consider for a moment .
As far as international agreements are concerned , the appropriations proposed for the 1999 financial year are lower than those for 1998 , both in commitment appropriations and in payment appropriations . Undoubtedly , there is justification for this reduction , but we would like to make an important point here .
The Committee on Fisheries would draw the attention of the authorities to the difficulty that will arise , when preparing the budget for 2000 , in relation to the agreement with Morocco . This runs out on 30 November 1999 and costs EUR 120 million every year , practically half of the total for this heading .
The budgetary authority will have to show its capacity for sound management in order to ensure that the necessary budgetary appropriations are available to implement a new agreement , while remaining discrete about this amount so as not to endanger the negotiations with Morocco .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , who was very receptive to the proposals from the Committee on Women 's Rights , which sought , above all , to enshrine the concept of mainstreaming in the budgetary procedure , in other words to incorporate equal opportunities for men and women into all European policies .
We had some degree of success , as can be seen from extensive correspondence with 12 Members of the Commission .
We have recorded this in two working documents .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights , my second priority - alongside mainstreaming - was to maintain special support measures for women in the fourth action programme and in the Structural Funds .
I emphasise once again that women are not a marginal group ; we represent 50 % of European citizens .
This is also reflected in the new Daphne programme .
I might remind you that we - 350 Members of this House - called for a European campaign and a European Year against violence to women in a written declaration .
The Council ignored it .
In the second reading , it also deleted the remark on this , despite the Austrian Presidency itself working very hard in support of this cause .
We in the European Parliament are keeping to our demands ; we are expecting EUR 5 million to be allocated for a campaign to combat violence against women , and we are looking forward to the concepts of equal opportunities and mainstreaming being very much more in evidence in the new policy areas of employment and enlargement towards the east than they have been up until now .
As the Commissioner has already said , the Treaty of Amsterdam gives us a new basis on which to work for equal opportunities and non-discrimination , and if female citizens do not find themselves represented in the policy of the European Parliament - and , by the way , this also applies to the committees - then we shall pay the penalty in the fifth directly elected Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can , I think , be brief , because I explained the main arguments of the Petitions Committee in our debate at the first reading .
I should , however , like to use this opportunity to emphasise , on behalf of the committee , that we feel like the hinge between Parliament and the citizens of Europe .
We are , as it were , the hinge on the door , allowing it to open to the citizens .
According to the Treaty on European Union , any citizen of the Union has the right to address petitions and lodge complaints , individually or in association with other citizens or persons , and for us in Parliament to be able to deal with these petitions in an appropriate manner and in as short a time as possible , it is necessary for the committee to be provided with sufficient resources and staff .
That is why it is also imperative for the Petitions Committee to be able to continue to work as an independent committee in the new parliamentary term .
I wish to thank the Budgets Committee and Mr Viola for judging the Ombudsman 's requests to be objectively justified , and for the fact that the creation of a new body for the Ombudsman will make it possible for sufficient resources to be placed at his disposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure I do not need to tell you that the 1999 budgetary procedure has been a complicated undertaking ; this was , in particular , for two reasons .
Firstly , the 1999 budget is the last to be covered by the Edinburgh agreements and the last to be adopted before the conclusion of the Agenda 2000 negotiations , which are being held between our institutions to establish a financial framework for budgets after the year 2000 .
Secondly , a decision on the 1998 supplementary and amending budget and a decision on the 1998 global transfer have also become part of the 1999 budget .
Despite the complexity resulting from combining these different matters , we have finally succeeded in reaching an overall compromise on the 1999 budget , the 1998 supplementary and amending budget and the 1998 global transfer .
I should like to recall that the success of this overall compromise was to a large extent dependent on the results of intensive discussions on flexibility , which we held with Parliament 's delegation at the two Council meetings of 24 November and 8 December .
In accordance with Parliament 's wishes , it is intended that budgets will display flexibility of this kind , and this will be introduced in the new financial perspective .
The conciliation we held last week with a number of your colleagues paved the way for the overall compromise on the 1999 budget procedure to be confirmed .
This conciliation in fact resulted in an agreement between our two institutions that there will be no strategic reserve in the 1999 budget , something which we have seen repeatedly threaten the 1999 budgetary procedure from beginning to end .
The Council thus saw itself in a position to declare itself willing to accept an element of flexibility in the negotiations on a new interinstitutional agreement .
The nature and extent of this flexibility will depend on the overall result of the negotiations , and on the level of the agreed financial framework .
During the budgetary procedure , but at the latest before Parliament 's first reading , both arms of the budgetary authority can decide - in accordance with the rules on majority voting pursuant to Article 203 ( 9 ) ( 5 ) of the Treaty and by means of a Commission proposal - to activate this flexibility component .
When applying this statement - and this is something to which I should particularly like to draw your attention - the Council will not make any internal agreements which would nullify these majority rules .
I should particularly like to emphasise this .
The positive outcome of our conciliation on the flexibility of future budgets has made it possible for the negotiations on the entire 1999 budget procedure to be brought to a successful conclusion .
Allow me now to turn to the results of the Council 's second reading of the 1999 draft budget and in so doing to highlight a number of points .
When examining the draft budget , as amended and with the proposed modifications , the Council 's general concern was to try to achieve as low a rate of increase as possible for the 1999 budget .
When assessing the results of Parliament 's first reading of the 1999 draft budget , the Council was also guided by the following principles : complying with the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 October 1998 on legal bases and the implementation of the budget ; assessing needs with a view to entering realistic appropriations in the budget which it will be possible to implement ; and dividing the savings equally between all the headings in the financial perspective , which means that reducing appropriations for one of the headings also has to entail a reduction in the appropriations for other headings .
Taking all these principles into consideration , the Council approved the content of the overall compromise drafted in conjunction with a Parliament delegation .
As you have noted , it has accommodated Parliament on many points .
I would ask you to take that into account when you yourselves vote !
As I said at the beginning , the overall compromise on the 1999 budget procedure also includes an agreement on the 1998 supplementary and amending budget and on the global transfer .
Both the supplementary and amending budget and the global transfer allow non-utilised appropriations to be redeployed , with the result that , in particular , payment appropriations for the European Social Fund and PHARE can be increased by ECU 795 million and ECU 150 million respectively .
In addition , Parliament will receive ECU 150 million for its building projects .
I should also like to draw your attention to the ECU 400 million for food aid to Russia , which we decided on as part of the supplementary and amending budget .
The 1999 budgetary procedure is drawing to a close .
When you vote on the budget on Thursday at the end of your second reading , some of you will be taking part in this procedure for the last time , and for those Members in particular , I am glad that during this budgetary procedure they have been able to experience some degree of cooperation between the two arms of the budgetary authority , something which has not always been the case in the past , a fact which the chairman of your Budgets Committee , Mr Samland , referred to himself last week at the end of our conciliation .
I should particularly like to thank Mr Samland for his tireless efforts to improve the quality of our cooperation .
I also thank the two rapporteurs , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Viola , and of course the Commission , for their valuable contribution to bringing the 1999 budgetary procedure to a successful conclusion .
I was very pleased to see them adopt such a constructive approach , putting us in a position to achieve the result we all wanted , the adoption of a budget for the coming year .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
The debate will continue at 3 p.m. with the speech by Commissioner Liikanen .
It is now voting time .
Mr President , I wish to raise a point of order under Rules 24 ( 7 ) and 31 , with respect to seating in the Chamber .

In view of the on-going civil war between Mr Le Pen 's faction of the National Front and Mr Mégret 's , I should like to ask the Conference of Presidents whether they will consider moving the two factions apart to avoid the possibility of disturbance in the Chamber .
In the meantime , we should be very grateful if they would wear the appropriate labels so we would know whether they support Mr Le Pen or Mr Mégret .

Mr President , I would like to make what is , I suppose , a personal statement , as Mr Ford is criticising me as a member of the National Front .
I would like to assure him immediately that I believe everyone is to be polite in this House , as is traditional , including on the National Front benches .
Thank you , Mr Blot .
VOTES
We shall now take the vote on the interpretation of the provisions applicable to the discharge procedure - Annex V of the Rules of Procedure .
Since questions have been raised , I am taking a vote on the interpretation given by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure of the provisions applicable to the discharge procedure .
The interpretation by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure - which was also included in the Minutes - was that it considered that the provisions of Annex V were not at variance with the general provisions of the Rules concerning the tabling of amendments , which could be accepted under Rule 125 .
On the other hand , amendments proposing the opposite to the proposal of the committee responsible were inadmissible .
( Parliament adopted the interpretation by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , as the rapporteur for Parliament , I just wish to confirm that the common position is acceptable to us , as is the financial settlement at ECU 112.5m.
I should like to thank the Austrian presidency and DG XXIV for their work on this .
( The President declared the common position approved )
Before we go on to the explanations of vote , I should like to congratulate the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and the rapporteurs on the way they organised the votes , which has made it possible for Parliament , thanks to the systematic way in which they were proposed and accepted by the Bureau , to vote on so many reports and 320 amendments in just 40 minutes !
This is a record rarely achieved , for which the Committee on Research must be thanked .
We appreciate the need to consider the status of those countries which are not , for the time being , signing up to the single currency .
It is a matter that certainly needs a thorough airing as part of the general political debate in the Member States concerned .
We must not forget , however , that one of the aims of this report - which has a united committee behind it - is to influence public opinion . Yet some of the assertions made here are based on pure speculation as to developments in the non-participating countries .
We do believe that the advent of the single currency will be of great significance in terms of competitiveness , employment and growth . And we think that Sweden should join EMU at some point in the future .
But it is not for the European Parliament to tell Swedish citizens - as happens in this report - that their country should adopt the single currency .
Any such decision will depend on a prior proposal having been put to the Swedish people , either in a referendum or in conjunction with elections to the Riksdag .
In the Stevens report , the European Parliament shows kind concern for the misfortunes likely to descend upon the Member States which did not wish to join the euro zone ( United Kingdom , Sweden , Denmark ) and on the country that did not qualify ( Greece ) .
Their national currencies will , it seems , become more volatile , and as all their economic actors will favour the euro , it will become a genuine ' parallel currency ' in these countries .
The conclusion of the report is obvious : ' As the only way the risks inherent in parallel use of the Euro can be removed for the United Kingdom , Sweden , Denmark and Greece , is by joining EMU , they should do exactly that , as soon as possible ' .
We are astounded at the arrogance shown in this report and the contempt displayed for the democratic choices made in three of these countries .
If tribute is to be paid to the United Kingdom , Sweden and Denmark , then it is because their governments were able to organise a genuine debate on the single currency and then to respect the choice of their citizens .
Not everyone can say the same .
Moreover , we may wonder whether the aim of the Stevens report is not to allay the feelings of guilt on the part of those in the euro zone who trampled on democracy , by showing them that they were not wrong because , when all was said and done , even those who respected democracy subsequently reached the same conclusions .
But there is an enormous gap in this report : it is by no means certain that the countries that did not choose to adopt the euro will regret it .
For example , if we assume that the euro is strong against the dollar , the European countries not participating in the euro zone will perhaps find that they are at an advantage by retaining more reasonable exchange rate parities .
Similarly , unification of monetary conditions within the euro zone will not be beneficial , or even painless , for all its members .
Some will doubtless regret not having been able to retain flexible exchange rates to be able to bring their economies smoothly into line with those of their neighbours .
They will envy the countries that have remained unrestricted outside the euro zone .
But perhaps the Stevens report has another , hidden , objective : to try to eliminate these recalcitrant countries that could in future become embarrassing witnesses to the error of the single currency by absorbing them into the euro zone .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party abstained in the final vote on the Stevens report on ' The euro as a parallel currency ' for the following reasons .
The rapporteur is unnecessarily alarmist regarding the consequences of the euro as a parallel currency for the pre-in countries .
The nature of his call on the pre-ins to join the euro ignores national policies and is not grounded in the real world .
The framework programmes for research , technological development and demonstration activities always lead to lengthy and stormy debates with the European Commission , particularly where they are linked to budgetary issues .
This provides the European Parliament with an opportunity each time to fight for the financial share we believe to be fair .
Until now , we have always been the decisive factor in allowing the European Union to create a real policy of research and technological development .
The fourth framework programme has now proved itself .
Scientific cooperation and technology transfer are organised around this unique programme that covers all areas .
Thanks to its vast range of activities , the opportunities offered to researchers , teachers and companies have been increased , and the result has been the development of a real sense of European identity .
We have achieved positive results that have been acknowledged unanimously .
This great popularity within the European scientific community must not be compromised at a time when a new framework programme is being drawn up and eleven new countries are knocking at the door of the European Union and are likely to bring mutual scientific and technical enrichment .
We therefore need appropriate financing to take account of the most recent technological developments .
Consequently , I approve the Quisthoudt-Rowohl report and the compromise it presents for 1998-2002 .
I am one of those who would have liked to go a step further . As this is not possible , let us accept a good compromise that includes the majority of the amendments tabled by the European Parliament .
Scientific research and technological development have become the focal point of the economic future of Europe .
Promoting these among small and medium-sized enterprises would therefore be promoting the progress of the European Union .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for this very interesting investigation into the Union 's research effort in the field of thermonuclear fusion and fission .
On the question of fission energy , our position is that we wish to see a phasing-out of nuclear power , although any decisions must be taken at national level .
We cannot therefore support any fission research which would lead to the development of more nuclear energy .
We commend the way in which the Commission is now emphasising investment in operating safety and targeting the whole fuel cycle - which includes waste management .
And we support the proposals on decommissioning reactors , phasing out nuclear power and storing radioactive material .
Whilst I approve of investing in research and development to improve nuclear safety and devise new waste management techniques , there is no reason for the EU to put research money into new thermonuclear fusion or fission reactors .
We are told in the report that the aim is ' the possible construction of safe , clean and economically competitive prototype reactors ' .
It is very hard to draw the line between nuclear safety research and new reactor research .
In order to avoid a fresh proliferation of nuclear power , however , the distinction must be made before any further projects are commenced .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

1999 General Budget ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the general budget for 1999 .
Madam President , the 1999 general budget for the European Union is the last budget which will be adopted by this Parliament .
It may be permitted , therefore , to put it into a more historical perspective .
The 1999 budget concludes a remarkable process of qualitative and quantitative consolidation .
In the future , the Union will be in better shape to justify its financial requirements .
Qualitatively , this budget procedure has solved three major problems which have been discussed for many years .
Firstly , the 1999 budget is established on the basis of the new interinstitutional agreement on legal bases .
The new budget procedure has shown that the agreement works .
New and experimental activities can still find their starting-point in the Community budget .
The Commission and the organisations concerned will benefit from the clarity for the execution of the budget .
This is a major achievement .
Secondly , significant progress has also been made with regard to Community subsidies .
The recent Commission communication imposes mandatory minimum rules for publicity and collective decision-making on all Community subsidies .
This is something that Parliament has asked for on many occasions .
The new rules come into effect for the execution of the 1999 budget .
A vademecum has been distributed .
We have had a successful seminar exchanging information and holding discussions with the actual and potential beneficiaries ; further seminars are in preparation .
Thirdly , there are the technical assistance offices .
The intense work of the Committee on Budgets and of experts on both sides has established an unprecedented degree of transparency and control in the 1999 budget .
In this area , lack of clarity can no longer be an excuse .
The Committee on Budgets has made that very clear to the Commission .
Work has to continue to strengthen links between decisions on financial and human resources for each Community action .
For that reason the Commission is currently developing the first elements of activity-based budgeting .
Legal bases , subsidies and technical assistance offices are qualitative improvements that may look small to some but they solve problems which have long overshadowed the Community budget .
They will remain after this budget for the future .
What will also remain is a string of rigorous Community budgets .
Since 1996 the Community budget has regularly grown less than public spending in the Member States .
Thus the Union has contributed to the consolidation effort for the successful launch of Economic and Monetary Union .
At the same time , within the rigorous framework , clearer priorities have been set .
On the one hand , financial support for cohesion , as agreed in Edinburgh ; on the other hand , employment-creating expenditure , for example trans-European networks research and education .
External expenditure has grown fast , pushed by the Member States and events .
It took some time to establish the regulations and the administrative structures to permit satisfactory execution and , as has been said today in the earlier debate , further efforts are still required .
Qualitatively and quantitatively , the European Parliament has built up a reputation of being , if not always an easy , at least a credible partner in the budget procedure .
Let us reinforce this partnership with the Council .
In this respect it has also been fortunate with regard to the most recent presidencies .
I hope for the best for the future .
The hope is that this partnership will also permit the successful conclusion of a new interinstitutional agreement next year .
Important progress has already been made : agreement on a legal basis , the flexibility element , concertation throughout the budget procedure .
It is no exaggeration to say that more progress has been made in the budgetary field than in any other part of Agenda 2000 .
This makes me fairly optimistic that new interinstitutional agreements can be reached with this Parliament .
In conclusion , let me congratulate the rapporteurs , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Viola .
As this is the last budget to be adopted under his chairmanship , I should like in particular to thank Detlev Samland .
I think you will agree that his years at the helm of the Committee on Budgets will not be forgotten .
However , we still have a lot of work to do during spring so that the agreement on Agenda 2000 will be ready before the end of this Parliament .
Mr President , this budget has been different in many respects from any other budget I have been involved with .
The Commissioner has just highlighted the three major topics which have come from the discussions between the three institutions .
The thing that will always stick in my mind is that we had a conciliation before the Council 's second reading , something which has never happened before .
One of the reasons for this , and part of the process , is that we are trying to get Parliament and the Council to work much more closely together on the budget so that we do not again have the game of ping-pong we have had over the past few years when trying to make sure that the budget we get reflects what the Council wants and what Parliament wants .
During the conciliation process before the second reading , the big decision was to drop the strategic amendment .
Those of us who were part of the delegation did that on the assumption that , come the negotiations for the next interinstitutional agreement , flexibility will be part of it .
The Council made that statement and the President-in-Office stated that clearly this morning .
Getting that agreement also paved the way for the supplementary and amending budget .
That position was taken by those of us who were involved for a number of reasons , not least of which was a threat by the Council unilaterally to break the existing interinstitutional agreement and state that the 1999 budget would have been illegal .
There are those of my colleagues who say that we should have gone along with that line of action , that we should have called the Council 's bluff and should have carried on with the strategic amendment .
Had that happened we would have been confronted with all the consequences of 1999 having no budget , provisional twelfths , etc .
Quite frankly , many of us did not want that .
We are trying to be sensible , cooperative and prudent , and that should be kept in mind by those in the Council who think a great victory has been achieved over Parliament .
From our side it was a spirit of responsibility and good sense that helped us to make that decision .
The Socialist Group went along with this in what we hope will be a new spirit of cooperation between those two institutions .
Having said all that , we have a problem which was not mentioned during this conciliation process .
It concerns Category 2 , where Parliament set out its position at first reading .
Nothing was said in our discussions but at the end of the day when the Council had its first reading , we find that it has made a cut .
It has agreed with the ECU 500m cut in payments but , at the same time , it has also got rid of the reserve .
We are left with the problem of what to do .
Those who were at the Committee on Budgets ' meeting last night will say that problem is now exacerbated , because we were going to go back to first reading and the Committee on Budgets did not agree with that .
The Committee on Budgets has not agreed the reserve but has agreed the ECU 500m extra spending .
Our group will be discussing that this evening and we will be taking a position on it then .
Therefore , I cannot give a conclusive statement as to what our position will be until it has been decided and until we vote on Thursday .
I have to say that the cut in the reserve does not help our position for the maximum rate of increase if things go wrong with the interinstitutional agreement .
Finally , we need to congratulate Mrs Dührkop Dührkop .
She has been congratulated throughout the speeches but we must recognise the hard work she and Mr Viola have done .
Mr Viola 's report is a formality at this second reading : but in Mrs Dührkop we have a single working mother from the Basque region , with all that implies .
Half way through the process she found herself at the top of an assassin 's death list !
We should appreciate the work she has done this year - it has certainly not been easy for her .
Madam President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for all her hard work on this report .
The debates on the second reading of the budget were extremely hectic , but they are actually relatively calm this time .
The discussion on the strategic amendments in particular took a great deal of time , and we agreed with the rapporteur 's approach .
We in the PPE Group have always maintained that strategic amendments should not involve any extra costs , and that was how they were formulated .
They were intended , as we saw it , to get negotiations going , and as such they succeeded .
There has never been such a broad agreement between Parliament 's first reading and the Council 's second as there is now , and this is all thanks to the strategic amendments .
We must thank both the rapporteur and the Austrian Presidency for this .
I must admit that I , as a Dutchman , still feel rather bitter that this perfectly normal negotiating strategy was so badly misinterpreted by the Dutch Minister of Finance , who made Dutch Members out to be some sort of traitors to their country .
That was what he said at the time , though he has certainly now been shown to be wrong , as the Dutch Government has also acknowledged .
The social items too have been settled , though there is one problem remaining , which is the expenditure under the Social Fund and other funds .
Mr Wynn referred to this a moment ago .
There are a lot of countries - of which the Netherlands is one - that are having to spend more than 33 % of the commitment appropriations .
According to the most recent figures , the Netherlands is having to spend 45 % of Objective 2 commitments , 37 % of Objective 3 , 42 % of the agricultural section of Objective 5a , 67 % of the fisheries section of Objective 5a , and 57 % of Objective 5b .
These are very worrying figures , and a number of other northern European countries are in the same position .
Last year , it was clear that there was not enough money left in the Social Fund at the end of the year , and the same thing is going to happen this year .
This means that projects will be paid late , particularly , I have to say , in the Netherlands .
This situation can only be prevented by making sufficient payment appropriations available .
I am therefore pleased that the Committee on Budgets has approved the amendment to make those payment appropriations available , otherwise a good many projects would find themselves in difficulties , which is the last thing we want to see .
Madam President , the debate this afternoon on the budget is perhaps less emotional than the one on budget discharge , but I think it is no less fundamental .
The substantive amendments are not really the issue today .
Gradually over the last five years the Council has become accustomed to the idea that a dialogue with civil society - where the Council 's presence has always been negligible - should be promoted .
Parliament , far from being a spending Parliament , has proved to be responsible .
The issue therefore is not so much finance as institutional issues .
Some people , including our own rapporteur , said that a new culture is developing .
You , Commissioner , said that there is progress in the budgetary field more than anywhere else .
I tend to question that .
Surely all groups , including the Liberal Group , will adopt the departure from the strategic amendment .
But if one looks at what has really been achieved , one can put some questions .
There is a very thin compromise .
At the end of the day the Council has agreed to vote in future by a qualified majority - something that already existed .
So my main point is that on the question of the interinstitutional agreement - the new interinstitutional agreement in particular - the next Parliament must be much more careful to see what will happen .
From the perspective of the strategic amendment there was always a compatibility with the interinstitutional agreement .
Article 17 made it very clear .
We have stayed within the financial perspectives .
But then the question of whether we agreed under the Treaty was a different matter .
I have always understood that during the time of an interinstitutional agreement it would not be possible for either the Council or Parliament to denounce it .
This particular threat to which Mr Wynn referred quite clearly indicates that was the main argument for the Conciliation Committee to change .
We should not go back over old history .
The story for the future is that for the time being the European Parliament margin for future expenditure remains pretty much close to zero .
Therefore I think we have reached an armistice , rather than that the battle is won .
The battle for the new structure will come up again in the next three or four months when Agenda 2000 is to be agreed .
No definitional flexibility is being agreed .
In short , the question of the future budgetary rights of this Parliament still remains in abeyance although the culture has certainly changed .
Madam President , the fact that the Council has accepted a good many of the proposals made by the Parliament at first reading and the proposal to include certain others by our committee means that I do not need to make any further comments on this matter .
I shall , therefore , concentrate on certain questions that I think are of particular importance in this final phase of the procedure .
I shall begin with something that was spoken about a lot at first reading : the fact that this budget , being the last in the lifetime of this Parliament , may be seen as a bridge leading to the following budget .
I cannot forget that this statement was made in relation to the so-called ' strategic reserve ' and the possible failure to conclude an interinstitutional agreement .
In any case , now that this process is almost over I must draw attention to the extremely low level at which the budget has been set and how far it is from the financial perspective set out in Edinburgh , and , fundamentally , to the negative impact which this has in terms of sacrificing the Community policies that we all see as fundamental , particularly if it is taken as a reference for the definition of future financial perspectives .
With or without an institutional agreement . In other words , in our view this is the most negative aspect of the whole process .
Let us now look at the question of strategic reserves : now that we have reached the end of the process I must say that we have many doubts and a great deal of concern today about the strategy that has been adopted and , above all , the results obtained by it .
For the sake of a point of departure that was meant to be higher in the future and in order to prevent any need to resort to Article 203 of the Treaty , we have ended up by adopting a rigorous budget .
That was achieved by the Council once it had rejected the reserve .
Apart from this , there has just been a vague agreement with the Council on the basis of an imprecise declaration of principle about flexibility , the significance and extent of which also seem to us to be extremely unclear .
The only conclusion is that there is to be very little flexibility indeed , and only the future will tell just how little .
I would like to make one final comment to say that there seems to be reasonably good sense in the proposal approved by the Commission to reinstate as payment appropriations the ECU 500 million from the Structural Funds that had been cancelled at the first reading by the Council .
It is a fact that these are payment appropriations and the question might therefore seem quite technical .
But it is not technical for the public .
It is no less true that , even in the technical field , given that the strategic reserve was also rejected here the failure to include this amount inevitably resulted in a huge and incomprehensible discrepancy between authorisations and payment appropriations .
We hope therefore that common sense will prevail here in the plenary and that this proposal will be confirmed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I regret the fact that such an important debate as the budget is being held in circumstances where I am almost obliged to speak because so many other people are absent .
In my opinion , this is partly a result of having tried to place too much political emphasis on another debate held this morning .
With the 1999 budget we had a lot of challenges and demands to present to the Council .
Unfortunately , we were unable to do so because we had to accept a certain political realism and abandon the amendment which we had nevertheless voted for at first reading in an attempt to strengthen our influence in the negotiation process and thus achieve a credible interinstitutional agreement , in other words an interinstitutional agreement that also involves the Council .
We have achieved this .
Personally , I regret that , obsessed by a dispute that is admittedly relatively important for the proper functioning of the institution but is in my opinion quite fruitless from the political point of view , we have to some extent neglected the real institutional debate with the Council .
The result is that we are in the process of adopting a budget at second reading that , all in all , gives greater consideration to the Council 's current concerns than to those of Parliament , and I mean that quite sincerely .
We have sacrificed our concerns on the altar of a different debate .
We shall see whether this tactic , chosen by those of our colleagues who - I repeat - wished to place a different debate at the centre of Parliament 's concerns , was the right one .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , those few ladies and gentlemen who are still with us , for the first time in four years , in the Committee on Budgets , I was in agreement with Mr Samland , the chairman , in rejecting the draft submitted to us .
To be honest , I am not sure it was for the same reasons : the chairman of the Committee on Budgets rejected the draft because he was not satisfied with the conditions under which the strategic amendment was withdrawn , and I rejected it even though the strategic amendment was withdrawn .
At first reading I criticised the fact that in artificially raising the budget to 1.17 % of GNP we were holding our countries ' taxpayers to ransom , and I mentioned the Committee on Budgets ' gamble .
Well , the gamble failed .
The Legal Service rightly declared that the strategic amendment did not comply with budgetary rules or with the principle of entering funds for a specific and genuine purpose .
So the Council is bringing us back to reality , and it is doing so , I must admit , without making any major concessions .
It has not agreed , for example , that Parliament should discuss compulsory expenditure with the Council .
It has simply accepted the possibility of a certain flexibility and also the idea of possibly using majority voting , which in fact means that it would be applying the Treaty .
For our group to vote for it , the budget proposed by the Council at second reading will have to be adopted in accordance with the terms and the amounts already set out .
Otherwise we will vote against the draft proposed at second reading .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would say to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy that your group has never yet distinguished itself by taking a constructive part in the discussion .
So your present attitude does not surprise me either .
Secondly , as regards the general attitude , I would actually be quite happy to devote another minute to that .
I believe that the Council and Parliament , with the support of the Commission , have in fact succeeded in developing a procedure which is moving towards greater cooperation . This has not just taken place under the Austrian Presidency - that would be to heap too much praise upon it - but has been an ongoing process since the Luxembourg Presidency and the presidency before that .
The ad hoc procedure for agriculture , for example , originated not this year , but last year , although we have also used it successfully this year .
Secondly , I say to the President-in-Office and the entire Council that you have not done anything to be proud of !
You ran the risk , if we had not agreed at second reading , of unilaterally revoking the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Because your announcement that , if the strategic amendment were adopted , you would stand here and declare that the maximum rate had been exceeded would have amounted to nothing other than your side revoking the Interinstitutional Agreement .
This , you see , specifically states that the ceilings on expenditure set in it are the same ceilings which you too accept when the maximum amount is determined .
You were not ready for that .
You can give us the credit for being ready - despite the poor results last week - to reach a compromise , because a declaration on your part not to accept the maximum rate would certainly not have been an invitation to Parliament to negotiate an interinstitutional agreement for the period 2000 to 2006 in the next three months , to state that quite clearly here .
The way in which you extracted yourself from that tight corner leaves much to be desired .
I must be open about this .
Because after the discussions and negotiations we held with the Austrians , I can only say that I had expected more .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is right there .
The results are extremely disappointing .
Over the next few months , we will have much more ground to make up and catching-up to do on what we have not managed to achieve now .
For you can take it - I am stating this quite clearly here - that the European Parliament will not agree to another institutional agreement which restricts the room for manoeuvre , characterised by flexibility , which it enjoys on the basis of Article 203 .
You , Mr President-in-Office , must be interested in this new financial perspective , because otherwise this House will be invited to enter the ceiling on expenditure in each respective budget , simply to ensure that expenditure does not fall the following year .
To that extent , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , this was a step in the right direction , a leap , one might say , but a leap which fell short .
I should , nonetheless , like to warmly thank all those who , through their work , have supported the discussions on the budget .
My main reason for doing so is because this will be the last full budget on which I shall work as chairman of the Committee on Budgets and as a Member of the European Parliament .
I would like in any case , at this early stage , since I will indeed be going some more of the way with you - and have no fear , I still want to leave my mark on Agenda 2000 , so that you will think of the work I have had a hand in here for another seven years - to wish every success to those who must then continue working on the budget .
For you have a huge amount of work ahead of you .
Always remember that the discussions on the budget are a real political opportunity in the European Parliament .
While Mrs Müller said this morning on the discharge that Parliament 's hour had come , I would say that it comes repeatedly every year with the budget .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are facing this final vote on the 1999 budget with trepidation .
At first reading , in October , the European Parliament did some positive work by reinstating the necessary appropriations for some of the main programmes for regional and social development , fighting unemployment , preserving the environment and humanitarian aid .
Thanks to the action of the rapporteur , Mrs Barbara Dührkop Dührkop , we then voted for a strategic reserve which raised the overall value of the 1999 budget to a value closer to that originally planned , to provide a possible starting point for the budget for the year 2000 , with amounts which are more realistic given the challenges of the euro , enlargement and the problems of inequality between the rich and poor regions of Europe .
Unfortunately the Council did not accept the strategic reserve , which meant that our framework for the future was uncertain .
Regarding Category 2 of the Structural Fund , the Council seems to ignore the fact that there are very large delays in payments , and funds are not being paid to projects already completed , which we feel is completely unacceptable and a discredit to the European Union .
In January of this year we had to use up PTE 230 billion ( ECU 1.17 billion ) of the 1998 budget in order to pay what should have been paid in 1997 .
Since the blanket was short we covered our heads and left our feet outside .
Throughout the year the Commission has been doing all it can to clear these back-payments , but it has not solved the problem .
How can some people now want to cut or place in reserve appropriations that are already lacking ?
As for the rest , I would briefly like to express our concern at the mismanagement of the programme of assistance to Russia - namely TACIS - and our doubts as to the objectives and results of the food aid that has now been proposed .
Finally , I should like to declare the support of our delegation for the creation of stricter machinery for fighting fraud and the misuse of public money .
Madam President , first I would like to thank the rapporteurs Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Viola for their excellent work .
Similarly I wish to express my sincere thanks to the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , whose leadership of the committee has been almost legendary .
I also wish to thank Budget Commissioner Erkki Liikanen for the cooperation he has demonstrated in his dealings with Parliament .
The budget for next year is being created on the whole with consensus , and with little dissension , among Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
It is a tight one .
It represents only 1.1 % of gross national product , whereas the ceiling is 1.27 % .
Personally , I am pleased that the planned EUR 130 million of appropriations for the TACIS programme have not been placed in reserve , as it would have paralysed this important programme and jeopardised , among other things , measures to improve nuclear safety .
This EU budget is the last in the lifetime of this parliament .
For the next budget both opinions on funding and an interinstitutional agreement will have to be discussed and negotiated .
Closely connected with this will be resolving the EU 's finances , which includes the issue of net contributions .
The Agenda 2000 resolutions will be vital for the budgets over the coming years .
We could say that Agenda 2000 is Europe 's most all-embracing international economic agreement ever made in peacetime .
For that reason , we must focus on its entry into force .
The worst thing we in Parliament could do now would be to render the Commission powerless , for example by refusing discharge for the 1996 accounts .
This would mean that our house would virtually be without a master just at a time when the crucial Agenda 2000 talks are going on , and Parliament would not have a negotiating team .
For this reason I hope that we can debate this issue just as we did the previous one , in a spirit of cooperation , for the sake of the EU and , above all , its Member States and citizens .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me remind you that the Council 's commitment two years ago , when we were debating the 1997 budget , was that the 1997 budget would be the last austerity budget .
And I remember the charismatic chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , wagging his finger during his speech and saying to them ' be sure not to let us down ' .
Unfortunately , Mr Samland , it seems that they have let us down .
Just as they did last year , the same has happened this year and so we are now debating a budget shaped by the demands of the stability pact , a budget tied to the commitment to prop up a phoney Economic and Monetary Union , subject to the dictates of bankers , banks and economic lobbies , and one which has absolutely nothing to do with what we all once dreamed of , namely a Europe of solidarity and employment , the social Europe .


I know what is going to happen now .
Everyone who spoke , even the rapporteur Mrs Dührkop , whom I do not see here to congratulate - it seems that she too became bored and has left the House - was disappointed with the budget .
At the end of his speech Mr Samland said the same thing , and all of you who have spoken said the same , but you will then vote for the budget , you will vote for it as you did last year and the year before .
I , however , wish to be consistent with my beliefs and vote accordingly . Therefore I will not vote in favour of this budget .
And those who elected you should ask you how you can maintain and say one thing and in the end vote for something else , and how you can issue ideological manifestos with a view to the coming elections containing false promises that you know you cannot fulfil so long as the budget remains at 1.10 .
Madam President , we in Parliament are good at eloquent speeches , but the words we utter have no influence on how things turn out .
In Parliament 's Committee on Budgets we roundly condemned the decisions taken by the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions to pay officials their salaries during the strike in May , but as the view of Parliament is not reflected in the budget , it counts for nothing .
Paying salaries during a strike is a small matter .
However , the so-called strategic reserve is a big issue , and showed Parliament 's desire to increase its powers .
But it lost the wrestling match with the Council .
In the end Parliament always humbly does what the EU political elite wants .
Parliament never opposes anyone .
Parliament spent a whole morning criticising the Commission for the ineffectual way it monitors finances .
Today , when in many speeches there have been suggestions of not granting the Commission discharge , Parliament is clearly in favour by a large majority of delivering ECU 400 million worth of agricultural produce into the hands of the Russian mafia .
The European Parliament will not impose any conditions on the granting of aid that have to do with the proper monitoring of the sale of food aid .
Thus Parliament itself will be powerless when it comes to looking for those guilty of fraudulent activity regarding EU surplus agricultural produce on the market .
When food aid is being sold on the Russian market , without any proper market mechanisms , we are squandering taxpayers ' money .
Selling off ECU 400 million worth of EU food is equivalent to just giving the Russians ECU 150 million directly in cash .
With the European Parliament approach it is easier to squander money all in one go than to squander it in a few small amounts .
The Committee for Budgets only monitors these small amounts .
Madam President , at first reading I opposed the ECU 3.75 billion strategic reserve , which I described as a completely wrong signal that will lead to the maximisation of expenditure in 1999 and thereafter , whereas the financial perspectives are precisely designed to control expenditure .

The Committee on Budgets is now proposing not to have this enormous reserve , which is sensible because Parliament would risk being condemned by the Court if it persisted in this dangerous course .
The extra buffer would mean that the maximum rate of increase under the Treaty would be considerably exceeded .
The Council 's promise to include ' elements of flexibility ' in the new interinstitutional agreement gives Parliament an excuse to change its mind .
But has Parliament actually achieved anything ?
The Council has given no promises about the nature and scale of the flexibility .
Will there be possibilities for transferring between the budget categories ?
Will there really be more flexibility than we already have with the current financial perspectives ?
None of this is clear , yet Parliament is content with this vague promise .
I doubt very much whether we really needed to put our credibility on the line just for this , and we must not repeat these sorts of antics in the future .
I also think that the Council was right not to make any specific promises .
The division of the financial framework into maximum expenditure figures for the various categories has helped the budget to achieve controlled and balanced development .
Budget discipline requires these maximum figures to be strictly adhered to .
Some flexibility is needed in fleshing out each year 's budgetary priorities , but this can be done without transferring funds between the various headings , which so many people have been calling for .
The headings are broad enough to accommodate varying requirements .
One final point on the Structural Funds .
It was stated in Edinburgh that these should be spending targets , and now we are paying for that statement .
At the end of the programming period , we can expect to see a considerable pool of unallocated appropriations , and we need to find a solution to this problem .
If we carry appropriations over until 2000 as the rapporteur suggests , they will have to be deducted from the financial package for 2000-2006 .
Madam President , as has already been stated , there is no doubt that this budget is a historic one . However , in my view , it is not historic because Mrs Dührkop is the first female Iberian Member to be appointed general rapporteur - although I congratulate her on her work - nor is it historic because it is the last budget of the current 1993-1999 financial perspective and because it is certainly going to influence the next financial perspective , if there is one , which is not yet certain .
Nor is it historic , in my view , merely because it is the first budget in euros . We knew all this when the budgetary procedure began .
In my opinion , it is historic because , in the course of this budgetary procedure , the Council has promised in writing , and this morning it repeated that promise verbally , that it would respect what it has signed .
We have managed to get the Council to make a momentous declaration here .
Some people may be surprised to know that it is the first time in 40 years that the Council has made a unilateral declaration stating that it will respect its commitments .
This might seem evident and redundant to some people , but it has not been the case in the history of the Community .
This Council declaration relates to the question of flexibility in the future financial perspective , which we would like to sign and to have , but not - and I would stress this point - at any price .
Ladies and gentlemen , the basis for my current negotiating mandate is the resolution of 4 December 1997 in which Parliament gave its support to a new financial perspective that would be adequate to meet the challenges that the European Union will face in the coming years .
Parliament accepts as a practical necessity the own resources ceiling of 1.27 % and calls for mechanisms to provide flexibility : on the one hand , review clauses for the financial perspective ; and on the other hand , mechanisms that speed up the process of transferring funds between categories and mobilising new resources when necessary .
In a working document several months ago , I pointed out that the problem stemmed from paragraph 12 of the current Interinstitutional Agreement , which provides for the financial perspective to be reviewed in accordance with the majorities provided for in Article 203 ( 9 ) of the Treaty . However , the Council had voted unanimously for an internal decision that prevented any degree of flexibility .
To put an end to this inflexibility , we tabled the so-called strategic amendments .
In my opinion , these can now be withdrawn following last week 's agreement .
I must point out that Amendment No 708 on the Structural Funds from the first reading followed a certain logic that the Council has now broken .
It has removed the commitment appropriations from the reserve and added them to the heading , while maintaining the reduction in payment appropriations .
Frankly , in this situation I would prefer to go back to the preliminary draft budget .
What do the Member States hope to save through this ?
At best , they will gain the interest on EUR 500 million at 3 % .
At the most , Germany would save between EUR 2 million and EUR 3 million over the year .
That is the maximum that can be saved .
Is this a symbolic gesture ?
Clearly , what counts are the commitment appropriations , but we are going to have to explain that we have only cut the payment appropriations , which do not really have much of an effect .
The analysis has already been made in the press and simply indicates that there has been a reduction in the Structural Funds .
And as far as symbols go , Madam President , I prefer that of solidarity .
Madam President , it is a great advantage to be the last to speak because that allows me to address the general rapporteur who has returned and whom I wished to congratulate .
Firstly , you understand , because I believe that the general rapporteur ex officio deserves support , consideration and respect from the House .
That is a matter of principle .
But also , I must admit , because Mrs Dührkop Dührkop has shown us in a very striking way something that is fundamental : that in a budgetary procedure interinstitutional war was not inevitable , that the dealings between the Council , Parliament and the Commission were sometimes farcical , but not necessarily doomed .
And we should be delighted about this .
You have shown that it was possible to come to a sound agreement with the other arm of the budgetary authority .
The agreement holds in two ways : by means of rigour and flexibility .
Rigour , because that has been the law of Europe 's public authorities for years , and will continue to be for years to come , and flexibility , because it is a pre-condition for the intelligent use of rigour .
Intelligent rigour is impossible without optimum allocation of resources .
Optimum allocation of resources is impossible unless the budgetary authority is freely able to allocate what are scarce resources across all potential expenditure .
There is an important difference between the Council and Parliament here .
We have shown rigour .
Over the past years we have proved that we were capable of bearing our share of the burden because we knew that behind each beneficiary of Community appropriations there was also a taxpayer , and that behind both of these there was a voter .
But we have shown this .
At the end of the parliamentary term we have achieved a level of expenditure that is very much lower than the ' own resources ' ceiling decided at Edinburgh .
On the other hand , in terms of flexibility , it is up to the Council to prove its goodwill , to prove its willingness to change .
Yes , there is a link between rigour and flexibility .
We have done our part of the work .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Council , it is up to you to do yours .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 9.30 a.m.
1998 assessment and 1999 annual programme
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the assessment of 1998 and the annual programme for 1999 .
I should like to welcome Mr Santer , who now has the floor .
Mr President , Madam President , at the height of the Lewinsky affair , a commentator on American television said that it was ' a grim time for the President ' . I would paraphrase that today by saying that it is ' a grim time for the Commission ' .
I am not just talking here about the debate on the discharge , because every day the press and media provide us with further information and make revelations , confirmed or unconfirmed , about the increasing problems affecting the running of the Commission .
Such revelations obviously affect the credibility and therefore the effectiveness of the Commission .
The Socialist Group is strongly urging you to act in a rapid and determined manner on the intentions you have expressed regarding the reform of the Commission , its working methods , its organisation , the flexibility of its procedures and , above all , its systems of transparency and control .
Although it is true that our two institutions are coming to the end of their respective mandates , it is also true that they still have their work cut out for them . To be able to accomplish the tasks before us , we all need a strong and determined Commission , as that institution is still the motor behind the construction of Europe that it has served so well since 1957 .
If we turn now to the assessment of 1998 , we could use the old image of a bottle being half full or half empty .
We must be fair and admit that the legislative assessment of 1998 is relatively positive , though with two obvious regrets .
The first is that when the Commission drew up the legislative assessment , it did not put a great deal of emphasis - very little , in fact - on the role Parliament played in this legislative work through its additions and contributions .
I believe that the assessment would have appeared more objective if you had mentioned Parliament 's increasingly decisive legislative action , particularly since the Maastricht Treaty .
The second regret is that compared with the anticipated work programme , a certain number of legislative proposals - and this is normal - did not see the light of day .
They remained out of sight .
The reason for this should have been explained to the European Parliament ; you should have justified why no work was done on these specific proposals .
Moreover , why are the proposals that did not see the light of day in 1998 not then included in the 1999 programme ?
There is certainly inconsistency here which concerns us somewhat , and we would like to hear what you have to say about this .
Last year , Mr President , when presenting your 1998 programme , you announced that the Commission intended to carry out a periodic assessment of the rate at which the legislative work was progressing .
We have been disappointed in this respect .
Very little has been done .
In any case , the Commission has done much less than it promised .
Finally , to round off my comments on 1998 , I would like to stress the fact that as guardian of the Treaties , it is your duty to keep an eye on this trend for the Council - which is mainly to blame - to hold on to a number of legislative proposals to which the Commission and Parliament are committed in its in-tray , as it were .
There is a problem there that you must be aware of .
In addition to this the Council is increasingly tending to claim the right to annotate legislative acts , as it were , including those that involve codecision . It does so through a number of unilateral declarations , as if it were up to the Council , and the Council alone , to create some kind of third court in the European legal order .
I therefore call on you , Mr President , as the representative of the Commission , to ensure that this practice stops .
I would now like to move on to your 1999 programme .
You have stated , Mr President , and we agree with you , that the main priority is to ensure that Agenda 2000 is a success .
Without the essential mechanism of Agenda 2000 , there could be no prospect of enlarging the European Union in the foreseeable future .
Naturally , the discussion on the financial perspective and the future interinstitutional agreement that began during today 's debate on the budget is very closely linked to Agenda 2000 .
It is therefore essential for the Commission and Parliament to work together in a determined fashion so that we complete this work , work that is difficult but that we must pass on to those who are going to succeed us .
The second priority is the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is true that a certain number of Member States have yet to ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is true that some of them are caught up in the slow pace or difficulties of their institutional procedures .
However , nothing should prevent the Commission , and nothing is preventing it , from pressing ahead with the preparations for the Treaty to come into force and for the instruments that will allow it to be applied as quickly as possible , as soon as the last country ratifies it .
Clearly , I am thinking here of the new legal bases that will have to be provided for certain legislative proposals that are pending , the problem of publishing or advertising the documents and acts , and the difficulty that my colleague , Mr Medina , will speak about shortly relating to the ultra-peripheral regions .
That is a point that we should also like to stress .
My final point concerns what , for us , is the most important priority of all , that is , the fight Europe must wage against unemployment and social exclusion through a dynamic employment policy .
The tide of social democracy that has swept across the governments of Europe in recent years is bringing a stronger wind with it that is blowing in the right direction .
It is important now for the Commission to unfurl as many sails as possible to ensure that the winds carry the European Community as far as they can towards this , to our minds , essential objective : social Europe , the fight for employment and the fight against exclusion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking the President of the Commission for the very diplomatic way in which he attempted today to examine the concerns that both our institutions have about the way we deal with each other .
The work programme that we are discussing today is supposed to be the product of our institutional consultations .
An agreement was once reached between our two institutions that the European Commission should consult the European Parliament before fixing its political priorities .
I have noticed over the last few years that this arrangement does not work entirely satisfactorily .
We tried last year to improve matters , as Mr Desama has already said .
We suggested that the Commission should produce quarterly or six-monthly reports in order to try to anticipate at an earlier stage any changes that should or might be made with Parliament 's knowledge .
But I do not think that this was the problem .
I think the problem was that the Commission did not do what it had promised .
I spoke to the Commission President about this , and I think that some of the blame also lies with us , Mr Desama , because we should have kept a closer eye on whether or not the Commission was keeping its promises .
There is blame on both sides .
We failed to remind the Commission about what had been agreed .
Mr Santer , you made a very severe speech today and implied that something is wrong between our two institutions .
We have always been natural allies in defending Europe , but now , just when the euro is about to be introduced , which is a major political event , relations between us have deteriorated and we no longer trust each other as we did .
That is what I think .
And if there is something wrong between us as we approach this major political event , then we must ask each other why this has happened and how we can rebuild our trust .
The European Parliament is finding itself the target of criticism , and we have tried to resolve a number of issues by introducing the Statute .
I have noticed that when ministers go back to their Member States , they claim all the credit for Europe 's successes themselves and blame the Commission and the European Parliament for everything that goes wrong .
This means that neither institution can do anything right .
When we vote on the discharge for 1996 the day after tomorrow , I personally hope and expect that discharge will be given , but I do not know what the newspapers will say the following day about everything else that is now going wrong .
So we must both try to find solutions together .
You have made a number of proposals that I agree with .
You said that you want to modernise the Commission .
If we have new responsibilities , we must have the staff to carry them out .
We must ensure that officials - not just at the Commission , but also at the Council and the European Parliament - undergo proper recruitment procedures , and that we have proper rules to be able to dismiss them where necessary .
You did not say anything about this in your speech .
The codes of conduct for both institutions are extremely important , but I have to ask , with the proposals you have made , how we can really monitor whether we are each complying with them , so that we can hold faith over the coming years and not have to go into the elections feeling that promises were made but not kept .
So I think we have a lot to do here .
I should just like to make three more brief points .
I am concerned about a number of political elements such as Agenda 2000 and the short time available .
I wonder whether our two institutions should not have clearer agreements here .
Secondly , I am concerned about growth , employment and all our efforts in the social field .
You talked about modernisation , but I have the impression that particularly those workers who cross frontiers every day are not seeing the advantages that we hoped they would .
I am concerned about food safety and everything to do with it .
One of the conclusions reached after the BSE crisis was that we in Europe definitely need something like a Food and Drug Administration .
We have hardly got anywhere with this , and that worries me .
It is not all your fault , the Council is also to blame .
What progress are we making there ?
Finally , I hope - and in many parliaments there is a group of elder statesmen or party chairmen or whatever they may be called - that after the vote on Thursday , we can find a better way of managing crises and that you will reach agreement with Parliament 's President and the Conference of Presidents on how we can ensure that we have a good run-up to the elections , and that you yourself can enter your last six months with your head held high , because that is what I and my group would very much like to see .
Madam President , it might seem a little frustrating to be discussing the likes of programmes in the afterglow of the Vienna summit , but the Commission and Council 's work does involve producing such things .
I certainly agree that implementation of Agenda 2000 deserves top priority - along with all the other programmes with ' 2000 ' appended .
The President of the Commission himself mentioned MAP 2000 and SEM 2000 .
No evaluation of the last six months will be complete until we see that the goals set are being achieved .
The Commission President mentioned two codes of conduct , but said nothing about his institution 's existing commitment to good administrative practice . We have in the past seen the fruits of this - and surely sound internal governance is now more relevant than ever .
Rules on transparency and conflict of interest are vital if a dividing line is to be drawn between political and administrative activities .
The credibility of each and every one of us is at stake here . I very much hope that Commissioner Oreja and his team will soon be tabling proposals on transparency and access to information , because an open style of management is essential if the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam are to be honoured .
And I would repeat today what I have already stated twice before in this House : it is transparency that will lead to greater effectiveness and efficiency .
Let me now switch to another subject under debate , namely the viability of the euro .
I sadly cannot endorse the compromise reached on how the euro zone should be represented on the international stage .
Mr President , there has been talk of new employment goals for Europe .
However , I fear that we could easily fall back into old moulds when it comes to ways of achieving them .
It was good though to hear from the Commission President that a new programme of health-promoting measures is on the way .
And the decision this week by the agriculture ministers to ban the use of certain antibiotics was excellent news .
I hope that steps will be undertaken as part of this programme to combat resistant forms of the tuberculosis and salmonella viruses . These are currently causing severe problems both in the EU and beyond .
May I conclude by saying how pleased I was that Mr Santer mentioned the extraordinary European Council to be held in Tampere on internal policy and security .
Let us hope that the Commission and its President will make the most of the right of initiative they do actually enjoy under the third pillar . And I would appeal for a pro-active approach to the Northern Dimension .
Madam President , those of us who have the responsibility of representing the agricultural sector of our individual countries must be concerned , if not alarmed , at the extent of the economic crisis experienced particularly by livestock farmers .
We are failing seriously in our duties if we cannot respond to what is an emergency situation resulting from an unprecedented set of circumstances which could not have been anticipated in the context of the 1992 CAP reform .
While acknowledging Commissioner Fischler 's concern and efforts in modifying regulations to ease the burden for farmers , the reality is that beef , sheep and pigs are being sold at a loss or at best at marginal profits .
The situation in Ireland is extremely serious and unless there is some recovery in prices , many farmers will not survive .
It is not in anybody 's interest , particularly in Ireland , with our greater dependence on agricultural exports , that the basic infrastructure of the food sector - the family farm - is in such dire straits .
With regard to the sheepmeat sector , the Commission should , as an emergency measure , suspend the stabiliser at least on a temporary basis to enable the system to reflect the reality of the market-place for Irish sheep farmers who are leaving sheep farming at an alarming rate .
Such instability is certainly not in the long term interests of the European farm model which we purport to represent in the context of Agenda 2000 .
If the Irish family farm is to survive within a framework of the European model , as envisaged in Agenda 2000 , greater efficiencies must be achieved through cooperation and well-planned partnerships .
The agricultural proposals , as represented in Agenda 2000 , are not satisfactory , particularly from an Irish perspective .
It is impossible to envisage further price cuts without a corresponding increase in direct income support from the EU and the agricultural budget .
Madam President , I , too , would like to speak solely on the issue of agriculture , the Union 's most important financial policy and the decisive issue in Agenda 2000 .
Mr President of the Commission , when will you admit that the reform of the CAP that you are proposing is leading to deadlock ?
First , because it reinforces a production-based approach that does not respond to the needs of farmers , those who live in the country and European society in terms of jobs , the quality and diversity of agricultural products , the balanced use of the land , and international cooperation .
Moreover , it preempts the result of the negotiations on the WTO and on enlargement by already penalising the Union 's interests , particularly by accepting additional concessions in the face of American demands .
Finally , what future does this reform have , when it is based on financial forecasts and international markets that have been turned upside down by the financial crisis and the constraints of budgetary stability linked to the euro ?
This all explains why this reform has been rejected on a massive scale , not only by the vast majority of national and European agricultural organisations , but also by the majority of this House .
On two occasions , the European Parliament has stated that it would prefer a different form of CAP , one that is based on employment , the adjustment of income support and the balanced use of land , and that respects Community preference .
The Committee on Agriculture has just rejected the proposals to reform the common organisation of the markets in beef and veal , milk and cereals , but until now , the Commission has refused to listen to the signals we have sent in its direction .
Not only has it failed to make any significant change to its initial drafts , but it is still persisting in negotiating free trade agreements with third countries , under conditions that are bringing about a further weakening of the Community preference and the European model .
When will the Commission decide to pull the reform out of the rut it is in and take account of the House 's proposals to make the CAP fairer and more just , to the benefit of farmers and all of society ?
In conclusion , how can the Commission justify its proposal to lift the embargo on British meat , while most scientists still have strong reservations and while not all the health guarantees have been met ?
I should like to hear what the Commission has to say about these comments and questions .
Madam President , our debate on 1998 is taking place in a unique context for two reasons .
It is unique , firstly , since , as our colleague Mr Desama has already pointed out , there is a serious crisis in our confidence in the Commission , entangled as it is in a muddle of accusations and allegations of poor management , which is obviously preventing the Commission from working effectively .
The second point concerns the political context .
In fact , 1999 is an important electoral year , when the public expects clear messages from the various political actors involved and from the Commission , so that they are able to make up their minds .
Finally , it is also a year when preparations will be made for the new World Trade Organisation negotiations , the review of the Lomé Convention and the adoption of Agenda 2000 .
So there are many issues and a difficult background . And , in my view , there are three questions that need to be answered here that many people ask .
Firstly , where is Europe going ?
Secondly , what are the responses of the Commission and the various institutions to the current challenges we face ?
And thirdly , given the political crisis , do original and credible responses exist ?
On the first question of where Europe is going , I believe that there are two possibilities . On the one hand , Europe can content itself with being a form of free trade area without much of a political dimension .
This is unfortunately a possibility that risks becoming a reality if , as I fear , the reform of the institutions does not measure up to what has been planned . On the other hand , we can have democratic , political integration with a common project for all Europeans , including those who are to join us in the years ahead .
Today , unfortunately , all the talk seems to be about enlargement and the Commission makes nothing but technical statements on the planned institutional reforms .
It talks about changing the composition of the Commission , extending the use of qualified majority voting , and giving new weighting to the votes within the Council , but it says very little about what we are all waiting for , that is , a far-reaching reform of the running of the European Union .
A new treaty which is much more ambitious than the Treaty of Amsterdam is essential and , as far as I am concerned , the Commission is the institution that is in the best position to propose one today , a few months before the election .
It is to be noted that there is no response to this either in your speech or in your documents .
The second question relates to the main challenges facing us .
You mentioned them yourself : globalisation , sustainable development , technological changes and international instability .
I am surprised to see that these challenges are presented as if they were independent of one another , and as if the European Union were faced with a sort of inevitability that had come from somewhere else , to which we must adapt as best we can by sustaining as little damage as possible at an ecological and social level .
This idea is , to my mind , mistaken and dangerous , and I think that it is a fundamental , and probably the principal , challenge .
Is globalisation , as it appears today , compatible with a democratic European Union that is the bearer of an original development plan , in other words , a model for development that is sustainable on both ecological and social levels ?
In the present context , this is not possible because many mechanisms regulating investment , global trade and technological choices still need to be introduced , and it is on this point that the Commission should provide at least an initial response .
I see no such response in your text , nor did I hear it in your speech .
Finally , the third point relates to transparency and confidence .
You say yourself that we cannot achieve any results without the participation and confidence of the general public in the democratic model .
Several of my colleagues have condemned the problems concerning the relations between Parliament and the Commission . And it is true that even the commitments made by your predecessor , Mr Delors , and by yourself , regarding relations between Parliament and the Commission have not always been honoured , and I would even go so far as to say that this has often been the case .
Given this situation , Mr President , you will surely admit that it is difficult to ask us to have confidence .
I therefore call on you to respond and to make a special effort as , to paraphrase one of our well-known predecessors , the Belgian Paul Henri Spaak , it is not too late , but it is high time to do something . I would like to repeat to you what he said : it is not too late , but it is certainly high time to do something !
Mr President , in the past , Mr President of the Commission , you have promised fewer rules but better prepared ones in return , and I am very pleased with that .
I simply do not have the chance to see if you meant to keep your promises .
Amendments to existing directives , plans for green papers , action programmes and important communications are not in fact included in the Commission 's statement .
The long version - the one which corresponds to a prime minister 's inaugural address - is drawn up by the Commission 's directorate-general , but it is not official .
When a government is presenting its list of legislation , one might perhaps accept this state of affairs : after all , the voters can decide to replace the government at the next elections , if they are dissatisfied with what it delivers .
We have no opportunity to do that , since it is the officials at the Commission who have the right of initiative in the EU .
We therefore believe that the right of initiative should lie instead with the national parliaments , but at the very least the long and uncut version should also be presented in writing to those who are elected by the people .
In the light of the discussions on redundancy pay which are currently taking place in Denmark , for example , I would like to know more about the substance of the Commission 's item regarding a proposal for a directive on the fiscal treatment of the supplementary pension rights of employees and self-employed persons moving within the EU .
Mr President , as has previously been pointed out , the Commission 's programme for 1999 has the particular characteristic of applying not only to the development of the Treaties currently in force , but also to the development of the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam .
There has already been a considerable delay , which is normal in the process of ratifying Community Treaties , but it is expected that the Treaty of Amsterdam will enter into force at the beginning of next year .
As a result , the Commission will obviously have to devote a substantial part of its work to the preparation and development of this Treaty .
In one particular area some progress has already been made , as at the Luxembourg Summit of November 1997 on unemployment , the Commission managed to obtain a commitment from the Member States to provisionally apply the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam relating to employment , which means that certain aspects of the Treaty are already in force .
However , there are other aspects for which there is no such provision .
In his speech Mr Desama already mentioned one example , namely the special system for the ultra-peripheral regions .
Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam provides for the immediate application of all Community legislation in these regions .
I am referring here to the Canary Islands , Madeira , the Azores and the French overseas departments .
If the Commission does not draw up special application rules , then those regions could be deprived of their current special status . They might all be subject to ordinary Community legislation from the very first day of the Treaty 's application , which would have negative effects on the development of these ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union .
I therefore believe that it is important for the Commission to include in its 1999 work programme - as the Socialist Group 's motion for a resolution does - specific provisions on the application of Article 299 ( 2 ) to the ultra-peripheral regions of the Community .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , allow me to address a number of issues .
I believe that it is important to record that the Commission - in contrast to the golden age of legislation on the internal market - is only tabling 31 new legislative proposals , and some of those consist of amending existing directives .
This shows a pleasing tendency , in line with the principle of subsidiarity , and I think that we should also make the public and our governments fully aware of this .
Secondly , I should like to ask the Commission - as we have also stated in our motion - to tell us more clearly why 181 dossiers are pending in the Council awaiting a final decision , and why the Council has still not adopted a common position in 85 cases .
I believe that we would perhaps be able to kick-start this process if the Commission were to inform Parliament in more detail of the reasons for the blockage in the Council .
That illuminates my next point , a call for more transparency .
One of the objectives which the Commission has included in its work programme is implementing the provision on transparency in the Amsterdam Treaty .
I believe that this issue is vital to the future acceptance of the European Union , and I should like to ask the Commission , when defining transparency and specifying and applying rules , to involve Parliament at a very early stage - if possible before its directives are published - so that we can use this as a basis for reaching a consensus on our ideas , because essentially this is also about how we can force the Council to be more transparent , to the point of establishing a legislative Council .
I believe that we should work together closely here .
That brings me to a further point , applying the provisions of Amsterdam .
The debate with Parliament hitherto has , I feel , suffered from a marked lack of proposals from the Commission on implementing the common foreign and security policy in connection with Amsterdam , and a lack of information about , for example , the composition of the Planning Unit .
Information or a dialogue might perhaps raise public awareness , so that this is not settled by the governments of the Member States amongst themselves . In the same way , we should also like to discuss working together on the procedure for the forthcoming selection of the Commission , and in other similar areas .
We should also like to ask the Commission , as far as possible , to apply the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty even now , before it is ratified , and also to take initiatives , so that the fields of justice and home affairs can - following the five-year transition phase - move over to codecision .
Preparations should be made even now , so that this changeover can still take place before the enlargement treaties are concluded .
Finally , I believe that it is extremely important for the Commission to table proposals for the new stage of institutional reform , as Parliament has proposed .
I completely understand that the date of December 1998 cannot be adhered to because of the delay in ratifying the Treaty of Amsterdam .
But I do think it is necessary for proposals to be made by March of next year , so that they can form part of the debate during the European election campaign , which in turn will bring the topic to the forefront of the discussion .
Mr President , the legislative programme for this year should respond to the public 's demands for employment , social justice and economic and social cohesion .
It should ensure that the construction of European is more transparent and closer to the people , and that it concentrates more on the political realisation of their immediate aspirations concerning their daily lives and wellbeing .
The programme does not make significant progress in this respect , although it does make a commitment to that end .
To make any progress , the programme should give priority to strengthening social justice at all levels and to solidarity between regions . This is particularly necessary at this delicate time when the preparations for enlargement have allowed the risks of increasing imbalances to come to the surface .
Questions have been left aside that would illustrate the desire for cohesion , and this is what has happened with the status of the ultra-peripheral regions .
I would finally like to point out that this programme - a programme for the last year of this legislature - will not increase public support for the European project or the construction of Europe , and this is something we need to win .
The President of the Commission said that the construction of Europe is not an end , but a means .
The end is naturally the wellbeing of the people , and in order to fulfill that objective , this programme needs to have a greater degree of democracy and justice .
Mr President , I think it is particularly important to mention an action implemented this year by the Commission - actually Directorate-General XXIII - which may be very small when seen in an overall context , but which I believe to be very significant and very positive .
Working in cooperation with non-governmental organisations and the travel industry and with a budget of ECU 500 000 , targeted and efficient preventive measures against child sex tourism were taken .
These consist of information videos being shown on long-haul flights , information pamphlets being distributed to travellers , and so on .
This is a laudable and tangible first step in the fight against a dreadful development , which is being further exacerbated by the economic and financial crisis in Asia .
European tourists bear a considerable part of the responsibility for this situation .
That is why I call on the Commission to please continue this positive work and further intensify its efforts .
Mr President , I cannot overemphasise the importance of the issue that has been raised by some speakers already , that is to say , the basic question of how the Agenda 2000 dossier is to be moved forward .
The Commission has its job to do here , and so have Parliament and the Council , but the Commission must not forget that its particular job is immensely important .
Unless this matter is moved forward according to the agreed timetable , everything else is thrown into question .
In the field of environmental policy , it has to be said that Commission 's work programme is not the most ambitious .
The Treaty of Amsterdam makes it compulsory , on the basis of the principle of transparency , for environmental matters to form part of all European Union policy .
However , the Union is not committed to framework legislation on this issue .
I would urge the Commission to attend to this , so that next year Parliament can start debating framework legislation that should in particular include proposals for integrating environmental issues into transport , agricultural and energy policy .
Enlargement is one of those challenges that has to be met using our full weight , and environmental issues also form a very large part of the whole process .
Right from the start of any enlargement negotiations , when bilateral talks commence between Member States and the applicant country , it has to be made clear that the environment must not take second place to other issues , and that it will feature more substantially than before .
Before any new enlargement the European Union must , however , see to it that the policies of the separate northern dimension are realised and that next year the means are found to make progress on those issues designed to make policies in the European Union 's Nordic regions more effective .
Mr President , the objectives for 1999 , which is a transition year for both Parliament and the Commission , should not be radically different from those considered at the Vienna Summit .
These include the fight against unemployment , the birth of the euro , the consolidation of the internal market and , above all , the Commission 's proposals in Agenda 2000 . The Commission must make efforts to ensure that these proposals are accepted within the Council and , in this respect , I would also ask the Commission to give very special priority to the presentation of specific measures to help the ultra-peripheral regions and a rehabilitation and reconstruction plan for the countries of Central America .
Many of us here - I would say the majority of this Parliament - do not believe that the Commission is a high authority of stateless bureaucrats but rather a key institution with significant merits that are important for the development of the process of European integration .
However , this does not mean that the Commission does not have to change some of its rules of behaviour .
In his investiture speech , Mr Santer committed himself to leading a merciless fight against fraud .
Fraud must be combated because , apart from anything else , it undermines the credibility and image of the European Union .
The Commission must cooperate with Parliament and keep it rapidly and effectively informed .
In certain Commission departments there is almost administrative paralysis , which we urgently need to resolve .
It is also urgent to establish a healthy personnel policy that prevents frustration and takes account of the legitimate aspirations of the Commission 's officials .
I am very pleased with the remarks made by the President of the Commission in this respect .
It is now time for the Commission or , should I say , certain Commissioners - for there are others who set a fine example that nobody remembers , as Mr Santer said - to take a decisive step in the right direction .
And the right direction , Mr President , can only be to set a course towards the process of European integration .
This course must be maintained , as has always been the tradition , and form a harmonious partnership with Parliament so that the present discord can be resolved into harmony for the future .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , this programme gives us the opportunity to consider some fascinating issues .
Up to now , Europe 's problems , with the single market in 1993 , have been of a technical and legislative nature , trying to determine , for example , if 80 % or 90 % of our legislation was European or national .
But we Members are looking at real questions , strategic questions that are all extremely fascinating .
As regards the euro , the die is cast , if I may say so ; the ball is in play .
With all the asymmetric shocks that it might cause , we do not know what the consequences will be or where they will stem from .
We may pray for miracles ; I hope we get them .
Soon it will be Easter and , perhaps , the time for resurrections .
There is also Amsterdam to consider .
You were not sensible , or at least this Treaty is not sensible , with tides of immigrants flowing in unchecked .
Fancy leaving this to a simple majority decision !
All this over the last five years with our Finnish and Swedish friends who , protected by their climate , naturally do not have as many immigration problems .
Then there are the WTO negotiations for the year 2000 .
I hope that you will hold out better than during the GATT negotiations , when all Mr Brittan left us were memories .
But we are a little worried given that all the free trade areas are coming together .
What is more , we have this great and wonderful plan to enlarge towards the East , even though we fear that our Polish or Hungarian friends might not be on the same level as us .
In addition , there are , of course , more technical problems due to all the rationing you have introduced , as well as serious health concerns .
I will not go into detail on the 1998 assessment , Mr Santer .
At the end of the day , you are only the latest in a long line .
However , those 18 million unemployed do exist , as do the children I read about in the press , the 500 000 children under the age of 12 in the United Kingdom who have to work .
It is like Victor Hugo 's ' Les Misérables ' .
What is more , the 50 million people excluded from society also exist . And you do , in fact , devote a large section of your work programme , paragraph 3 , to the eternal issue of employment .
Mr Santer , I believe that if we wanted to look at the philosophical errors since the beginning , since the Commission of the 1950s , it would be easy to see where they came from .
The philosophical mistake comes from Malthusianism .
In fact , your prevailing ideology is that of the Club of Rome of the 1960s .
Every time there is a problem , you resolve it in a negative manner .
When there was a coal problem , you closed the mines .
When there was a steel problem , you closed the steelworks .
After that came Vietnam and Thailand .
As for the shipyards , they were also closed down .
Calves were turned into bonemeal .
Each time , you succumb to the heady lure of the void .
Each time , Europe 's policy is a Malthusian policy , even as far as the most technical points are concerned , such as the budgetary stability pact , which is actually a budgetary rationing pact .
Your ideology is that we cannot invite many people to the great banquet of European humanity and , therefore , we must cut down , we must ration payments , ration social protection , ration care and ration health .
That ha produced consequences that are plain to see .
If only you had a different policy , based on a different philosophy , based on the philosophy of life , on the belief that life is beautiful , that tomorrow brings with it our future , and that there are more things to life than just this ! Instead , because we make cuts and add restrictions , we have ended up with the current situation .
If only you wanted to treat the causes of unemployment !
It is not the good Lord or the devil that bring unemployment .
It has been caused by the senseless opening of borders , overly high taxation and the pointless race for extreme levels of production .
And what if Europe wanted to be European ?
For example , with Europe 's common security policy , what would it be like if we no longer followed the United States ' line on human rights , Iraq and the Iraqi children , for instance ?
Europe is simply humiliating itself and going back on everything it has stood for when it turns Iraq into a concentration camp with 18 million dying inhabitants , without even raising its voice against Mr Clinton and against the United States .
As regards financing - since everything boils down to money - Mr Monti is making some very ordinary proposals about fiscal measures and savings .
If only you had greater ambition when it comes to taxation !
We should reduce Europe 's taxes and provide for a form of European fiscal contribution with a ceiling for compulsory levies in order to free up resources .
Then you would have your European funding programme with a GNP resource that would replace everything , both levelling out and cofinancing . ( By the way , by mistake my group , having been against cofinancing , very nearly voted in favour of it because of a practical error . )
If only you had a great ambition , Mr Santer , a great ambition and a European Europe !
For we are not the stupid anti-Europeans you believe us to be . If you had a great ambition for a European Europe , a Europe that was no longer Malthusian and that wanted to forge bridges towards the future , a Europe that was itself , then we could agree with you , Mr Santer .
That is the Christmas miracle .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , I should like to look at the work programme for the coming year in conjunction with the results of the summit held last weekend .
The initial reaction of anyone who , like me , has been mainly occupied with the issue of employment over the last few years must be to be happy with the results , because I have never seen so many pages devoted to employment in a final report .
However , I have also seldom read so many pages where so little that is practical is said about employment either .
I therefore think that one of the most important tasks for the Commission is to keep the Union on track in the process developed last year in Luxembourg , and to keep to the idea of benchmarking and specific targets .
These are things that it seems to have more or less abandoned in its proposals , which I regret , but I hope that improvements can be made in the year to come .
An important aim for the coming year , and one which could become extremely important for future generations , is the development of effective coordination between economic policy and social employment policy , involving all the various players here .
I can well imagine that this will entail a whole new process , but I hope that it is already being prepared for the summit under the German Presidency .
There is just one problem .
Now that we have finally succeeded in making employment a top priority , I have the impression that it has become the only issue in the social field .
But employment is not and cannot be the only issue .
Social policy is more than just labour market policy .
Social integration and combating poverty , now included in the national action programmes , are also linked to wages policy .
It is all well and good to talk about work and poverty , but talking about combating poverty without having a minimum wage , for example , means that your policy has no solid foundations , and I hope that the Commission succeeds in coming up with some proposals on this subject too .
Social policy is also about legislation , and here I think the Commission has not been bold enough in recent years .
I would urge that the convergence of social protection in Europe should be put higher on the agenda this year , and that we should consider whether the system we have developed as part of our employment strategy , using benchmarking and specific targets as a way forward , would not also be a good approach for social convergence .
With social protection , we have concentrated far too long on often demoralising minimum levels of protection and minimum directives , which were often extremely difficult to justify in countries which already had quite well-developed systems .
I hope that we can continue the process we have started with our employment policy , moving forward on the basis of benchmarking and targets .
I wish you every success with this .
Mr President , you said , Mr Santer , that you had set the Commission a full programme for the coming year .
That is good , because not only is this the last year of this term of office , it is probably also the most important , if you look at the challenges facing the European Union , and thus the Commission .
The key word is Agenda 2000 .
You said quite rightly that the development of Europe is at stake here , and we will need to make every effort if this process of development is actually to lead anywhere .
The Commission can be assured of the European Parliament 's cooperation , precisely on this important issue , if it actively seeks this cooperation from Parliament , and if it grants the European Parliament the legal powers which we must otherwise wait for the Treaty of Amsterdam finally to bestow on us , in particular when decisions are made about the important reforms covered by Agenda 2000 - the common agricultural policy and structural policy - but also where financial decisions are concerned .
A further important point is implementing the transatlantic economic partnership .
This crops up time and again , but in the future , next year and in the years thereafter , it will have to amount to something more than repeated displays - all too common in reality - of our obstructing one another 's trade in petty quarrels about relatively unimportant matters ; I am thinking here of bananas .
My third , final and , in my view , most important point is as follows : you said that the Commission had to ensure that its house was in order .
This morning in the debate on the discharge , we heard that Parliament wishes to set the Commission a particularly important task in this respect , with a view to cleaning up the Commission .
A set of Staff Regulations which does not just meet with the approval of staff representatives should make a significant contribution to our being able to clean up the Commission .
This starts with the recruitment of officials .
Both selection procedures and in particular the procedures by which senior officials are appointed need to be run quite differently from the way in which they have been run all too often in the past .
The key word of transparency should not remain simply a word ; we also need actually to put this transparency into practice .
I have one final point , which cannot be overlooked . In my view , it is important for the Commission also to resolve to pursue the individual responsibility of Commissioners in particular cases , where that proves to be necessary .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to confine my contribution to transport policy and , within that , to the Commission 's work programme for 1999 .
I should like to say at the very outset that I still clearly remember the time in 1994 and 1995 , before this Commission was appointed , when this Commission swore that it would always listen to Parliament .
I should now like to remind you of this by making two points .
I should in fact like to ask you not to proceed with two proposals in the 1999 work programme .
In transport policy , Mr Kinnock , on behalf of the Commission , has proposed tabling a directive on market access for port services .
When I drew up my report on the Green Paper on sea ports , the Committee on Transport and Tourism decided unanimously that there was no need for a legislative initiative of this kind at the present time .
Should there be any difficulties , the Commission is kindly requested to use its powers in the field of aid and competition rules to improve market access .
But we certainly do not want you to initiate legislation .
Secondly , the Commission is proposing to produce a white paper on trans-European transport networks .
Mr Santer , we do not need one !
We do not need a new general basis for our discussion ; instead , we need a specific proposal to amend the 1996 guidelines adopted by Parliament and the Council , as it says in Article 21 .
This states that there shall be a revised proposal in 1999 , not a white paper .
Given the forthcoming parliamentary elections and the reappointment of the Commission , I can understand the desire not to table a new proposal on trans-European networks .
But nor do we need to have Parliament working on a superfluous white paper .
Instead , you should say that you will propose specific legislation in the year 2000 .
Perhaps you could have a word with Mr Kinnock , because if both houses - the Council and Parliament - do not even want a bill , then why should the Commission draft one ?
You can save yourself a lot of time if you listen to Parliament first !
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the private economic law of the Union 's Member States is increasingly influenced by European legislation .
Recent examples of this are to be found in the fields of product liability , guarantees for consumer goods and payment arrears .
The Union 's work in the field of private law thus far has been characterised by a host of individual initiatives .
The Commission should consider whether this method of taking many small independent steps forward really will continue to be the best one in the future .
Of course , the Union 's usual procedure is to legislate on individual , limited areas at a time when those rules are necessary , and when they are likely to receive majority support .
An approach of this kind will not necessarily increase our citizens ' confidence , however ; it must seem to them as if their national private law were being eroded bit by bit , by the back door as it were .
What is lacking is a confidence-building , recognisable system , an approach clearly based on a system .
That is also the reason for the - quite justified - repeated complaints about the lack of consistency when private law is approximated in Europe .
Before taking further isolated initiatives , the Commission should , therefore , develop a plan of action which openly - but also with due moderation - expresses support for some basic principles of a body of Community private law , on which there is likely to be a consensus .
The discussion initiated by the so-called Lando Committee needs to be reopened and included in the work in progress in the Commission ; otherwise we cannot expect people to accept European legislation .
Mr Santer , your programme undoubtedly goes in the right direction : it is an ambitious one and addresses the problems which will confront us over the next few years .
But , in order to be fulfilled , ambitions - like good intentions - require a certain political climate and general conditions which , in my opinion , do not exist at present and which the Commission should set about creating .
How can the problem of greater cohesion be tackled with fewer resources ?
How can the agricultural policy be improved through a proposal which in actual fact destroys the good parts of what exists at present ?
How , for instance , could we possibly think of replacing the good wines produced in Europe 's hilly areas with sugaring carried out in chemical processing plants ?
And I could continue .
Nor do I believe that the outcome of the Vienna summit goes in the right direction .
There is a certain resurgence of nationalism which does not augur well and which the Commission , as Europe 's government , should somehow combat with courage and determination .
The problem of unemployment is of crucial importance , and I do not believe that it can be tackled solely through financial or administrative measures , however flexible these may be .
One key theme must be scientific research , innovation and the updating of cultural and educational systems , which represent the greatest challenge for the future .
Achieving these aims is a matter not only of transferring technology to SMEs but also of mounting large-scale projects , because they alone can transform , innovate and carry forward scientific research and innovation within Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank each of the speakers who have taken part in this debate and who have thus contributed to enriching the Commission 's action programme for 1999 .
I am clearly not going to respond in full to all the points raised but you can be sure that I will forward them to those of my colleagues who are directly responsible for the more specialised areas .
This debate comes between the debate you held this morning on the discharge and the debate that will take place tomorrow morning on the conclusions of the Vienna European Council .
I would therefore like to avoid any needless repetition .
Clearly , you have already put up with enough of that today .
I would , however , like to respond to certain points and questions that were raised and to clarify certain issues .
I would firstly like to apologise to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for not having gone into much detail on the assessment .
This is because I deliberately wanted to concentrate more on the future , that is , to look at things more from a political perspective .
However , as far as the assessment is concerned , I must point out - and I say this with some pride , perhaps not justified in every case , but with a certain degree of pride all the same - that , for the first time , of the 34 new legislative initiatives scheduled in our action programme for 1998 , 30 were actually put forward , in other words 88 % .
Those that are not completed by the end of the year will naturally be carried forward to next year , and thus be added to the 26 proposals for the 1999 programme .
I do not want to inundate you with statistics but I have here a table that shows us what the new initiatives are .
Of these initiatives , 30 out of 34 have been implemented .
14 consultation procedures have been initiated , while 29 action plans and other initiatives have become a reality , and so on .
I will stop there .
This is perhaps of interest to the officials and secretaries who work for the committees . It is not always of interest to politicians .
I would also like to assure you that the Commission guarantees that the legislative programme will be monitored .
During the course of this year , I myself attended the Conference of Presidents to be present for the assessment of the programmes . And my colleague , Mr Oreja , also attended the Conference of Committee Chairmen to discuss the legislative programmes and the work programme .
Rest assured that both myself and Mr Oreja , who is responsible , in particular , for relations with the European Parliament , will certainly be at your disposal if you , the Conference of Presidents or the Conference of Committee Chairmen want to contact us .
I believe that we will do all we can to ensure that this programme can be implemented , for reasons that you know very well , because 1999 will be an important year .
Some of you have also raised the matter of the reform of the Commission .
I must tell you that this is an issue that has concerned me since I was appointed , because I noticed when I took over this role , in January 1995 - and I have already said this to you on many occasions - that there was a management problem within the Commission .
I had certain dossiers on my table , such as the tourism dossier , for example .
That is why , from the outset , we introduced a number of initiatives to help the Commission resolve the management problems .
These included SEM 2000 ( Sound Economic Management ) , MAP 2000 and many others . I have already spoken about these initiatives and will not go back to them now .
Our anti-fraud body , UCLAF , also became operational under this Commission .
It was created a little earlier , but only became operational under this Commission .
I must tell you , and emphasise the fact , that it is thanks to UCLAF , thanks to our own services , that a number of matters , particularly the incidents of fraud , have been brought to light .
What we can criticise is the fact that we have become victims of our own goodwill and , perhaps , our naivety . The issues that are now the front-page headlines in all the newspapers , the matters that have led to a number of articles are , in fact , euromyths .
We need to forget about these euromyths that are splashed all over the newspapers ; I do not believe them , and I know what I am talking about . But , on the other hand , these matters also relate to real events , and they are real events that we have discovered precisely because we want to be transparent .
As I have already said , we want to wage an effective fight against fraud . In all the instances where fraud has been discovered , we have drawn the consequences , both the disciplinary consequences for the officials concerned and the judicial consequences for the dossiers themselves , which are , in fact , currently sub judice .
This applies equally to tourism , to ECHO and the other matters involved . In actual fact all these matters go back to 1990 , 1992 and 1993 , in other words to a time when the Commission , as I said earlier , took on a number of new responsibilities , but those in charge were not able to monitor the management of the funds under their control .
For example , the humanitarian office , ECHO , had 38 officials in 1993 to manage an annual budget of ECU 100 million under very difficult conditions .
You know how the volunteers from our NGOs work , be it in Rwanda , in the region of the Great Lakes , in Bosnia , in China , in North Korea , and so on .
At times , the accounting rules as they are now cannot always be applied in the same way , including in relations with the various auditing authorities .
That is why I believe it is essential to have screened all the directorates-general and learned a number of lessons that are currently bearing fruit .
I assure you that we want this Commission to do this work thoroughly , and we want to learn all the lessons we can so that the new Commission , in the year 2000 , has a number of instruments available with which it can work .
This is just as important - and I believe that Mr Rack or Mr Desama , I am not exactly sure who , raised this question - when the individual responsibility of the Commissioners is at issue , which is not the case at the moment .
The Commission works as a college .
It therefore has a collective responsibility towards Parliament .
Under the new Treaty of Amsterdam , however , the President of the Commission will have an entirely different role to the one he currently has .
He will define the Commission 's policy and that will have implications , firstly , when it comes to the appointment of Commissioners , who will only be appointed with the agreement and approval of the President , while at present he is only consulted .
In addition , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty and its protocol , the President will be able to distribute the portfolios at his discretion and , if need be , to change this distribution during the term of office .
As a result , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the President 's role will change and be strengthened . He will have control and authority over the Commission , whereas at the moment he does not and cannot have such powers , since the institutional rules do not provide for that possibility .
Therefore , if we consider this entire arrangement , the efforts we are currently making to introduce the necessary changes , and the transparency we want to guarantee , with Parliament 's help - without which we would fail , as we are accountable to Parliament - I feel certain that we will manage to find a way to remedy certain situations which you are perhaps rightly criticising at the moment .
As regards the questions raised in this respect , as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten quite rightly said , the most important issue relates to the codes of conduct that are currently being drawn up .
Some of these are already in the final stages .
We did not wait for the provisions on the discharge .
The work began several years ago and is essential if we are to guarantee transparency .
Clearly , we will have to see how this transparency can be monitored .
There are certainly various ways of doing this .
There are proposals on the access of the institutions to documents and on the protection of personal data .
These must be looked at together .
I will stop there , because you have already discussed that at length this morning .
Of course , our action programme for 1999 forms part of an established political line , and broad agreement has emerged from the various speeches which will enable us to determine the important issues that will define our , and your , political action during 1999 .
Agenda 2000 is the main issue .
As I stated at the Vienna European Council and as I will state again tomorrow morning , when it is being discussed , I agree with those who said that if there is no agreement on Agenda 2000 by the end of March , then there will be no enlargement .
But if that happens , the Community 's activities will be at serious risk .
We will have a crisis , and at the very time when we need it to be strong , Europe will be facing doubts about its credibility , which will have a knock-on effect on the management of the euro , I am sure .
We must not underestimate all the efforts that have yet to be made to reach an agreement on Agenda 2000 .
The Commission has put all the cards on the table so that the negotiations can resolve all the problems .
As I said to the Member States the day before yesterday in Vienna , please , let us stop hiding behind our principles and begin to look at the areas where negotiation is possible , where agreement might be reached , or where a compromise might be achieved .
I still believe that the political will does exist and I am very pleased to see that it is there .
Our Heads of State or Government were unanimous in Vienna in stating that we must conclude this by the end of March 1999 . But to reach a final agreement , we naturally need everyone to agree to put everything on the table and not to insist on concessions obtained which are no longer justified .
I therefore agree with you that before the forthcoming enlargement , a comprehensive institutional reform must be completed .
If you have read Agenda 2000 , you will see that the Commission proposes a new international conference .
However , we must wait for the Treaty of Amsterdam to be ratified and to come into force and we must not do anything that might hinder ratification in any of the Member States that are more sensitive to institutional issues by making new proposals at this stage .
It is a question of time , but I agree with those who said that as soon as the Treaty is ratified and has entered into force , we will have to put forward proposals to take the institutional reforms further .
Some of you wanted to know what the attitude of the European Union , and more particularly that of the Commission , is towards the phenomenon of globalisation .
It is impossible to expand on all the problems in just a few words , but we have submitted a communication to the European Council on globalisation .
I believe that it is a very interesting document , and it analyses the phenomenon of globalisation while suggesting what the European Union 's responses should be to it .
I would urge you to read it , as it sets out the Commission 's response to these problems .
There is no reason why we should suffer from globalisation , even if it is a fait accompli . We must react to it , learn from our experiences and thus be true actors on the international stage .
That is why it is so important for the European Union to be present at an international level and for it to draw the political consequences of its economic dimension in order to assert itself before the rest of the world .
Other speakers raised more specific questions regarding the peripheral areas .
Certain speakers - Mr Medina , I believe , and one of his colleagues - spoke about these ultra-peripheral regions .
I can simply assure you that the Commission is currently preparing for the entry into force of the new Article 299 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
An interdepartmental working party is working on this and at the moment is carrying out an assessment and drawing up a programme for the future .
On this basis , as soon as the Treaty of Amsterdam is ratified , I will call a partnership meeting with the regions and the Member States involved so that together we can organise the future and the introduction of the new status for these regions under Article 299 .
Some speakers referred to the environment .
We have put forward a number of proposals on this subject and we must work on them .
This also applies to other initiatives that you called for , particularly - and I am in complete agreement on this point - as regards our external relations , and , above all , the Transatlantic Economic Partnership , which we need to develop .
Of course , trade disputes have become more serious recently , but we must not focus solely on the problems .
We must ask ourselves what the essence of our cooperation with the United States is and consider the possibilities for overcoming the difficulties we are encountering at the moment , because we are , in fact , partners .
Our relations are relatively well-balanced , in terms of both our trade and direct investment throughout the world .
It is therefore in our interest to develop political dialogue with the US .
A meeting will take place at the summit between President Clinton and President Klima on Friday , 18 December 1998 in Washington , at which the development of transatlantic relations will certainly be discussed .
The third point raised is , of course , employment .
I complete agree with those who say that we need to continue and consolidate the process and the strategy defined in Luxembourg .
The first attempt has already borne fruit .
In the future , in other words next year , the national action plans will be assessed on the basis of 19 guidelines , and they will be adjusted and adapted accordingly .
On that basis , we will also add the finishing touches to the process .
The process and strategy defined in Luxembourg must continue to form the backbone of the European employment pact , even though the strategy itself may have to be extended and firmed up . And you know the extent to which I am in favour of such an initiative since I launched a confidence pact on employment in January 1996 , which was a forerunner to the current pact .
I am also very pleased - and we will be able to discuss justice and home affairs tomorrow - that the idea I had proposed to you of convening a special European Council meeting on justice and home affairs has been taken up by the European Council .
I think that these areas must not be left solely to the ministers for justice and home affairs .
These are very sensitive matters that must be dealt with by the Heads of State or Government , who will have to assume their responsibilities .
I will not detain you much longer , ladies and gentlemen .
I only want to say , particularly to those who were perhaps a little more pessimistic , that it is clear that the international environment has changed a great deal since January 1995 , when the Commission began its work .
At that time , an atmosphere of gloom hung over Europe and unemployment was on the increase .
Soon , however , the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 will give the European Union new life , putting it in a different position in international economic , monetary and political relations .
Unemployment is falling .
For the first time , unemployment has dropped to below 10 % and has now reached 1992 levels .
Clearly , this is still too high , and that is why we are implementing this employment strategy which we must continue and consolidate .
In spite of everything , last year we created 1 700 000 new jobs , something that had not happened for five years , and I believe that we should work on this basis .
I am very confident because , as the headline in an American newspaper not known for its pro-European stance said a few months ago : Europe is back .
So , please , let us continue on this path and let us ensure that we do not allow ourselves to be swayed by other aspirations .
Thank you , Mr Santer .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Mr President , I did ask for the floor earlier , but no one was looking in this direction .
I should like to know why we are so far behind with our schedule .
I was told that the Metten report would be taken at about 4 p.m.
I should like to know when I can now expect it to be dealt with .
Why are we two reports behind schedule ?
If you look at the agenda , you will see that , five minutes later than planned , we are beginning Question Time to the Commission .
As you are well aware , the debates on the reports are sometimes subject to a certain delay , but we cannot afford to delay the questions to the Commission .
At the moment , I cannot give you an answer .
The only thing I can say is that it is now time for questions to the Commission to begin .
What I can also tell you is that the debate on the report by Mr Metten will be held after 9 p.m.
So , Mrs Sandberg-Fries , you now know that the debate on Mr Metten 's report will take place during the night sitting , after 9 p.m.
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0713 / 98 ) .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 46 and 47 lapse .
Question No 48 by Brian Crowley ( H-1146 / 98 )
Subject : Computer systems and the year 2000
With just over a year to go , preparations for the year 2000 in the computer system field are far from complete .
OECD ( September 1998 ) suggests that ' while awareness is increasing , the amount of remediation is still daunting , the problem continues to be underestimated ...
Preparedness among the health-care industries , small business and some parts of government appears to be particularly worrisome ' . Other information suggests that rogue software specialists are introducing as many errors as they are correcting when overhauling systems for the millennium ( FT , 26 November 1998 ) .
Will the Commission state what , in its view , is the state of preparedness in the EU for the millennium switch-over in the areas cited above , as well as in the transport , nuclear , banking and telecommunications industries , and how does it respond to the view that ' early IT system failures will occur more often as 2000 approaches , simply because IT systems generally look ahead in terms of forecasting sales , orders and other business functions ' ( FT supplement , 2 December 1998 ) ?
Mr President , the Commission drew attention to this problem some years ago .
Not only have we set up working groups with the Member States , but our services have also employed a variety of methods to make private companies and administrations aware that they need to be prepared for this technical problem .
We really have , therefore , taken every possible measure .
Solutions for the various information systems are also now available which allow the problem to be completely eliminated .
Sufficient attention is still not being paid to the problem , however , and that is why the Commission has sent a further communication to the Council .
In this communication , we have once again indicated what can be done in government , and what additional work still needs to be done to make those concerned in the private sector deal with this problem .
In the private sector , the level of awareness is still too low .
I cannot imagine why this should be the case , because actually everyone should realise that they will be the ones to suffer the most if they do not make the necessary preparations .
The honourable Member will understand that we ourselves can only deal with this to the extent that it affects us .
The Member States can only deal with it to the extent that it affects their public administration .
We cannot go into every business and solve the problem by installing the necessary software .
On the other hand , we should not exaggerate either .
I read or heard somewhere that someone was considering laying in emergency food stocks to overcome the year 2000 problem .
Even though the Commission ought to find this an attractive idea , because of its agricultural policy , it is certainly an exaggeration .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his answer - I realise how difficult it is for him to speak on this issue when so much depends on action being taken by other people and other institutions .
However , over the week-end the British Government advised people to hoard food because of the year 2000 .
As well as that , with the introduction of the single currency next year and the changeover in financial markets and other similar situations , there is a great fear , and a danger , amongst Member States , private individuals and institutions , that not enough work has been undertaken .
I should like to ask the Commissioner whether , within his own area of competence , he has brought forward any codes of best practice which should be copied by the Member States or by small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular when we consider that in its final resolution the Vienna Council placed particular emphasis on helping small and medium-sized enterprises for the changeover in the year 2000 .
I fear , Mr Crowley , that a code of conduct - even if there were not more general reasons against having one - would not be of much help , because the systems differ so greatly .
The hardware is very varied .
Different companies work with completely different computer systems .
It is understandable that more modern computer systems are easier to switch over .
Let me repeat : we did not start working on this just today ; we have been working on these issues for the last four years .
As early as four years ago , we also established that it was impossible - or in any case very expensive - to replace all the hardware .
So we put our money into software being developed for the hardware we already had - and we also supported work of this kind in our research programmes - software which could be installed on the existing hardware and would thus take us through the year 2000 .
That means , firstly , that there are solutions ; secondly , that these solutions are expensive , and that is probably the main problem , because anyone who is familiar with the problem can install this software and will have no difficulty in the year 2000 , but they will pay good money for it .
There are many small and medium-sized companies which are probably living under the illusion that they will somehow overcome the problem without having to pay the money .
More recently , I have read advertisements from insurance companies wishing , under certain circumstances , to insure for any damage resulting from a failure , which shows that even in this field offers have become available .
We cannot do any more .
You are facing a situation where , as a public administration , you can do so much , but then the people themselves have to react .
If they do not , then you cannot make up for it .
Everyone knows or ought to know that this is a problem and that there are solutions to it .
People can ask the firms they work with how they are dealing with it .
Obviously , we and the Member States have made the necessary preparations .
We really cannot do any more than that .
Even if the British Government 's advice were correct - and I very much doubt it - laying in food supplies will really only benefit the European agricultural policy , though that may indeed be reason enough .
Question No 49 by Graham Watson ( H-1158 / 98 )
Subject : Protection of children on foreign exchange schemes from abuse
Children under 18 account for 20 % of the world market for tourism .
It is estimated that , in 1998 , four million European tourists will be visitors under 18 years of age , of whom at least one million will be independent stay visitors attending foreign-language and activity schools .
Is the Commission aware that , throughout Europe , this sector is almost entirely unregulated ?
Will the Commission therefore reflect on how best to combat abuse of children in this sector and give careful consideration to the promotion of a Europe-wide code of conduct ?
I should like to welcome Mr Monti and ask him to reply to Mr Watson 's question .
The Commission is aware of the importance of youth tourism , of its benefits for the development of the young people concerned , and also of the economic activity of the tourist sector in general .
It is equally aware of the concerns , expressed in one Member State at least , regarding the inadequate regulation of the activities of those who organise annual trips abroad for large numbers of youngsters wishing to pursue foreign-language courses and other activities , especially in respect of the participants ' personal safety Looking ahead to the adoption of a new Community programme in the field of tourism , it might be possible to examine this matter in the context of the work undertaken to identify and disseminate best practice , particularly since many responsible organisations , individuals and authorities have probably already taken serious steps to provide protection in this field .
Under the Daphne programme , which supports non-governmental organisations in combating violence against children and young people , the Commission encourages the establishment of telephone helplines in all the Member States ; these offer useful advice and information to troubled youngsters , and can assist them when they travel abroad .
As far as regulatory aspects are concerned , however , the Commission would point out that these fall under the auspices of the competent authorities in the Member States .
I should like to ask the Commissioner where we are with this matter .
The vast majority of young people who travel across our borders for language courses enjoy a very good experience and their first visit abroad is a very happy one .
For the unlucky few it can be a nightmare .
This is not the kind of problem that one wishes to sensationalise : we certainly do not want to put young people or their parents off taking advantage of the benefits of a united Europe .
However , there is evidence of infiltration of this sector by organised crime and organised paedophile gangs and , as a parent myself , I am worried about the dangers of this .
I am very pleased that you are going to tackle it under the new programme on tourism but would the Commission not consider a study of what the extent of this problem might be and how it could be effectively tackled ?
The Commission is taking this issue very seriously .
Questions relating to the security of individuals and standards and procedures to be observed by educational establishments are a matter for Member States .
It would be wrong for the Commission to seek to become involved in this aspect .
The same holds true in the matter of judicial cooperation if there is any question of organised criminal activity covering more than one jurisdiction .
On a more optimistic note , if it happens that we can reach agreement on a Community tourism programme , we may be able to make some contribution in the context of youth tourism if this is seen as a priority area for Community action .
Otherwise , given also the absence of any budgetary support , there is no possibility of our contributing in this area .
However , there is a specific budget heading with associated remarks which allows us to support the efforts of organisations involved in the campaign against child sex tourism .
That , of course , goes some way towards addressing the important problem to which you so rightly call our attention .
Question No 50 by Angela Billingham ( H-1062 / 98 )
Subject : British ski instructors in the French Alps
It appears that no consensus has been reached between the French and UK Governments in the two series of bilateral meetings concerning the recognition of British ski instructors ' qualifications in France and that the French have been unable to prove that there is a substantial difference between the BASI Grade 1 Diploma held by British instructors and the French Brevet d 'Etat held by French instructors .
In the light of this , is the European Commission intending to intervene in order to end the discrimination against British ski instructors and allow them to teach in the French Alps ?
I give the floor to Mr Monti to answer Mrs Billingham 's question .
The Commission has already taken action to promote bilateral dialogue between the parties concerned , namely the BASI - British Association of Skiing Instructors - and the UK authorities , on the one hand , and their French counterparts on the other , with a view to encouraging them to agree on a basis for the recognition of the BASI Grade 1 Diploma in France .
An initial meeting between the BASI and the competent French authorities took place in Brussels at the end of 1997 .
It was decided at the Commission 's initiative to establish a Franco-British working group to examine issues relating to the two countries ' training systems .
The Commission was recently informed that this group has drawn up a report .
However , the French and UK authorities have decided by joint agreement to discuss the report first and only then , if possible , to forward joint conclusions to the Commission .
As the honourable Member will appreciate , the Commission would be ill advised to pre-empt the outcome of this process , before the working group has made public its conclusions .
At this point in time , therefore , I can merely assure the honourable Member that the Commission is committed to solving the outstanding problems .
In order to do so , if and insofar as possible , cooperation should be stepped up between instructors , their professional associations and the appropriate competent authorities .
At the same time , the Commission is fully aware of its own responsibility for checking carefully that Community law is properly complied with , in respect of sporting and recreational activities in the Alpine regions .
I would add that the contacts established between those most directly concerned have already led to agreement on a considerable number of practical measures .
These measures have already been taken and have substantially improved matters , and those concerned deserve to be congratulated on their work so far .
The Commission hopes that further progress will be made in the near future , building on the success already achieved thanks to the clear commitment on the part of both the French and UK authorities .
Commissioner , I welcome your reply and thank you for the work I know you have done .
But it must be said that , as yet , not one single British ski instructor has been allowed to work in the French Alps .
It is two and a half years since we first spoke about this in the Chamber and you assured me that French ski instructors would allow the British to work that year .
Two years on , still no action .
This is an absolutely disastrous situation !
There is a new twist : a French ski school has sought to employ 15 British ski instructors and has been prevented from doing so .
They themselves are now taking the French Ski Association to the courts .
Clearly there is a terrible situation here , which throws into question our ability within the European Union of translating the Treaty into appropriate action .
I am sad to say that we have an example here of French protectionism which has to be stopped .
This is slightly off-piste if you are going to talk about being on the ground or on the snow .
This is very familiar ground for those that have worked in the area of free movement of workers and mutual recognition of qualifications across the European Community .
It strikes me that some authorities are continuing to prevaricate , in one country at least .
Is there not a case for returning to the status quo at least of two and a half years ago ?
If there is a problem in agreeing on benchmarks and this is an indication of disaccord in bilateral discussions , the Commission should be very much involved in helping to reach an agreement on these benchmarks in a way that will lead us out of this impasse .
The problem is a complex one because in principle the French authorities are allowed to impose aptitude tests on foreign ski instructors .
Under Community law - Directive 92 / 51 EEC - the national authorities are allowed to impose compensatory measures but only where there are significant differences in the levels of qualifications .
In the case of ski instructors , where the issue of safety is at stake , they are allowed to impose aptitude tests .
This is why it is not particularly easy for the Commission to enter into such a debate - a debate , you will appreciate , involving comparison of very technical courses .
If the BASI considers it appropriate , the problem could be resolved by a national court which is responsible for the correct implementation of Community law .
Of course one way to solve the problem is also bilateral dialogue .
This is the way forward that - as I explained in some detail in my initial response - the Commission has been pursuing and will continue to pursue .
Mr President , there are at present 2 993 temporary staff employed in the Commission .
750 of them are paid out of administrative appropriations and 2 243 are paid out of funds set aside for research .
The procedure for selecting and employing temporary staff was reviewed on 1 December 1996 .
The review applies only to those temporary staff who are paid out of administrative appropriations .
A total of 135 staff have been employed since the new procedure came into effect .
On the basis of a decision taken in December 1996 regarding temporary staff , the Commission will no longer organise competitions for making posts permanent after 1999 .
This is because those taking part in internal competitions and those participating in general competitions were usually regarded as having unequal status .
However , the Commission has begun to look for ways of dispensing with mass competitions , which are so difficult to organise .
In February we are reorganising the aborted competition of early autumn , and I hope that after that the mass competition system will no longer apply .
At present we are considering how preselection might be approached in future , for example on the basis of languages or by country , thus simplifying the very ponderous competition process involving tens of thousands of applicants .
We shall inform Parliament of this as soon as some progress has been made .
The working party responsible for reviewing personnel administration under Mr Williamson , the then Secretary-General , has made a considerable number of proposals for reform .
Mr President , I should like to thank you , Commissioner , for that detailed reply . Not only did you give the figures I asked for , you also anticipated a possible supplementary question , namely what the situation is with the current selection procedures and how they will proceed .
Nevertheless , may I put a further supplementary question ? It is as follows .
Admittedly , I cannot expect you to give specific figures , but I would like to have a general idea .
Are there any particular Member States with an especially high number of nationals who have been recruited as officials through this device for particular nationals ?
Mr President , in accordance with EU regulations and legislation on the employment of staff there can be no favouritism or discrimination based on nationality .
This principle is obviously in force .
But of course statistics on staffing and nationality indicate that , depending on official rank , a few nationalities are over-represented and a few under-represented at some levels .
I will be glad to submit the figures for the honourable Member to look at .
What I can say is that when we have organised competitions aimed at specific nationalities amongst the new Member States , it has been the Finns who have shown the most interest in EU posts , and for this reason selections have been made faster .
The Swedes have not shown quite so much interest , and the Austrians have shown the least interest .
We have tried to correct the problem and we are now organising new competitions both for Swedish and Austrian applicants , and we hope that by the end of 1999 the Commission will have met all the targets fixed for these three countries when they joined the EU in January 1995 .
I fully share the concern of the honourable Member , Mr Alavanos , at the continuing and growing trafficking of women into the European Union for sexual exploitation .
Combating this shameful form of organised crime and violation of women 's human rights is a question on which I have spent much time and energy since I became a Commissioner in 1995 .
Before then no one had thought that the European Union could deal with this question .
In June 1996 I organised the European Conference in Vienna on trafficking in women .
This was the first time the main European players from both East and West had met to discuss this serious problem .
On the basis of their recommendation , in November 1996 I presented an action plan against trafficking in women for sexual exploitation .
Since then a number of important actions have been taken .
I shall recall some of them briefly .
Firstly , in November 1996 the Justice and Home Affairs Council decided to extend the mandate of Europol 's drug unit , now Europol , to include trafficking in human beings .
By 1999 Europol will support joint investigations in order to dismantle criminal organisations involved in this trafficking .
Europol also intends to establish a report on the general situation in the European Union concerning trafficking in women .
The second important decision was the creation in December 1996 of the multiannual STOP programme .
This programme has a budget of ECU 6.5m over five years .
It aims to promote research , information campaigns , training and exchange of projects .
All professionals involved in combating trade in human beings are targeted .
Since 1996 we have been able to support 30 projects .
Thirdly , and finally , in February 1997 the Council adopted a joint action in order to criminalise trafficking in human beings .
It also agreed on concrete measures for judicial cooperation and protection of witnesses .
Another crucial factor in the fight against trafficking and in providing support to victims is the work and role of non-governmental organisations .
In order to support their work we set up the DAPHNE initiative in May 1997 to combat violence against children , adolescents and women .
The main objective is to support the setting up of NGO networks across Europe and to support pilot projects .
Ten of these projects concern the fight against trafficking in women .
The Commission has also been able to give direct support to the development and work of NGOs in Central and Eastern Europe .
This has been possible through the PHARE and TACIS democracy programmes .
To fight trafficking in women is to fight a moving target .
New criminal networks and new strategies are created almost daily and their methods become increasingly ruthless .
So we constantly need to strengthen and revise our own strategies and create new tools .
This is why I am very happy to inform you that on 9 December the Commission adopted a new communication for further action against trafficking in women .
This communication is a follow-up to the one in 1996 .
It reinforces the multidisciplinary approach and aims to cover all the various stages of the trafficking chain - recruiters , traffickers and exploiters .
It reviews progress made so far in this field and on the basis of experience so far suggests deepening ongoing activities as well as initiating new ones .
This communication also responds to the request made by the European Parliament in the report by Mrs Waddington , to present it before the end of 1998 .
The main objective is to ensure that the fight against trafficking in women is kept high on the political agenda of the Union and to reinforce cooperation between countries of origin , transit and destination , including both governments and NGOs .
The aim is also to encourage the Member States to implement fully , by the end of 1999 at the latest , their legal obligations under the joint action of February 1997 .
The main new initiatives in the communication are to produce in 1999 a communication on assistance to victims of crime including victims of trafficking ; to make a proposal for legislative actions as regards temporary residence permits for victims who are ready to act as witnesses ; to refocus the existing guidelines of the STOP programme to include information to victims on ways of seeking assistance , and research on the various intermediaries of the trafficking chain ; to launch training projects to prevent and combat trafficking in women in the areas of migration and detection of false and fraudulent documents ; to advertise among the concerned target groups the possibility of support under several other Community programmes such as INTEGRA and the Leonardo da Vinci programmes ; and to promote further cooperation and exchange of information on the issue of trafficking in women within the pre-accession strategy as well as in cooperation with the newly independent states .
I hope we now have a new platform for our common fight against trafficking in women and I am looking forward to continuing to work closely with the European Parliament in combating this shameful violation of women 's human rights .
Mr President , let me thank the Commissioner for her very long and detailed answer .
Yet , Madam Commissioner , as you too are aware , the phenomenon persists and is constantly on the increase .
In my country , indeed , we find that public authorities or some public authorities at least - particularly members of the police force - are accomplices in the spread of this ' trade ' , if we can call it that .
I think that what the Commissioner said is encouraging .
There are , however , two more detailed questions I should like to ask : firstly , is the Commission empowered to arraign before the European Court of Justice for the violation of human rights , countries which are not taking adequate steps to combat trade in human beings effectively ?
I think there may be accusations and that , as the custodian of the Treaties , the Commission can do that .
And secondly , can the Commission require countries which are candidates for accession to implement , as a condition for joining during the forthcoming enlargement , effective measures to suppress trade in human beings ?
Thank you very much for your question .
Of course we need to work together much harder to convince some of these officials and people in government who are not that engaged in these questions .
With the Eastern and Central European countries we do this best through projects .
The projects we conduct with them are quite successful and the networks that are being built up between non-governmental organisations in the 15 Member States and in the accession countries are becoming quite good .
This is the best way of making progress with these questions .
Question No 53 by Clive Needle ( H-1086 / 98 )
Subject : Increase of cigarette imports in Andorra
Figures published by the customs authorities in Andorra show that 3.1 billion cigarettes were imported into that country from the EU in 1997 .
On the basis of those figures , every man , woman and child in Andorra smokes 140 cigarettes per day .
What action does the Commission propose to take to ensure that the smuggling of tobacco products into the EU is prevented , with particular reference to action against tobacco companies such as Gallaher , who must have been aware that their sudden increase in sales to Andorra could not be explained by any legal supply to a normal commercial market ?
I give the floor to Mrs Gradin to answer Mr Needle 's question on this surprising increase in imports of cigarettes .
Mr President , Mr Needle is concerned about the smuggling of cigarettes out of Andorra and wonders what measures the Commission intends to take to combat this trade .
At the end of 1997 , we were informed that significant quantities of British-manufactured cigarettes were being exported to Andorra .
Simultaneously , several Member States reported seizures of cigarettes smuggled into the Union from Andorra .
A clear picture began to emerge of Andorra as a centre for illegal trafficking in the direction of the EU .
The Director of the Commission 's anti-fraud unit , UCLAF , went to Andorra in December 1997 for talks with the country 's government .
The purpose of his visit was to reach an accord on how to stop cigarette smuggling .
It was agreed that the Community would operate a number of checks in Andorra during the first half of 1998 .
These would be carried out by UCLAF officials , together with investigators from the relevant authorities in the countries affected : France , Ireland , Spain and the United Kingdom .
The results demonstrated that Andorra had manufactured as well as imported large quantities of American-brand cigarettes - mainly from the United States .
There was strong evidence that a large element was earmarked for smuggling into the EU , in particular Spain .
Moreover , criminal networks operating both in Andorra and in a number of Member States were found to be behind this activity .
The Andorran authorities stressed , however , that they could neither produce statistics on cigarette sales , nor could they ascertain the final destination of the goods in question .
Since these investigations were carried out , the Commission has been in constant touch with the Andorran Government and , as a result , measures are now in place which should enable us to come to grips with this illegal trade .
We have already noticed that considerably fewer cigarettes are being seized by Member States on suspicion that they have been smuggled from Andorra .
There has also been a huge reduction in UK exports to Andorra compared with 1996 and 1997 .
What is particularly distressing is that manufacturers in Britain must have been aware of the situation , since exports to Andorra rose so sharply over such a short time-span .
The whole affair is now being looked into both by UCLAF and the authorities in the countries which took part in the original investigations in Andorra .
I would like to express my gratitude to Commissioner Gradin for what was a very informative and positive answer .
I very much hope that we can get some further information on the successful measures and the extent to which the problem is being reduced .
I am grateful to the Independent newspaper in the United Kingdom for raising this , and it is extremely important that people are made aware of this issue , because of the work that UCLAF is doing .
In the current climate it is important to talk about potential successes as well as problems .
For the wider issue , in terms of the health debate in the European Parliament and measures the Commission is taking to combat tobacco consumption , on which I hope there will be further progress in the Commission tomorrow , there is progress in Member States such as Great Britain , where proposals have been produced by the government to tackle smuggling as a priority .
I am delighted to hear that the Commission will be working in partnership on that and I hope that sufficient priority will be given to tackling this , to ensure that directives such as the tobacco advertising directive will be effective and will not be undercut by these criminals , particularly in the tobacco companies , who must take responsibility for what they are doing : increasing smoking .
I am very pleased that we have been able to have good cooperation between UCLAF and the different Member States .
This is the only way we can combat trafficking in cigarettes .
As you may be aware , we have also been quite successful in working on this in the Mediterranean and we have now a specialised unit in UCLAF that looks into trafficking in cigarettes .
We will always willing to give information to Parliament about our work in this area .
Question No 54 by Maj Theorin ( H-1099 / 98 )
Subject : Illegal immigration
Illegal immigration is a big problem for the European Union and its Member States .
The Council has therefore taken steps to harmonise control methods and to increase consultation and cooperation between Member States on matters relating to refusal of entry and action to combat the smuggling of human beings .
Many refugees currently live illegally inside the EU 's borders , some 3 million of them having entered Europe between 1991 and 1993 .
They often live , children and the elderly alike , in inhumane and unhealthy conditions , as described by Chris de Stoop in his book ' Utan papper ' .
How , in the Commission 's view , can these people 's living conditions be improved ?
I give the floor to Mrs Gradin to answer Mrs Theorin 's question .
Mr President , I share Mrs Theorin 's concern over the situation of third-country citizens residing unlawfully in the Member States of the Union .
Some fell prey to traffickers in human beings , others arrived here independently .
Most of them came in pursuit of a decent life and a better future .
Reality does not always match their dreams , however , and many find themselves struggling to survive under very difficult conditions .
As things stand , immigration rules vary from one Member State to another .
There are a number of EU-wide recommendations and agreements on immigration policy and these cover most - but not all - categories of migrant .
Nor are all the various provisions fully coordinated .
In 1997 , I duly tabled a proposal for the introduction of common rules to govern immigration into the EU .
My hope is that clearer and more uniform immigration criteria will help to reduce the scope for illegal entry .
The proposal is now before the European Parliament for consideration and I look forward to discussing the resulting report - which will be produced , I imagine , some time next year .
The nineties saw the advent of increasingly worrying forms of human smuggling .
There is a real slave trade in women operating around Europe ; migrants are loaded onto buses and containers for shipment over the EU borders .
They run the risk of dying an unusually painful death , brought on by either thirst or lack of oxygen .
People are dispatched to sea aboard unseaworthy craft in the middle of winter .
No one knows how many drown each year in this manner .
Trafficking in human beings is organised by well-run criminal networks .
These mercilessly exploit the vulnerability of the weak for their own greater gain .
Large amounts of money are earned at relatively low risk .
Only a many-pronged strategy can enable us to fight such rings .
Action is needed at both national and EU levels .
If we are to put a stop to this growing trend , it will be necessary to combine immigration measures with intervention in other key policy areas .
Little effect can be hoped for from isolated measures on visa policy or border controls , or from one-off decisions to deport or expel individuals .
A joint and coordinated strategy across the policy spectrum is what is required .
I am thinking in particular of CFSP , together with trade , development and humanitarian aid policy .
A general commitment to the progress of society and social justice is of course an important component when we are seeking to reduce illegal immigration into the EU .
Let us never forget that we are talking about individual human beings who find themselves in difficulty .
Even if they have no legal entitlement to enter the Union , they can expect to have their human rights and fundamental freedoms respected .
This principle should underpin any European strategy to combat illegal immigration .
The situation of asylum seekers and those coming from war zones is somewhat different .
These people did not leave their homes voluntarily .
Maybe they are fleeing civil war , or their government cannot offer them adequate protection .
Usually they will be part of a mass migration process .
The Commission has , as you know , submitted two proposals to the Council of Ministers in the hope of easing the situation : one on temporary protection , the other on burden-sharing when the Member States are faced with mass movements of people fleeing their country of origin .
Both proposals are currently before Council and the European Parliament has already considered them on two occasions .
You will have heard that one of the aims of my proposal is to establish a minimum level of social protection for such migrants once they have entered the territory of one of the Member States .
If the Council of Minsters can agree to the proposal , everyone needing protection within the Union will be able to be guaranteed decent living conditions .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for her comprehensive and very positive answer .
Our views seem to tally pretty much on many of the issues , which is gratifying .
I particularly appreciate her reference to the need for social measures in order to drive progress in terms of society .
The magnitude of the problem is none the less catastrophic for the Union and Europe as a whole .
Whereas we used to deport 30 000 people a year , now we are approaching a figure of 200 000 .
As the Commissioner herself pointed out , this is partly due to the fact that various mafia-style rings have discovered that trafficking in human life is a highly profitable enterprise - a situation which we did not have to face in the past .
The central issue from my point of view , however , is that there are people actually in hiding in the EU and elsewhere in Europe .
Their children often receive no schooling and do not have access to the health and social care they need .
This is extremely worrying and the psychological pressure on them is enormous .
Surely the least we can do is to reach agreement on guaranteeing illegal immigrants in the EU their full human rights .
How to deal with those individuals who are residing illegally in our 15 Member States is a very difficult question , particularly given that we have 18 million unemployed already and no longer have a need for imported labour .
It is the refugees , however , who require our particular attention .
Their predicament further complicates the situation .
I agree that dignified solutions must be found to the problems of these people . And let us hope that most of them will subsequently be able to return to their countries with their difficulties resolved .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
With that question by Mrs Theorin , we have reached the end of the time set aside for this group of questions .
Questions Nos 55 , 56 and 57 will therefore receive written answers .

Before we move on to Question No 58 , Mrs García Arias has a point of order .
Commissioner , I would like to raise a point of procedure that , in my view , is important not only for the questions that some Members wanted to put to the Commissioner responsible for competition policy , but , in general , for the European Commission 's control procedure for Question Time .
So , Commissioner Van Miert , are your services analysing the development of Article 24 of the Directive on common standards for the internal market in electricity , which talks about a transition to a competitive environment ?
If the Commissioner could answer this question , then I would know if I can protest to the European Commission regarding the issue of which Commissioner is responsible for answering the questions that certain Members have asked .
Mrs García Arias , you have just asked a question that is not on the agenda for the type of answers the Commission has proposed .
You have also protested today before the House that your question was not among the questions answered by Mr Van Miert .
You are now asking a question that is not included on the agenda .
To introduce this question would mean upsetting the established agenda .
If the Commissioner wants to give you an explanation , I will allow him a short time to do so but , in any event , he must take into account that it is not actually on the agenda and that there are other questions which are that require his time .
Mr Van Miert , we are breaking with custom here , but I am relying here on the good will of the other Members of the House and on your own good will , and I would like to ask you if you wish to respond to this question .
I can answer this question at the same time as that of Mr Pérez Royo .
I will do this in a personal capacity , of course .
That seems fine to me , Mr Van Miert .
Then we shall not break the order .
Mr Van Miert has agreed to reply to Mrs García Arias in the context of the question by Mr Pérez Royo and , if we make good time , we shall be able to reach Mr Pérez Royo 's question .

Question No 58 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-1052 / 98 )
Subject : Mergers in the bus sector
The Commission recently gave its authorisation for mergers in the European Union 's bus sector .
To what extent are such mergers likely to affect competition and job creation ?
I give the floor to Mr Van Miert to answer Mr Camisón Asensio 's question .
I can give you a very brief answer to this question .
The Commission did indeed approve the merger between Iveco and Renault , but only for the three main categories of buses : tourist coaches , buses for use in towns and urban environments and buses used for public transport in general .
We examined the merger in question and decided that it did not present any problems as regards competition .
As you know , we looked at the issue on the basis of the regulation on mergers of undertakings , and it was clear that , firstly , both companies held a declining share of the market in their respective Member States and , secondly , that there was sufficient other competition left .
I have to say that as far as tourist coaches are concerned , the competition is extremely strong , while for the other categories of buses the market is currently opening up , because it was traditionally nationally based , as you know .
But even this market is now opening up to the extent that we can start to talk about a European market , and we had no problem with the merger from the competition point of view because there was still plenty of competition left .
I should add that once we can resolve any concerns we might have about competition aspects , then we will always be happy to include other elements such as employment in our analysis .
But our first responsibility under the regulation on concentrations or mergers of undertakings is to analyse the competition problems and to base our response - in this case a positive one - on that .
Commissioner , I would like to ask a question concerning the Commission 's authorisation of the merger of the bus manufacturing activities of Renault and the subsidiary Iveco , a concentration that naturally puts the second manufacturer in a much more important position on the European market . Have you taken account here of the willingness or desire of companies to make access to buses easier for the disabled through the addition of retractable platforms ?
And in what respect has this been considered ?
Similarly , in relation to the employment creation measures mentioned by the Commissioner , has consideration been given in this concentration to transferring activities to the United Kingdom , Germany or Spain ?
In this particular case , neither of the notifying parties raised any employment-related aspects , though they did tell us where they intended to concentrate their activities .
The mergers regulation allows trade unions to put their case to the Commission 's services or to myself , but as far as I know , no requests were made in this case .
We would be quite happy to listen to their concerns and , as I said , to accommodate them as far as possible .
In another very typical case , that of Kässbohrer / Mercedes-Benz , we received a great deal of interest from the trade unions and this was taken into account in the procedure .
It also led to a decision that we took at the time in another case .
But as I said , in this particular case neither the notifying parties nor , as far as I know , the trade unions made any request to speak to us .
Question No 59 by Paul Rübig ( H-1068 / 98 )
Subject : Discriminatory fares
The British ferry company which operates the Dover to Calais route has a discriminatory fares policy .
Subject to certain conditions , special offers are available which mean that a crossing can cost as little as £ 16 ; but these are available only to inhabitants of the United Kingdom .
Other citizens of the Union have to pay the normal fare of £ 79 .
Does the Commission have any reservations about these practices , either from the point of view of the rules of competition ( Article 85 et seq. of the EC Treaty ) or as regards the elimination of quantitative restrictions between Member States or bodies on which they have an appreciable influence ( Article 30 et seq. of the EC Treaty ) ?
I give the floor to Mr Van Miert to answer Mr Rübig 's question .
It seems that this is a question of the commercial strategy of an operator of the cross-Channel ferries .
If that is the case - and it might well be that this is just part of a commercial strategy - and if we receive complaints then eventually we will look at the matter further .
So far as I am aware this is not the case but it might indicate that ferry operators have made certain agreements .
As I said , there is no indication that is the case here .
Another question which could eventually be raised concerns Article 86 : if there has been an abuse of a dominant position .
Since the company in question is not in a dominant position , this does not apply .
Therefore , for the time being , according to our information , there is no problem in relation to the enforcement of competition rules .
Commissioner , the problem is that those travelling from Europe to the United Kingdom find that there are two separate fares ; a much reduced one for UK citizens and a normal fare .
I have also come across this problem in Austrian ski resorts , where the same thing happens with ski passes , and that is why I believe it is important for us to consider the principles behind this issue of discrimination against certain countries .
On the other hand , of course , we all know that discounts also exist , and there can be discounts for particular professions , educational groups , companies , authorities and so on .
I do believe , however , that it would definitely be appropriate for the Commission to express a clear opinion on this matter .
Mr President , of course most people are glad when there are discounts , and that is what we have here .
We then also have to take a careful look to see whether there is anything more to it than that , for example whether certain shipping companies have come to an arrangement .
Occasionally there might be a cartel .
We have already had cases of this kind , whether related to the tunnel or these sea crossings .
You will certainly also know that , just last week , we decided to fine the ferry companies operating between Bari in Italy and Greece .
We will of course investigate if we receive complaints .
But in this case , there is no sign as yet - as far as I and my services can see - that this is anything more than what would normally be called a policy of offering discounts .
If you have any more information , please let us know , and we will see what we can do .
I welcome the Commissioner 's reply .
I wonder whether he saw the Money Programme on BBC 2 on Sunday night - I know he is an avid television watcher in his spare time - which indicated that this practice is not confined to ferry companies alone .
The practice of charging different fares for different flights , depending on which country you start your journey in , is a widespread practice within the European Union airline industry .
When the euro comes into force on 1 January and prices have to be quoted in euros , will he please undertake to make sure that this practice is not rife throughout the whole transport sector ?
If it is , and cases are reported to him or if his own department 's research indicates that this is a widespread practice , will he please use the powers available to him under the Treaty ?
You mention a broader question which is a very real one ; probably an even more real one in the civil aviation business than in the ferry business .
Again , if it is just about promotional fares , that is all right .
People like it .
But if there is something more behind it and if we get some evidence and coherent information about it , we insist that we will look into it .
There is another question about Sabena .
My answer is that indeed , there are reasons to launch a broader investigation about certain practices , particularly in the civil aviation sector .
As MEP for East Kent , I represent Dover .
I am very keen to help reassure Mr Rübig that good deals across the Channel are , in fact , available to all citizens of the European Union .
Special offer fares of around GBP 16 are available to all citizens of the European Union for day trips .
In practice , many EU citizens benefit from that particular offer , not least , of course , our friends , the French , across the water , who regularly take up those good deals and many last-minute bargains .
Of course when duty-free goes , many of these bargains will go with it .
I hope that duty-free stays and Mr Rübig and his fellow countrymen and women come to Nord / Pas de Calais , take a trip across the Channel on these ferries that represent excellent value for money .
He and others would be very welcome to visit my constituency .
I can reassure him on that point .
We do not discriminate on fares .
I have the impression that this was not really a question but a one-minute advertisement .
I congratulate a Member of Parliament for being so outspoken on behalf of his region .
Having said this , there is no discrimination between Community citizens .
If there were , obviously we would have problems and would act .
That is not the case .
Let there be no misunderstanding about that .
If there appeared to be an abuse somehow or a kind of hidden cartel , or whatever , then we would act .
As far as I and my services can see today , that is not the case .
Question No 60 by Fernando Pérez Royo ( H-1069 / 98 )
Subject : Oligopoly in the Spanish electricity industry
In Spain , an oligopoly appears to be taking root , whereby four undertakings have cornered 90 % of the electricity market , with two of them alone , ENDESA and Iberdrola , controlling 80 % .
Recently formed partnerships such as the one between ENDESA and Gas Natural amount to fresh horizontal integration , which is exacerbating this trend .
Does the Commission regard these shifts and agreements amongst undertakings as running counter to the spirit and the letter of the Treaties and as detrimental to free competition and to the consumer ?
As the Commissioner has indicated , this is the question we are dealing with , and I now give him the floor .
Unfortunately , I cannot be of much help to the honourable Member , as we too only learned of the two companies ' intentions from the press .
Therefore , my services are currently making every effort to gather all the information we need because , for now , I am not even in a position to tell you whether this is a concentration or an operation involving Article 85 , that is to say a type of joint venture or cooperation .
For the time being , therefore , I am unfortunately unable to tell you any more .
But I have agreed with my services that we will insist on obtaining information very quickly from the companies concerned because I can assure you that we are following developments in the energy sector very closely , not just in Spain but also in the other Member States .
I would now like to answer the other question raised that appears later in the list of questions .
Firstly , this matter actually concerns DG IV , but it also concerns my colleague Mr Papoutsis because it comes under the directive and the Member States are therefore required to inform the Commission , and in particular Mr Papoutsis , of their intentions with regard to stranded costs .
Secondly , as it is mostly a question of state aid , my services must also be notified of this type of matter .
I can also tell you that , during my last visit to Madrid at the beginning of the month , I discussed this issue at length with Mr Piqué , the minister responsible , who promised me that my services would definitely be notified of the issue so that we can examine it in parallel with other cases , because the problem exists almost throughout the Member States .
In the course of the coming months , we hope to examine all of the cases of stranded costs in a spirit of coherence and transparency .
I cannot therefore tell you any more , except that we have insisted that the Spanish Government should notify us of the issue so as to allow my services too to examine all relevant cases , obviously in full cooperation with Mr Papoutsis 's services in DG XVII .
Commissioner , I would ask you to remain with this issue as , firstly , I have a supplementary question from Mr Pérez Royo and I then have two further supplementary questions , one from Mrs Estevan Bolea and a second from Mrs García Arias .
Therefore , I will first give the floor to Mr Pérez Royo for one minute .
Commissioner , my written question refers to the oligopoly that exists in the Spanish electricity industry .
Given the measures that the Spanish government has been promoting recently , we should instead be talking about a form of capitalism between friends or a sharing out of the loot .
In fact , on the eve of the liberalisation of the electricity industry , the companies have managed to get the government to propose compensation of ESP 1.3 billion , that is , EUR 6 200 million , to cover the costs of the transition to a competitive environment .
The government , in collusion with the companies , hopes to move this issue of compensation forward before quantifying the costs involved and before even knowing whether or not there are any costs at all . Indeed , this compensation is going to mean a significant rise in charges for consumers .
The regulatory body for the industry , the Comisión Nacional del Sistema Eléctrico , has stated that it opposes this measure and believes it to be unjustified .
The only response from the government to the views of the regulatory body was the assertion that the chairman of the Comisión Nacional del Sistema Eléctrico is a socialist .
Apart from the embarrassment I feel at the attitude adopted by the Vice-President of the Government , I would like to specifically ask the Commissioner if the government has informed the Commission of its intention to approve these measures by urgent procedure , in less than a few weeks . Secondly , I would like to know if the Commission 's services believe that such practices are compatible with the rules on competition .
It is clear that the two questions are linked .
Firstly , as far as the trend towards concentration is concerned , once again , I cannot for the time being tell what is involved here as I do not have sufficient information .
But we are , of course , insisting that the companies provide us with full information so that we can check whether this is an example of a concentration and see whether we must examine the case , or whether it should be dealt with by the national authorities .
Then , if it is a cooperation agreement we may also have to examine it , this time in the light of Article 85 rather than the regulation on concentrations .
That is all I have to say on the first aspect of the question , which in fact is similar to the question asked initially .
As for the other aspect , I have just said that a few weeks ago , when I was in Madrid , I managed to secure Mr Piqué 's agreement to ensure that Mr Papoutsis is notified of how the transitional measures are funded not only under the directive but also in the form of state aid .
Perhaps this has been checked in the meantime , but we are going to examine this whole issue in terms of state aid and stranded costs .
I cannot tell you any more at the moment , except to confirm that we refused to accept that we should not be informed of this so that we can examine it properly .
As you know , Spain is the country where there has been the greatest and most widespread liberalisation of the electricity market .
At the moment , 18 % of supply comes from private generators , that is , autoproducers , so Mr Pérez Royo 's figures are somewhat out of date .
There are also new projects involving a number of American companies .
I would like to ask you about the situation in France , which has the company Electricité de France .
I would like to know whether or not you believe that the French are complying with the directive in terms of the transition to a competitive environment .
I am very grateful for this question because it allows me to give you certain details .
Firstly , there must be no mistake .
We very much welcome the government 's current plans to liberalise the energy market .
There is no doubt on that point .
But in doing this we must also respect the rules of the game , particularly by checking that the amount devoted to stranded costs is real and does not exceed the actual stranded costs involved .
This is yet to be checked , both in Spain and in other countries such as France and Belgium .
Secondly , you are correct . The situation is in a way even more complicated in certain other countries .
In France , everyone knows the situation concerning EDF .
But there too the market will have to be opened up , particularly as EDF has just bought an electricity company in the United Kingdom .
Therefore , if we want to have access to other markets , we must of course accept that others can also come onto our market .
It works both ways .
There must not be any misunderstanding on that point .
Once again , we welcome the government 's policy , on the whole .
Nonetheless , we must check that the way in which it is being implemented does not cause problems .
However , I will not comment on this now but will wait until I have been fully informed about the system in question .
In the days ahead , before the end of this year , the Spanish Chamber of Deputies is going to vote on an amendment to the accompanying government bill on budgets that will allow electricity companies immediately to obtain around one billion pesetas from the financial market that the banks will recover through an additional charge to be added to the rates paid by consumers over the coming years .
The electricity companies are going to be able to use the money they pocket against other competitors , not only in the electricity industry , but also , for example , in the telecommunications sector , where these electricity monopolies are already evident .
I would like to ask the following question . Do you not believe that it is urgent , before that vote , to warn Spain 's legislators - on the basis of the Community law you represent - that this substantial aid or subsidy needs to be authorised in advance by the European Commission and that the vote should therefore be postponed ?
Of course .
I can tell you that we have informed the government that this practice is at the companies ' own risk .
You are right in saying that the Commission must be able to check whether aid given by the authorities as compensation for stranded costs is correct and , consequently , until the Commission is able to complete its work , authorisation cannot be given and , as a result , if they go ahead it is at the risk of the authorities and of the companies concerned .
This must be clear .
Therefore , I will not conceal the fact that I have asked the government to postpone this operation .
That is the stage we are at now .

As for putting it on the market , for which you have quoted the amount - so that there is no misunderstanding , the remainder is the overall system , which will be examined - not only would this be at the companies ' own risk but , moreover , those concerned would be well advised not to proceed with it before the Commission has been able to complete its work .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Knowing how generous you are , I would propose that you deal with one last question in the two minutes that we have left .
Question No 61 by Jyrki Otila ( H-1101 / 98 )
Subject : Sabena flights to Strasbourg during part-session weeks
The Belgian national airline Sabena discriminates against economy class travellers on the route between Brussels and Strasbourg during the European Parliament 's part-session weeks .
The airline prohibits the purchase of other than business class tickets for certain departures . This causes problems to other passengers , not least with regard to the compatibility of timetables and the limited alternative travel possibilities .
Does the Commission consider that in acting in this way Sabena is abusing its dominant position on the Brussels-Strasbourg route ?
What measures does the Commission propose to take to put pressure on Sabena to halt the discrimination against economy class travellers on this route ?
I give the floor to Mr Van Miert to answer this last question in the two minutes which remain .
I would ask the honourable Member , who was quite right to raise this question , to give us a little more information , because it is not clear whether this was a case where all the economy seats had been sold and it was claimed that there were only business-class seats left .
That may have been the case - it does happen .
Or else there were still some economy seats left , but the person concerned was forced , as it were , to pay the business class price .
That happened to me once , not on this flight but on a flight from Brussels to Milan .
I have to say that there are obviously still certain practices going on here and there - hence the answer I gave to Mrs McIntosh a moment ago - which are enough to make us look at the whole situation a little more closely , not just that one flight .
I have the impression that certain things are happening that are a little suspicious .
I do not want to comment on this particular case because we have of course asked Sabena to provide further information , but if the honourable Member could give us any more detailed information himself , it would be helpful .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
It is true that Sabena only offer a business class service on this route .
But as our time is drawing to a close I do not wish to prolong this sitting .
I shall return to the subject later .
Thank you , Mr Otila .
Since we have now come to the end of the time set aside for questions to the Commission , Questions Nos 62 to 113 will receive written answers .
That concludes questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Information strategy on euro
The next item is the report ( A4-0485 / 98 ) by Mr Arroni , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication on an information strategy on the euro ( COM ( 98 ) 0039 - C4-0125 / 98 ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Arroni .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , money is present in numerous acts of daily life .
It is not only a vital cog in the economic wheel but also a store of values and ideals ; and if the currency under discussion is the euro , these considerations take on a far deeper meaning .
Hence the importance of informing Europe 's citizens about the euro and ensuring that they appreciate its significance .
Much is at stake : the euro is now a fait accompli and must succeed .
But its success depends to a large extent on its acceptance by all the citizens of Europe .
Their acceptance will in turn depend on our capacity - until now and from now on - to communicate with them and inform them about the euro .
Acceptance by all Europeans , therefore , is the first aspect on which I wish to dwell .
A mere glance at the budget of the Prince programme reveals straight away that the investments scheduled increase in stages and culminate at the key date of 1 January 1999 , only to decline inexplicably thereafter .
What does this mean ?
Does it mean that our task will be complete once we have satisfied the information needs of that part of the population which will have the possibility , the desire and indeed be privileged to use the virtual euro as from 1999 ?
What do we intend to do for the other part of the population , the less fortunate groups , the ordinary citizens who will only encounter the euro once it is in their pockets in 2002 ?
We must remember that for many European citizens the euro will not arrive in 1999 , but in 2002 .
We have been quite right to focus our efforts so far on those who will be using the euro as from 1 January 1999 , but we must not make the mistake of believing that this is enough .
If we were to do that , the euro could be perceived even more than now as a currency for the rich or for just one section of the population , and this would not only be a social injustice but really could jeopardise the much-desired success of the entire operation .
That is why one paragraph of my report proposes that the budgetary effort - ECU 38 million - should be maintained in the years following 1999 .
Let us now move on to another problem : when the target population changes , can we maintain the same type of information ?
In the Economic Affairs Committee I proposed that , after 1999 , we should offer information that is less technical and more emotive , so as to arouse people 's feelings .
The committee did not think it advisable to take this course , and I respect its view .
What I would say , however , is that not only must the nature of the information be different , but so must the type of language and the practical methods used .
Until now , we have been attempting to communicate on the basis of rather technical information - economic and financial considerations - stressing the economic and financial potential of the new single currency .
This was without doubt a winning approach , because it was aimed at a section of European society capable of understanding and benefiting from it .
However , as I have said , the success of the euro will depend on its acceptance by the average citizen .
We must therefore use a different sort of language , try to speak to the ordinary citizen in his own language and find out what kind of information he needs .
As for the methods , we must bear in mind that 25 % of Europeans - I repeat , 25 % - are a target population which cannot be reached at all by means of the methods used to date .
An OECD report states that between 30 and 45 % of Europe 's citizens are illiterate or recurrent illiterate : this does not mean that they cannot read or write , but that they have difficulty in grasping the meaning of a written text .
So we could send out kilos upon kilos of brochures , or put together the most sophisticated websites ; all to no effect .
It is not a matter of repudiating the magnificent work done so far , and which has served our purpose so well , but this should be complemented by other , more suitable methods .
As regards the most disadvantaged groups , one undoubtedly effective method could be to use so-called ' euro mediators ' : people whose social role brings them into close contact with these disadvantaged groups , such as the family doctor , pharmacists , postal workers and social workers .
I would just conclude with a thought for the young people who , by their very nature , will be the bearers of the positive messages which we entrust to them .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have often discussed the question of the euro and the European Parliament 's information campaign , known as Prince .
Those Members of Parliament present today , who are almost all experts , know that the Prince programme is an initiative of the European Parliament and that in 1998 we have had a heated debate with the Commission concerning the implementation of its information activities .
For this reason we in the Committee on Budgets , in our opinion on the present report , which dates from as far back as 15 June , first considered calling for an independent Prince campaign in order to ensure that we would have a continued role in decision-making in the Prince programme , as the President at that time did not accept the amendments or the Pex report .
On the other hand , of course , we did not create the Prince initiative solely for the purpose of a euro campaign but also in order to take in two other areas of activity .
It is ultimately the wish of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy no longer to do so to such an extent , but I am pleased that the rapporteur has included the main paragraphs from my opinion - paragraphs 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 and 12 - which deal with the main points agreed on by the joint working party of the European Parliament and the Commission .
I would ask the Commission and the Commissioner responsible , Mr de Silguy , to use their authority where the budgetary framework is concerned .
You are familiar with the problem .
We have constant problems between Parliament and the Commission , although in the past Parliament strongly supported the Commission in making available the necessary resources .
Yesterday , in the supplementary budget , we once again made additional resources available for the euro campaign so that its implementation is guaranteed .
I hope that in future the Commission 's proposals will be sound at the outset , so that Parliament does not need to put them right .
Mr President , the rapporteur is right to highlight in his report the importance of information and communication in the context of introducing the euro .
It was the European Parliament that , very early on , pointed out the lack of information on the euro and fortunately found in the European Commission a partner to organise cooperation between the European Commission , the European Parliament and the Member States of the Union .
As always , I regret that information in the Member States and also in the regions and local communities is not as highly developed as it should be .
We have discovered that many people in the European Union do not feel involved .
They feel that they are not properly informed and that the information they have is not broad enough .
They do not feel that they are sufficiently well informed about the pros and cons of monetary union .
Yet monetary union begins in only 17 days .
We in the European Parliament must therefore ensure that this work on information continues , as the rapporteur rightly emphasised .
It must continue in particular in the next year when we will be living in the European monetary union but only cashless payments will be handled in euros .
Do you know that many people believe that euro coins and notes will be available to them from 4 January ?
Do you know how frustrating this will be ?
Do you know how difficult it is to adjust to a different currency ?
All these issues concern us particularly as Members of this European Parliament .
We must therefore continue to insist on conferences on the subject of the euro , on discussions and on reliable information booklets .
But we must also ensure that we include the NGOs , consumer protection associations , youth organisations and women 's associations , so that they can help to persuade people in these areas .
I believe that with the help of such efforts over and above the report , a great deal more can be done and that the genuinely positive approaches of the information and communication work on the euro can and must therefore be extended .
It is true that we must also consider the problem groups in our society , the disadvantaged sections of the information society , and it would therefore be helpful if the Commission could tell Parliament today that it intends to make 10 % of the resources available for these disadvantaged groups and that in addition to the initial projects it has a new strategy to genuinely include everyone .
We have also shown that we are concerned not only about handicapped persons but also about people who live in remoter regions , who do not have much opportunity to travel , and also about illiterate people , for example .
We therefore need a more substantial contribution and also a greater commitment from the Member States .
So I call on the Ministers of Finance and in particular the Ministers of Education in the European Union to ensure that the euro is taught about in schools and in adult education , and to provide the necessary resources for this .
We must involve young people and older people , so that they know that European monetary union is in their interest .
We cannot leave it to the private sector to take full responsibility for information on the euro .
The public sector must take on the leading role which we wanted it to have in the regions and in the Member States too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Arroni report has made it very clear that information about the euro is of great importance .
But I should like to raise here the question of policy with regard to target groups .
Member States will need to broadly coordinate the information they provide on the practical procedures for the introduction of the euro as a currency between 1 January and 1 July 2002 .
To my mind , the choice between a transitional period of a few weeks and one big change-over day all at once largely determines the way in which information on the euro should be given to our citizens .
Information must be targeted at the moment of the actual physical change-over .
The problem is , however , that most countries have not yet taken a decision on that .
If Member States decide to introduce the euro all at once in a ' big bang ' of the kind Mrs Peijs referred to , then information should be aimed primarily at older people encouraging them to start using the euro right away .
Because a ' big bang ' needs frontloading .
Euros will need to be distributed a few days ahead of 1 January 2002 .
We have to avoid older people being taken by surprise by a change-over all in one day .
Research shows that older people are more reluctant than others to start using euros early .
A fairly long transitional period will enable people to pay with the old currency and the euro .
This method will mean that the retail trade in particular bears a large proportion of the cost of the actual change .
If a fairly long transitional period is chosen , information must focus primarily on encouraging the public at large to pay by transfer methods using PINs , chips and credit cards .
This will as far as possible ease the burden on the retail trade and small businesses .
Mr President , this report by Mr Arroni has been drawn up at a defining moment in history as we move towards the introduction of the euro .
The arrival of the single currency needs a revolutionary approach not only on behalf of the institutions but on behalf of all the citizens of this Union .
Our habits and our traditions will have to change .
To be effective this change must be accompanied by a real and effective information policy .
The transfer to the euro is going to change a whole scale of values .
The symbols for the currencies we have grown up with will disappear .
I am certain that with a properly organised information campaign we will quickly adapt to the new euro symbol .
Europe will be moving forward together on the euro .
The point of no return has been reached .
It is legitimate to devote half the information budget to a public awareness campaign on the euro to ensure that the transition happens as smoothly as possible .
The transfer to the euro is not only an economic question for bankers and financial institutions .
Public opinion also counts .
Without delay , without exception and if necessary through large-scale trial runs , we must ensure that the less-favoured , the blind , those with disabilities and those who are isolated must be the target of a practical and major information campaign .
Governments and local authorities - as they are close to the people - have a role to play in this information campaign .
The main focus must be on schools , universities , small shopkeepers and the media .
From the year 2001 a major campaign of public awareness must be launched throughout the Union aimed at promoting the identity of the euro .
It must take into account questions raised between now and then .
My group fully supports a rise in the funding levels for the Prince programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have very little time but I would like to use it to emphasise the fact that even the Commission itself claims that SMEs are not as well informed about the consequences of the euro as larger firms are .
That is natural given the origins of the euro and the interests that its creation primarily serves !
Again , the Commission itself says that the preparation of local authorities and elected representatives is at times lagging behind .
That too is natural !
And it is being too kind in watering down the expression by adding the phrase ' at times ' .
It is small and medium-sized firms , small and medium-sized elected representatives , small and medium-sized consumers , small and medium-sized people who are being given too little information about the euro .
That is natural , because the euro was not created for anything small or medium-sized , even though they are going to have to use it in their small and medium-sized daily lives !
Recital J of the Arroni report points out the psychological , social , political and national dimensions and rightly considers that a currency is not only a technical instrument to make trade easier .
I would like to add , in the case of the euro , the phrase ' between large groups in international economic and financial relations ' .
I would like to draw attention to recital L , although perhaps it exaggerates when it says that switching to the euro is going to destroy all scales of values in existence , and people 's memory of prices and habits .
I emphasise all of this but I could also underline the fact that in France there are still people who work out prices in old francs ; in Portugal people still refer to a thousand ' reis ' or ' tostões ' .
Probably every country has examples of people who run the risk of being discriminated against or even excluded .
For our part , when it comes to the euro , we would like to make them special targets for information about the euro .
Mr President , it may initially seem rather strange and also late in the day for this House to be discussing the information strategy for the euro when we are just 17 days away from its introduction .
However , we should remember that , since 1996 , many costly efforts have been made to inform the inhabitants of the European Union about the introduction of the single European currency as this will affect them more than any other EU measure .
The introduction of the euro must therefore be fully understood by all EU citizens , whether employees , businesspeople or consumers , with regard to both its political , economic and social objectives and its methods of use during the transitional period and after 2002 .
Approximately ECU 150 million have already been spent in the campaigns organised between 1996 and today .
From next year until 2001 , another ECU 100 million will be available .
I must congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Arroni , on his report and thank him in particular for having accepted the majority of my amendments .
However , he has had to report that , despite this expenditure , a large part of the EU population feels ill informed about the euro and that , according to the OECD , around 30-40 % of the European population experiences difficulty comprehending written information .
This is rather astonishing , particularly when you consider that we are all normally interested in money , whether we have it , whether we do not or whether we have enough .
Our rapporteur has recommended that the general public be among the main target groups of the euro information campaign , with special attention being given to particular sections of society and with certain specific groups in society being used to distribute this information .
I have secured the addition of women 's organisations as a multiplier for communicating and targeting the information .
There is a regrettable tendency to ignore the major national and European women 's organisations which have millions of members in the Member States and very specific and direct means of reaching and informing women .
Perhaps the Commission could encourage these organisations to participate in the information campaigns by offering them a partnership ?
This would be money well spent and more cost-effective than glossy brochures which no-one reads or understands .
Mr President , the physical introduction of the euro really affects all the citizens of the countries that are participating in monetary union .
The replacement of the coins and notes we have been accustomed to with something completely new and different will be an important event in all our lives .
This changeover will require a new way of thinking and a positive attitude to the event .
Mr Arroni 's excellent report , which is also technically outstanding , is therefore a highly important document in view of the need to provide economic actors and citizens with information as efficiently as possible .
Large sums of money are being spent on this information campaign , so it is important for the European Parliament to state clearly how the agencies responsible should use it .
As all sections of the population , all social classes , all age groups , including partially sighted people and the mentally handicapped , need to be able to deal with and handle the money , information cannot just take the form of general statements .
Instead , it is important to try to initiate dialogue with the people and to provide information geared towards specific target groups .
We will be able to avoid a lengthy and costly two-track situation in the first half of the year 2002 if people are fully informed before that point .
Institutions and firms that are particularly suited to the role of multipliers must play a key role in information .
These include in particular schools , local authorities , banks or even tourism organisations with an international clientele .
In terms of the acceptance of the new currency , it is important that we should no longer give the impression at this stage that we are advertising the euro , but that we are simply providing information about it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission I must first of all congratulate Mr Arroni on his report on the information strategy for the euro .
I believe that we have very similar views on this subject and I share the concerns expressed in this House about the fears , expectations and even hopes of the general public in the changeover to the euro .
I also believe that the action which we have carried out together since 1996 , following the Madrid European Council at the end of 1995 , has largely achieved its objective of mobilisation .
I would be inclined to answer Mr Tillich by saying that cooperation between the Commission , the European Parliament and the Member States is useful .
I believe that this has been proven and , in the future , cooperation will be the decisive factor in the success of the transitional period .
I will very briefly comment on two aspects arising from the speeches and from having read this report . The first relates to the method of operation of the campaign and the second concerns the priority targets .
With regard to the method of operation , I would remind you that our campaigns are based on two principles : partnership and decentralisation .
I believe that partnership is a vital concept because the Member States must be brought as close as possible to the citizens .

This is why conventions have been signed - in the end with all 11 members of the euro zone - which have worked well .
They will be renewed next year and I can inform you , as requested by Mr Arroni , that the Commission is not limiting itself just to the euro zone .
On the contrary , we are ready to discuss with the various ' pre-in ' countries the issue of cofinancing euro information actions from 1999 , if they wish to do this .
However , Mr Arroni is suggesting that we limit the Community cofinancing to 50 % of the total budget .
I find this rather strange because it was specifically on the basis of the recommendation of the joint Commission-Parliament working group that approximately two-thirds of the available annual funds were reserved for partnerships .
Also , our evaluations confirm the success of these partnerships which , in the context of the conventions , act as a lever for the actions carried out by each Member State not only at national level but also among local communities , SMEs , the distribution sector and the vulnerable sections of the population , about whom you are rightly concerned .
Partnerships are therefore the best way of ensuring that the information reaches the grassroots level .
Also , the way in which these partnerships are implemented is essential , in this case through tripartite structures in which your representatives are participating .
Mrs Randzio-Plath , these tripartite structures allow these partnerships and actions to be guided , thus ensuring the necessary monitoring and follow-up .
With regard to the second principle - decentralisation - I must remind you that the Commission proposed the creation of local observatories .
These are being set up and will provide structures in each Member State to improve the monitoring of the information actions ' impact .
They will therefore meet this need for information and the need to reassure public opinion , namely the general public .
The ECU 100 million budget specified for the Prince line for the transitional period - that is , ECU 38 million ( or EUR 38 million as it is now ) for 1999 , 32 million for 2000 and 30 million for 2001 - seems sufficient to us to assist the efforts of the Member States .
Having said this , I have noted the rapporteur 's wish to see this line increased .
It will be up to the budgetary authority to decide on this on an annual basis .


Turning now to the second aspect - priority targets - I believe that , as mentioned by several of you , including the rapporteur , the priority targets must be the SMEs , particularly in the distribution and tourism sectors , and also , Mr Arroni , the general public and the more vulnerable sections of society .
I must thank you for highlighting the important role of the Commission 's recommendations in the spring on the dual display of prices , banking charges and the monitoring of the euro 's introduction .
These recommendations were the result of real cooperation and have allowed codes of good conduct and good practice to be established between the various sectors concerned .
I can give as an example the agreement between distributors and consumers , particularly regarding the dual display of prices .
This will be embodied by a euro logo with a broad smile which you will soon see throughout Europe and which appears to have been accepted by the population .
A code of good conduct and good practice on conversion charges , which is currently being developed , will also be introduced in the banking sector .
However , in addition to these agreements , the Commission shares the rapporteur 's view concerning the need to adapt the information strategy to the requirements of the most vulnerable target groups .
I can say to Mrs Peijs that , with regard to the so-called big bang , the idea currently being studied in Europe involves arranging for shopkeepers to give the euro as change from 1 January 2002 .
Therefore , just before 1 January 2002 , they will be provided with enough euro notes and coins so that they can give change only in the euro from 1 January 2002 , with the public being able to continue paying in the national currency for a few more weeks .
This is the formula which is currently being studied .
With regard to the public , and specifically those in vulnerable and disadvantaged groups , I believe that our information strategy must develop , in the short and long term , into partnerships with the Member States , with these groups being a priority .
We have therefore planned for specific actions to be carried out among young people and in the world of education .
Mrs Lulling , based on ongoing qualitative studies we have also planned a specific action targeted at women , particularly those not in paid employment .
As for the so-called sensitive groups , several pilot projects are currently being developed .
However , I do not believe that it is appropriate to fix a predefined limit of 10 % for the funds . Some countries will need more while in certain cases more is already being done .
In any case , I believe that a certain amount of flexibility must be kept in order to adapt the effort to current and future requirements .
Clearly , political pressure in favour of these disadvantaged groups must be maintained , which is what the Commission intends to do .
To conclude , I must applaud the exemplary collaboration between our two institutions .
Since 1996 , this has allowed a coherent information strategy for the euro to be developed .
We must continue in this manner and affirm that our ultimate aim is to ensure that , unlike the situation which occurred in France in the 1960s , on 1 January 2002 when the euro notes and coins are put into circulation , this will be for everyone the final stage in a process for which they will have been well prepared and which will have been properly explained .
Our aim is also to ensure that this changeover occurs smoothly .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Adjustment mechanism in cases of asymmetric shocks
Mr President , how are countries to cope with an economic crisis once we have the euro ?
That is really what my report is about .
From 1 January , eleven countries of the European Union will have a single currency .
At the same time , they will have a single monetary policy and the various exchange rates between them will be irrevocably fixed .
What this means is that whilst they gain a common currency , they lose the ability to absorb the consequences of an economic crisis affecting only themselves and not other countries of Euroland by applying a monetary policy which is tailored to their own national circumstances or by revaluing their national currency .
From 1 January , monetary policy will be geared to the average situation in Euroland as a whole , and only the euro itself will fluctuate in value against currencies outside the euro zone .
In economic terms , the Member States in Euroland are simply regions within a greater whole .
A crisis affecting one region cannot be resolved through national policy .
Whilst the euro countries are losing two major instruments for dealing with regional crises , they still have the most important instrument , namely their budget .
In the event of a regional crisis , they can use their budget to resolve it .
However , the stability pact has restricted the ways in which the budget can be used .
If the budget deficit is 3 % , those possibilities are exhausted .
Other possibilities for resolving country- and region-specific crises and the unemployment to which they lead could well be labour mobility and wage flexibility .
But in Europe , with its different language regions , the mobility of labour will always be limited , and there are clear limits to what is acceptable in Europe as regards wage flexibility .
All this means that Euroland is quite vulnerable to economic crises which affect just one or more countries .
I offer two solutions to this in my report .
Firstly , Member States can take their own precautionary measures , as the social partners have done in Finland .
In Finland , the social partners use the pension funds as a shock absorber .
In times of sound economic growth , they increase contributions into the pension funds so that in times of crisis they can reduce them .
Since national economic crises may , in the strongly integrated Euroland , spill over on to other Member States unless they are dealt with effectively , I propose a safety net at European level in the form of a stabilisation instrument to be funded by loans raised on the capital market .
A mechanism of this kind is already allowed for under Article 103a ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
It is in fact quite simply an insurance instrument against the consequences of a serious national crisis .
It cannot resolve the crisis , but will buy governments the extra time they need to take structural measures to restore the balance .
It will in fact replace the exchange rate instrument which in practice served the same purpose prior to the advent of the euro .
Since the monies involved are funds raised on the capital market and repayable loans rather than transfers , I would expect Member States to be happy with this idea .
A major fear in the past , that a stabilisation mechanism of this kind might conflict with the stability pact , has now been allayed .
The conditionality attaching to loans will undoubtedly run in tandem with the requirements of the stability pact .
I shall be glad to hear from the Commission how it intends to keep its promise of 8 April last year that it will , before the end of this year , consider jointly with the Council and Parliament how the terms of Article 103a ( 2 ) can be implemented .
Precisely because this Treaty article envisages a stability mechanism and unanimity is needed in the Council to implement it , we in Parliament think it is important to draw up the framework for implementation well in advance , because if a country is faced with a shock which it cannot absorb effectively itself by using existing resources , Community assistance is needed promptly and we cannot spend half a year talking about what to do and how to do it .
This same need for a speedy response means that an early warning system might usefully be devised .
We are urging the Commission to do this too .
Mr President , country-specific shocks within Euroland are not problems over which politicians are losing any sleep , let alone the general public .
This House is convinced , however , in view of the broad support which my report has received , that this is not right .
So the Commission and the Council have to get their act together .
Mr President , in Portuguese we have the equivalent of the expression ' shutting the stable doors after the horse has bolted ' - in other words people tend to find ways of avoiding problems only once they have taken place .
Before any unexpected shocks hit national economies following the introduction of the euro , we should decide on arrangements to tackle that situation .
We should not try to find solutions after a crisis has struck .
That is the aim and the merit of this report , an own-initiative report drafted by our colleague Alman Metten , whom I congratulate and who proposes a number of different solutions on the basis of Article 103a of the Treaty of European Union , which provides for a Stabilisation Fund to tackle national shocks .
First of all we must bear in mind that this support can only be granted in exceptional circumstances beyond countries ' control and by a unanimous decision of the Council .
The instrument which we are now proposing to create will be particularly useful when crises occur in Member States which have not yet sufficiently reduced their budget deficits and do not have their own reserves to face such situations .
It also seems to us that the proposal for the European Union to have a stronger budget to allow it to take effective action against asymmetrical economic slumps is the most appropriate one .
The European Union now needs instruments to defend the economies of its future Member States .
The Commission should , therefore , put forward draft directives setting out all of the possible solutions for tackling this potential risk .
However , the appropriations should certainly not be deducted from the Community Funds , since they have another aim and are applied to those regions that are still the least developed in the whole of the European Union .
Mr President , now that European monetary union is in place , we must examine in detail some of its consequences .
How will EMU function ?
What problems may arise and how will these be solved ?
In this respect , the question of asymmetric shocks is clearly vital .
It is well known that , with the introduction of the euro , the Member States will lose two courses of action in their economic policy : the manipulation of exchange rates and monetary policy .
We should therefore ask whether the euro zone has sufficient instruments to deal with any asymmetric shocks .
We firstly need to clarify one point which Mr Metten has briefly mentioned : that the chance of asymmetric shocks will fall under monetary union .
Why ?
Quite simply because the Member States can no longer set themselves apart by pursuing economic policies which go against those of the other countries in the euro zone , and God knows that some not too far away have done this in the past .
Having said this , even if the chance of asymmetric shocks will fall , we must not delude ourselves into thinking that these will be completely eliminated .
So what can we do ?
We can put into practice the old saying ' prevention is better than cure ' - this must be a day for sayings .
To do this we firstly need to reinforce the coordination of economic policies in order to at least minimise , if not prevent , the infamous asymmetric shocks .
Secondly , we must implement major structural reforms in a number of Member States , particularly relating to the operation of the labour market and the weight of the social and tax burden .
However , we must also provide a cure using remedies that involve in particular good coordination of budgetary and tax policies and possibly , eventually , a greater transfer of certain budgetary expenditure and revenue from the Member States to the Community budget - eventually .
I am not so naive that I do not realise that although this would currently be the best solution economically speaking , this is not the case politically .
Our rapporteur is proposing the creation of a stabilisation fund based on Article 103a of the Treaty .
I would say to Mr Metten that this article does not go that far as it only authorises Community financial assistance to the Member State concerned .
This is why we in the PPE believe that we should stick to an insurance instrument and we are therefore proposing an amendment to this end .
Mr President , the Liberal Group read with interest Mr Metten 's proposal for an initiative on the absorption of asymmetric shocks .
The aim , as he indicated just now in his brief introduction , is to find an alternative to devaluations and local monetary policy .
That prompted the Liberal Group too to wonder , when we compare the old situation with the new one , how much has really changed , who bore the responsibility previously and who is to bear the responsibility now ?
The underlying cause of this kind of shock frequently lies in the policy of the country concerned .
Have the countries made sure , and a number of speakers have asked the same thing , that their own policies are sufficiently balanced as regards taxation , the budget and the national debt ?
The Treaty also allows for measures to be taken in special situations , and deficits of more than 3 % are permissible , but in very exceptional circumstances .
From a Liberal point of view , I think that these should be very exceptional circumstances and then intervention , perhaps short-lived , should be possible in the case of a bigger budget deficit .
But that is a very special situation and it requires unanimity .
The other side is that responsibility lies primarily with the policy pursued by the national Member States , and those national states must continue to pay for it .
We do not agree with the idea that this should be done primarily through a stabilisation fund at European level .
In that respect , we do not support the proposal .
Mr President , this report asserts that asymmetry within the EU economy will decrease with the introduction of the euro .
However , the facts tell a different story .
Divisions between the various regions of the Union are increasing , and have been doing so for a long time .
There is a clear trend towards concentration of business and other activities .
Countries differ in terms of their dependence on raw materials from abroad ; and the single market itself is creating growing inequalities .
The very notion of a common market is underpinned by the need for specialisation and concentration - in other words , increasing asymmetry is built into the system .
I view the report as one more example of how little real analysis has been done on the actual foundation for this hazardous monetary venture .
Mr President , the Metten report highlights that the euro zone may ultimately be relatively unstable due to the impact of various asymmetric shocks .
These shocks could come from outside the zone or may also , in particular , come from inside .
We should not forget , Mr Fourçans , the shocks resulting from the system itself given that this will impose uniform policies on national economies in differing situations .
In this respect , it will be very interesting for economists to see if , in the coming months , the first of these destabilising shocks will result from the alignment of short-term interest rates which took place on 3 December among the various countries in the zone .
The explanatory statement of the Metten report considers this situation , and is particularly concerned about the situation in Ireland .
What will happen if the sharp fall in interest rates leads to the economy of this country overheating ?
The rapporteur proposes offsetting the effect of the fall in rates by increasing taxes in Ireland .
This is a solution which will undoubtedly not please the Irish , who will be sacrificed on the altar of the single currency .
In more general terms , Mr Metten proposes using Article 103a of the Treaty to set up a European stabilisation fund intended to assist countries falling victim to asymmetric shocks .
Of course he promises us , as is always the case in this type of exercise , that this will be a lightweight structure that will provide guarantees but will not redistribute finance among countries .
We do not believe this .
The logic of the single currency system is to gradually progress towards a Community redistribution budget in order to offset the internal instability of the zone .
The contributing countries which are already complaining about the extent of their payments would do well to consider this .
Mr President , the question of whether the risk of asymmetric shocks will increase or decrease with the introduction of monetary union is one that can hardly be answered at this point .
However , it is clear that this possibility exists .
But it is also clear that the instrument of devaluation will no longer apply .
Mr Metten 's report makes a series of useful recommendations for both the Member States and the Community .
However , the coordination of national policies is certainly the most appropriate way of reducing risks .
I agree with the reference to Article 103A as an insurance instrument .
The idea of providing the Union with a bigger budget in future in order to take effective action to combat economic slumps seems to me to be completely pointless , at least for now .
The only effective means of successful intervention will continue to be the political will of the Member States .
Mr President , the problem raised by Mr Metten is clearly a central one which economists have been studying for some time .
These economists must now find solutions because the advent of a single monetary policy prevents the use of the weapon of devaluation and is in fact the cause of the problem raised by our colleague 's report .
In simple terms , it is clear that when exchange rates were involved , shocks were possible within the Member States which had consequences for the whole Union .
You can therefore appreciate the importance of anticipating the possibility of such asymmetric shocks within a country or , as rightly pointed out by Mr Metten , within regions or sectors and not just within a state structure .
Such shocks exist in our Member States .
It is currently possible for one region in a Member State to be in an asymmetric position with regard to the rest of the country , and the solution used is one of cohesion and solidarity .
This same solution must be used accordingly at European level .
This will require much more work yet .
Firstly , we must strive for closer coordination of economic policies .
By implementing coordinated policies of stimulation , growth and solidarity we will help to reduce the chances of asymmetric shocks .
At the same time , we must also strengthen the means at the Commission 's disposal because I believe that , in order to prevent asymmetric shocks , we must harmonise the Commission 's evaluation and procedural means so that the Commission is not solely dependent on those of the Member States .
The Commission must have its own means of expert evaluation .
Turning to the broader picture , Mr Metten raises the question of freedom of movement .
I feel that , in addition to freedom of movement for workers , freedom of movement for citizens would help to make our economies more fluid .
I would go further by saying that , in terms of the universities , we must create courses with common-core syllabuses .
Finally , the solutions proposed by the rapporteur relate primarily to the budgetary issue .
I believe he has quite rightly raised the question of the current budgetary ceiling in the European Union .
If we do not consider this question today , we will eventually be forced to consider it because , if we want to effectively combat asymmetric shocks , we will need further means in addition to the insurance instrument or stabilisation fund .
I believe the course proposed by the rapporteur on the basis of Article 103a should be explored in order to find solutions to these asymmetric shocks .
Mr President , Mr Metten 's report is clearly not the report that I would have liked to have seen produced .
It does not go far enough but , having said that , it is the only report possible at the present time .
I should like to thank Mr Metten for his efforts and for having accepted many of the amendments I tabled .
I should like to add , by way of warning to some Members , that I am not defending Spanish interests here , nor am I entering into the debate concerning rich and poor countries , which featured so prominently at the Vienna Summit .
I am only defending a European interest .
So why am I not defending Spanish interests here ?
I am not defending them because , as highlighted in the Metten report , asymmetric crises in the past affected , above all , the United Kingdom in 1980 , Germany following reunification , and the Netherlands . And , in the future , although the report makes no reference to the fact , experts have predicted that those most likely to suffer such crises are Portugal , in the event of a crisis in the textile industry , and Ireland , in the event of a recession in the United Kingdom which would have a devastating effect on Irish exports and emigration .
Why have I therefore chosen to defend a European interest ?
I have done so because we need to prevent a risk that might affect anyone .
Those who think that Europe can grow with increasingly less money , when confronted with the problem of the asymmetric crisis and the question of what can be done - as Lenin said - , simply say nothing .
Those of us who believe that Europe should progress at an even faster rate , emphasise the importance of and applaud the amendments tabled . A number of these were somewhat cautiously highlighted by Mr Metten , while others were strongly defended and supported in his report .
Mr Metten states that there is a need for greater mobility of production factors .
In this connection , I should like to highlight what Mrs Berès said : language learning and the coordination of academic studies will make Europe an area that is increasingly open to people .
One of the fundamental elements of this is the principle of coherence together with the budget , the early warning system and safety net facility that Mr Metten included in his report , on which I congratulate him sincerely .
Mr President , fortunately we are the only ones here this evening and we can speak quite freely .
I even hear the name Lenin mentioned in this hallowed Chamber .
I would like to take up the subject at the point where it was left by Mr Fourçans , who told us quite rightly that two of the three instruments of economic policy available to the Member States are no longer at their disposal , and indeed they do not have control over economic policy and exchange rate policy .
It should be added that financial policy , which is the third instrument , is very heavily mortgaged to - if not eliminated by - the notorious stability pact , and I would say that the rapporteur 's analysis of the stability pact should be considered with particular care .
According to the rapporteur , the 3 % deficit limit permitted by that celebrated pact is enough to cover the operation of the economy 's automatic stabilisers , provided we start from a zero-deficit basis .
As the rapporteur rightly observes , it is most unlikely that zero deficits will be achieved in the next few years .
The aid from the stabilising fund proposed by the rapporteur may therefore prove particularly useful during the first , critical period of the euro 's operation .
As you will certainly be aware , Mr President , the prevailing interpretation of the stability pact is that public investments not covered by taxes are also subject to the stability pact 's 3 % limit .
Public investment in Europe today averages 2 % of national income , having fallen to that level from 3 % at the beginning of the decade .
If public investments are to be governed by the stability pact , then either there will be no room for the automatic stabilisers to operate , or there will be no room for public investment , or public investment will have to be financed by higher taxation , which would be a recipe for madness - as indeed the entire stability pact is a recipe for madness - at a time when economic activity in Europe is on the decline .
In any case , Mr President , if the stability pact is actually applied - which I doubt , because it seems to me quite unworkable - it will be a source of pain for Europe 's economy .
In that sense , measures like those proposed by Mr Metten may mitigate the harm and we should support him , even though his proposals are purely symbolic and without much practical value since they depend on the principle of unanimity in the Council .
And since this evening is an evening of slogans , as Mr Fourçans himself said , what we need to extract Europe from its present impasse is ' de l 'audace , de l 'audace et encore de l 'audace ' - as your celebrated compatriot once said , Mr Fourçans .
But where are we to find that ' audace ' when we have all subjugated our reasoning to irrational monetarism which is leading us straight towards disaster unless we react against it ?
Let us at least give a sign that we reject that mentality .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the text before us today is the result of careful and thorough work by the rapporteur , Mr Metten , and our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Once again , Commissioner , this parliamentary initiative demonstrates our capacity to consider the major problems with which Europe is or risks being faced and also our capacity to propose serious and realistic solutions .
I therefore support this report and congratulate Mr Metten because , like him , although convinced of the security that the euro will provide , I believe that we must now guard against the risks , which may be small but are ever present , in the period after its introduction .
In this respect , the creation of a Community fund and an insurance instrument to help countries in the euro zone in the event of a crisis in one of these countries can only strengthen our single currency and , in particular , help the countries which have decided to join .
I would add that this fund would also be a stabilising element for the euro in respect of other world currencies , whether these are strong or unstable , dominant or speculative .
Furthermore , while we may feel that any asymmetric shocks will be minor - as confirmed by the stability of the currencies in the euro zone - we cannot ignore the differences in laws and policies .

To conclude , I must wholeheartedly join with those calling for improved coordination of our economic policies , harmonisation of taxes and , in particular , cooperation in our fight against unemployment and our drive for employment , in which the Commission will also be needed .

All in all - and I will finish on this - in order to maximise our assets and limit the risks , we need a positive Europe .
Mr President , to assume that all European countries will avoid asymmetric shocks is naïve .
Within the EU we have to be prepared in good time in order to ward off such shocks .
They may well most obviously affect countries with a narrow industrial structure .
As Mr Metten takes Finland as an example of these , I would like to emphasise that the substantially increased role that Nokia and high tech exports have come to play in the economy has diversified the industrial structure and exports .
I cannot really support Mr Metten 's recommendation for preventing crisis within the framework of the EU budget .
The decision-making process is too slow .
Nor do I see a harmonised monetary policy as appropriate .
That is why sufficiently independent national action is vital .
Mr Metten refers quite rightly to the Finnish plans to change pension contributions so that they would be lower than average during a recession and correspondingly higher during periods of relative prosperity .
For my own part I would like to stress the importance of Keynesian budget policy as a tool to ward off recession .
Automatic stabilisers must be developed in the budget .
I would like to remind you all that over a year ago Parliament approved the proposal I made to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy that a deficit of 3 % should be viewed within the context of the whole economic cycle , not from one moment to the next .
In this way , when the danger of an asymmetric recession looms the country in question could , by means of a budget deficit , stimulate the economy and , with the surplus of the boom phase , bring the situation back to an overall framework of 3 % .
Now it is time for the Commission and the Council to follow the same line and amend the Stability Pact so that different Member States may prepare to avoid shocks by means of anticipatory measures .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Metten for a splendid and professional report , which contains some excellent proposals .
The greatest and most influential shocks have been wars .
We have succeeded in preventing some of them in this Chamber .
Economic shocks are nonetheless serious and they always affect the worst-off most seriously .
The 1973 and 1981 oil crises were explosive events that spread fear around the world .
Furthermore , the steep decline in the value of the dollar was a shock , not only for the Americans but for us also .
Although these shocks were felt throughout the whole EU area , the effect on some states was greater than on others .
This is what breeds asymmetry , rather like what happens in the blood circulation system .
When shock hits a country which is a member of an economic and monetary union , it is a serious matter .
Medical supplies are urgently needed .
On this subject I agree with the previous speaker , but we no longer have the right devaluation medicine at our disposal .
I was one of the member of my large group who had the honour of interviewing candidates for the post of Director of the European Central Bank .
I was astonished that one of them did not regard the issue of asymmetric shocks as important .
If such unrealistic views were to spread within the ECB , its work would certainly produce a shock here in Parliament .
ECB monetary policy is not neutral , so it must acknowledge its responsibility for employment and asymmetric shocks .
The rapporteur gives as examples of shocks affecting single countries the effect of North Sea oil production on the United Kingdom , German unification , the floods in Europe , mad cow disease , and swine fever in the Netherlands .
From Finland 's point of view the crisis in Russia can be compared to any of these .
The situation in Russia may erupt into an asymmetric shock at any time .
For that reason it is time that EU aid to Russia was targeted at relieving the violent social upheaval that has been going on , and not at supporting an oligarchy led by people who moreover , send their money , which is actually our money , abroad .
A Finnish shock could be caused by the timber processing industry getting out of step .
Fortunately the importance of wood in our country has declined dramatically , and it is the metal and electronics industry that has become the largest export sector .
Nevertheless , the situation in the timber processing industry is important , and when the Russian crisis came along , it did not affect Finland , which shows how much our situation has changed .
We need a guarantee fund and instruments of stability .
We also need an early warning mechanism in respect of shocks that affect single countries .
Mr President , the creation of an adjustment mechanism to tackle asymmetric shocks may be seductive on the surface , but we have reservations and worries . Of course we do not wish to question the merit of the rapporteur 's initiative , and I wish to congratulate him .
Nobody could question the fact that it is preferable to attack evil at the root , eradicating or at least attenuating the circumstances that might give rise to these shocks by means of sectoral diversification , structural reinforcement and more flexible economies - in particular , through the markets , on the one hand , and tight budget policies , on the other .
Let us hope that this will be successful because , who knows , the size of these asymmetric shocks - or even symmetrical shocks , affecting the whole of the economy - might be so great that dealing with them might be far beyond the capacity of the European Union 's budget , a budget that falls short of even 1.2 % of the entire area 's GDP .
Unfortunately , Mr Metten 's hope that the European Union will have a stronger budget than it does at present is not realistic and the fight against short-term slumps would undoubtedly be fought with the resources that should really be earmarked for structural solutions .
This fear is not lessened by the rapporteur 's own reservations , since he says that it would not be a transfer mechanism but only a credit guarantee to be repaid with interest , and that it would be conditional on policies aimed at bringing about a balanced budget ( while in the explanatory statement he talks about special low interest rates ) .
The question that arises is : what about the need for a fund or for budget increases if the necessary resources are not available ?
This might end up by being an open door to extremely unfair transfers of resources , especially if those resources are transferred to the richer countries - it is even said that the small countries might not even need this mechanism - or if countries with less correct policies are actually rewarded to the detriment of countries deprived of any structural support and which , having pursued the correct policies , manage to avoid asymmetric shocks .
Since the question of priorities is at stake we should make it a priority to promote structural policies that are absolutely the right ones but that are incomprehensibly being questioned by politicians with blinkered visions of the European project .
With this stronger safeguard , we should be able to make progress towards the creation of the fund proposed in Mr Metten 's report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Metten is asking us to consider a problem which often arises in the context of Economic and Monetary Union , namely the problem of asymmetric shocks .
Even though I do not agree with all his conclusions , I must congratulate him on his work and also on the work carried out in the relevant subcommittee .
I had prepared a longer version of my speech but , as time is getting on , I will shorten it as much as possible .
I will provide anyone who is interested with my detailed thoughts on asymmetric shocks .

I would have liked more time to try and convince Mr Berthu but I believe that , at this stage , this would require a specific lecture on basic economic mechanisms , which I am prepared to give him .
First of all , we must understand what is meant by asymmetric shocks so I will give a definition of these .
We must also be aware of the probability of these shocks occurring in Europe and , finally , what solutions are possible .
These are the three ideas which I would like to briefly develop .
Firstly , what is an asymmetric shock ?
There is a simple , theoretical and fairly vague answer to this question , which is that an asymmetric shock is a shock in supply or demand affecting a specific part or sector of an economic zone in a different way to the other parts or sectors .
Given that we have worked on this extensively in the Commission , we have tried to establish a typology or classification of asymmetric shocks in order to illustrate this definition .
We have distinguished four types of shock .
Firstly , there are shocks caused by nature , for example after an earthquake or epidemic .
Their asymmetric nature is due to the fact that the operative event is very localised and affects a particular region .
Secondly , there are shocks which are caused by an exceptional historical development which is impossible to foresee .
I am thinking , for example , of the unification of Germany .
Thirdly , there are shocks caused by the collapse of demand for a good or service in which a country specialises .
I will use the example mentioned earlier of the collapse in the price of wood and therefore of the wood sector , which represents 15 % of the GDP of Finland .
In this category , the asymmetry clearly depends on the degree of specialisation of the country .
Fourthly , and finally , there are shocks whose asymmetry is caused by differing responses in economic policy to the same operative events .
For example , during the first oil crisis in 1973 in principle all the industrialised countries should have tackled the problem in the same way as they were all similarly affected .
However , this was not the case .
What happened was that national responses differed greatly , thus creating asymmetric shocks .
In some countries stimulation policies were initiated , whereas others aimed for stabilisation .
This is therefore the definition of an asymmetric shock .
But that is not all there is to it as it is also necessary to try to assess the probability of the shock .
Firstly , I would say to Mrs Berès that the Commission is currently equipping itself with analysis structures .
I can tell you that , just today , the new organisation chart of DG II has been signed in which we have really reinforced economic analysis skills , and we have also set up a system for ' reasoning in the euro zone ' .
I think we will have an opportunity to discuss this again but I wanted to reassure you on this point .
There are two relevant factors in assessing the probability of asymmetric shocks : the integration of the economies of the Member States and the coordination of economic policies .
It is precisely due to the combination of these two factors that asymmetric shocks are very unlikely within EMU .
With regard to the first factor - the integration of the economies of the Member States - you can see that the achievement of a single market makes the economies increasingly interdependent , and even more so with a single currency .
This lessens the specialisation of the national economies .
Furthermore , structural and cohesion policies approximate the levels of development in the Community .
These two elements therefore help to prevent asymmetric shocks and I would say that the situation in Europe in this respect is at least as positive as in other monetary unions .
Mr Berthu , Finland is no more threatened by a crisis in the wood sector than Alabama is by a cotton crisis or Michigan by a crisis in the automotive sector .
Finally , I would say that the relatively low degree of national specialisation in Europe makes the occurrence of national asymmetric shocks very unlikely .
This does not mean that shocks will not occur in a town or region affected by a natural disaster or which specialises in one product .
Rather , there may be a shock but this will not affect just one Member State .
The second factor is the coordination of economic policies , and I believe that one of the characteristics of EMU is precisely to provide coherent and coordinated political responses .
Firstly , single monetary policy excludes any possibility of a franc tireur , or lone gunman if you prefer , aggravating the consequences of a shock on the economies of the other Member States .
The situation is therefore very different from that which could have occurred between 1992 and 1995 in the European Union .
Furthermore , the coordination of budgetary policies - and I am thinking particularly in the context of the stability and growth pact - specifically prevents differing national responses , such as were seen during the first oil crisis .
However , the stability and growth pact also allows budgetary margins of manoeuvre to be regained by eliminating structural deficits from public finances .
Therefore , for all these reasons , and because it is accompanied by the convergence and coordination of economic policies , EMU reinforces the EU 's capacity to avoid asymmetric shocks or to limit their impact by means of appropriate political responses .
Having said this , shocks are not totally impossible .
So what measures do we have to tackle them ?
There are two categories : measures involving the market which , rather strangely , no one here has mentioned , and budgetary measures which , by contrast , have been much discussed .

If I may , I will briefly talk first of all about the market .
This is an asymmetric shock absorber .
Analyses too often tend to focus solely on the public responses to economic shocks .
This type of analysis no longer corresponds to the modern structure of our industrialised economies .
In our economies , it is the market and not the government which has the ability to adapt and provide finance .
I have found a study on asymmetric shocks which was carried out in 1996 by Brown University and which showed that the financing needed to offset the effects of a shock came from the capital markets in 62 % of cases and from the federal budget in 13 % of cases .
The market 's action is therefore decisive .
Accordingly , EMU is providing Europe with new assets represented by two essential markets : the capital market and the labour market .
With regard to the capital market , there is of course the euro which is primarily a major capital and credit market .
The introduction of the euro will therefore result in the establishment of an extensive and very liquid market and also , undoubtedly , a liquidity and security comparable to that of the American market .
Negotiations are currently under way to form a genuine European stock exchange .
We are also witnessing the promotion of the European venture capital market .
A major European capital and credit market will be better able to release the financing needed to absorb an economic shock .
With regard to the labour market , I would refer you to our main economic policy statements and to the guidelines on employment , which have the same message , namely that the Member States , the Commission and Parliament want to improve the ability of the European labour market to react to the effects of globalisation .
I believe that this greater flexibility will be an important element in absorbing the negative effect in employment terms of any asymmetric shocks in the future .
I will not go into the conclusions of the Vienna European Council as I believe that Mr Santer must do this , but the proposed European employment pact has the same aim .
To give you the full picture , I must add that the improvement of the single market in goods and services , which the Council lists under ' economic reforms ' , will also help to reinforce the ability of the European economy to respond in the event of a shock .
Therefore , the private sector 's ability to respond is vital and must not be neglected .
The other means of combating asymmetric shocks is to use budgetary policy ; this is still in the context of the stability and growth pact and the Treaty .
Budgetary policy can be used in two ways : in the context of national budgetary policy and in the context of financial solidarity , and this involves Article 103a as you have mentioned .
With regard to national budgetary policy , I would remind you that , by avoiding excessive deficits and by fixing as a medium-term objective a budgetary situation which is close to equilibrium or slightly in surplus , the stability and growth pact aims , by 2002 at the latest , to give the Member States a sufficient budgetary margin of manoeuvre to allow a broader response to economic shocks .
Four national stability and convergence programmes , which we have already analysed and which have been accepted by the Council , respond to these objectives .
Another eleven programmes are pending which should in principle be available before the end of the year .
We will examine these from the same viewpoint .
Your report , Mr Metten , which noted that these margins of manoeuvre would not be available until 2002 , cleverly suggests that the Community budget could also be used to artificially speed up this process , for example by deferring or bringing forward the national contributions .
In this respect , I must say that nothing of this kind is provided for by the budgetary legislation of the European Union and that such an arrangement would be unfair , in my opinion , because it would transfer the burden from some countries to others , without providing a lasting solution .
This is why the best solution is to strictly apply the stability and growth pact and , if possible - as you yourself have underlined , Mr Metten - to create budgetary reserves during boom periods , as in Finland , which could be used in the event of shocks .
In general , the Commission recommends that Member States create for themselves an additional margin of manoeuvre which can be used in the event of a shock or dramatic change in the economic situation . This is in addition to a position of structural equilibrium in the public accounts .
Finally , to round off this point , I must remind you that the stability pact specifies that a Member State may temporarily and exceptionally use its budgetary policy beyond the 3 % deficit limit in the event of exceptional economic circumstances .
This completely covers the occurrence of an asymmetric shock of a particular extent , and that is all I have to say on ' national budgets ' .
The other important aspects are the Treaty and Article 103a of the Treaty .
I would remind you that Article 103a of the Treaty states that : ' without prejudice to any other procedures provided for in this Treaty , the Council may , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission , decide upon the measures appropriate to the economic situation , in particular if severe difficulties arise in the supply of certain products . ' It also states that : ' where a Member State is in difficulties or is seriously threatened with severe difficulties caused by exceptional occurrences beyond its control , the Council may , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission , grant , under certain conditions , Community financial assistance to the Member State concerned .
Where the severe difficulties are caused by natural disasters , the Council shall act by qualified majority .
The President of the Council shall inform the European Parliament of the decision taken . '
The scope of this text is very clear .
Under no circumstances can it be interpreted as authorising the bailing out of a Member State whose economic policy does not comply with the Treaty .
The text is worded wisely .
In the event of an unexpected shock , it gives the Commission and the Council significant latitude to ensure financial solidarity .
It is clearly not possible to prepare precise remedies for the unexpected .
Nevertheless , the Commission is already considering the best way of ensuring the financial solidarity of the euro zone in the event of a natural disaster , for example , and I hope to have the opportunity to discuss this with you at some stage in the future .
I would point out that the main problem with Article 103a is that it requires the unanimity of the Council , whereas an effective mechanism for absorbing asymmetric shocks must by nature be immediate and automatic .
Finally , to finish on this point , I must add that , in accordance with Articles 109k and 109k ( 6 ) of the Treaty , the ' pre-in ' and ' pre-out ' countries - those which are not in the euro zone and those alone - can still benefit from Community assistance for the balance of payments .
We will be making proposals in this respect before or during 1999 .
To conclude - and I apologise for having taken so long but we could go on for hours on this subject - I would say firstly that if there is an asymmetric shock , it is necessary to adjust and not just provide finance .
It is wrong to focus solely on finding Community finance when the problem is primarily the responsibility of the countries which must implement reforms imposed by the adaptation to a de facto situation .
Finally , asymmetric shocks are an unlikely occurrence .
There is less chance of these occurring with the euro than without the euro and I believe that the coordination of the policy mix introduced by EMU will give the Community the best weapons to combat asymmetric shocks .
This is the direction our work must take in the coming months , now that we are just 16 days away from the introduction of the euro .
Mr President , our thanks to the Commissioner for his extensive reply , but he has not answered my very specific question , namely how does the Commission intend to keep the promise it gave on 8 April last year in connection with a report of mine on the same subject that it will , before the end of this year , consider jointly with the Council and Parliament how the terms of Article 103a ( 2 ) can be implemented .
He has said nothing on that .
Nor has he confirmed that he still plans to keep that promise .
That was really the thrust of my report .

Mr President , Mr Metten could perhaps read my original speech in detail as I believe this would provide the answer to his question .
Firstly , with regard to Community financial support in the event of difficulties in the balance of payments - in other words the extension of the system in Article 109h to countries not in the euro zone - we are committed to preparing an assessment and proposals .
As I have said , this will occur in the next few weeks or months .
Secondly , with regard to the accelerated procedure allowing the implementation of this article in the event of a natural disaster with micro-economic consequences , I must say that we are currently examining the possibility of a procedure which would accelerate the Council 's decision .
This would be taken by qualified majority in order to initially provide the bare essentials of assistance through a special budgetary line followed by reconstruction in the areas affected by means of loans , particularly involving the EIB .
Thirdly , with regard to the most contentious point about asymmetric shocks - which I believe is a problem of substance and doctrine - namely the first part of paragraph 2 of Article 103a , analysis and discussion work has been carried out on different empirical cases of asymmetric shocks , including the development of various economic and legal arguments .
I was able in my presentation to give you some answers .
I remain at your disposal to continue the discussion in private or in public .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Trading of goods between Member States
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0486 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 8776 / 98 - C4-0492 / 98-97 / 0155 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 3330 / 91 on the statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States with a view to reducing the data to be provided ( Rapporteur : Mrs Lulling ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling .
Mr President , Commissioner , on 31 March I submitted to this House my report on the two proposals for regulations presented by the Commission . These proposals are intended to simplify the Intrastat regulation , reduce the statistical burden of undertakings , particularly SMEs , and reduce the costs of those information providers who must provide Eurostat with the data which allows the preparation of the essential and invaluable statistics on the trading of goods between Member States in the single market .
I regretted at the time that these proposals did not contain all the positive suggestions of the SLIM initiative .
I also said that they were simply a step in the right direction in anticipation of a more radical simplification , all the more so given that the reliability of the Intrastat statistics is inversely proportional to the costs incurred by the 450 000 undertakings which must provide the data .
These costs are in the order of 500 million , plus another 100 million for the operation of the system by the national statistics collectors .
We therefore tabled amendments at first reading .
These were adopted unanimously and , apart from a few details , received the blessing of the Commission .
Commissioner de Silguy actually said in the House that he could include all our amendments .
Unfortunately , this was not the case in the Council , which sent us a common position which actually watered down the Commission 's original proposal , whereas we and the Commission wanted to strengthen it .
If we followed the Council , in other words the governments , in their negative attitude - which is all the more incomprehensible given that their statistics officers collaborated in the SLIM initiative - this would lead to an increase in the statistical burden on undertakings .
The Council even went as far as to simply refuse to adopt a common position on the proposal for a regulation concerning the nomenclature .
We could have resigned ourselves to such a negative attitude from the Council and capitulated due to the impossibility of moving the mountain of Member States ' bureaucratic requirements , thereby discrediting the SLIM initiative and ignoring the interests of undertakings which continue to ask for a reduction in their statistical burdens .
Instead , we have chosen to keep our amendments to the two proposals for amending the Intrastat regulation .
I realise that , in the absence of a common position from the Council , the Commission might say that , for formal reasons , it cannot accept certain amendments even though it basically supports these and its opinion has not changed since 31 March .
To us , keeping these amendments is a political signal to the Council , which must realise the confidence and solidarity which exist between the Commission and Parliament on this matter .

As the rapporteur , I have again been subject to pressure from users of these statistics who are legitimately interested in receiving detailed and quality information on intra-Community trading of goods and who are keen to maintain the finest subdivisions , with eight-digit codes , in order to have cheap and reliable economic information .
As there is some misunderstanding among these users about the extent of our amendments , I must reassure them by saying that , in our Amendment No 8 , the Combined Nomenclature is recognised as being the basic nomenclature for the classification of goods .
A single nomenclature , the Combined Nomenclature , will be used for external and intra-European statistics .
Our amendment is the result of abandoning the idea of a specific Intrastat nomenclature .
In addition , as regards the recommended simplification of using a six-digit code instead of the eight-digit code for identifying certain goods , as in the Harmonised System , the conditions needed in order to benefit from this simplification are being adopted by the Commission in comitology by taking into account a partnership between national administrations and users and by noting the vital importance of close cooperation with all the indicated parties being confirmed from the outset by a legislative text .
This partnership could guarantee that certain special needs , particularly in the agri-foodstuffs sector , will be covered .
My friends in the wine sector can relax as they will continue to receive statistics which show them how much red and white wine , and of what regional origin , has been the subject of intra-Community trade .
Keeping our amendments will stop us from shooting ourselves in the foot by limiting our own competitiveness due to a lack of strategic intelligence .
In addition , work is in progress in the context of SLIM II in order to simplify and modernise the Combined Nomenclature .
The preparations for a code of conduct for the management of the Combined Nomenclature are currently being finalised and the European professional federations know that close sectoral collaboration in this has already resulted in a reduction in the nomenclature .
However , Mr President , because we must go further and adopt measures exempting information providers in certain cases from providing data for the detailed version of the nomenclature , we have decided to continue down the road taken at the first reading .
I hope that the Commission will follow us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's firms need our help .
The entrepreneurial environment , characterised by a variety of tightly regulated legal frameworks , has undoubtedly become more and more complex and complicated in recent years .
From the experience of my own country and my own forging business , I know only too well that the administrative burden arising from national and European legislation causes a lot of problems , especially for small and medium-sized companies .
In this respect , the present common position , together with the amendments proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and those introduced by Mrs Lulling , forms a positive basis for simplifying administration .
It is a small step but a good one , and above all it is a step in the right direction .
The distinction between Intrastat and Extrastat means that there is still a lot of work to be done .
Simplifying the nomenclature within the internal market is an interim measure .
The ultimate goal must be deregulation , as with other statistics .
Mr President , Mrs Lulling , ladies and gentlemen , you have referred to the Commission proposals of 30 May 1997 which are intended to simplify the basic regulation on the Intrastat system , this being the statistical system on the trading of goods between Member States .

As you have indicated , Mr Rübig , the aim is to reduce the statistical burden on undertakings , firstly by reducing the list of data to be provided in the declarations and secondly by simplifying the nomenclature of goods used to classify traded commodities .
This House welcomed these two proposals in a very positive manner and even tried to widen their scope by tabling 8 amendments .
As I promised , the Commission accepted these amendments in the main during the first reading on 1 April and incorporated them into its amended proposals .
The common position adopted by the Council on 20 July was limited to the first proposal on the reduction in the range of data to be provided .
In this common position , the Council unanimously rejected the Commission 's amended proposal .
The Council did not mention the second proposal but merely expressed a hope that the Commission would continue its work on classification .
I would remind you that at the time the Commission officially published a statement stressing that the Council 's position was a real step backwards in terms of the aims of the SLIM initiative to simplify the legislation of the internal market .
I will start by commenting on the Commission 's first proposal and the Council 's common position .
The rapporteur proposes introducing further simplifications in the context of the SLIM initiative .
I am able to say that the Commission can accept the majority of these amendments , with the exception of three points .
Firstly , you ask for the immediate deletion of the ' mode of transport ' data .
The Commission would prefer to retain this data until 1 January 2000 when the directives on transport should come into force in all the Member States .
Secondly , you also propose the immediate deletion of the ' delivery terms ' data .
The Commission does not agree with this and recommends a transitional period of one year to allow the Member States sufficient time to adapt their statistical systems .
Thirdly , and finally , you have not kept the option of granting derogations to Member States for the application of new regulations .
The Commission feels that it is necessary , in view of the constraints involved in adapting the national systems , to provide for a transitional period of one year .
This does not seem unreasonable to me .
I will now turn to the second proposal , on which the Council has not made a decision .
In the absence of a common position from the Council , the Commission is not permitted to consider the four amendments , Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 8 , which this House is proposing to adopt .
However , I understand the rapporteur 's concern about maintaining pressure on the Council in order to force it to adopt a position on the simplified use of the nomenclature for traded commodities .
The Commission would like to draw the attention of this House to the development of the Council 's position following the fairly recent adoption , in fact on 1 December , by another authority - the Ecofin Council - of a Monetary Committee report underlining the importance of the simplifications to be made to the Intrastat system .
I believe that this position is closer to the Commission 's proposals and the position of this House and I believe that it should help to define a common position on the whole subject .
To conclude , I must applaud the support which the rapporteur has given the Commission on the simplification of the Intrastat system , in line with the objectives of the SLIM initiative .
I can assure you that the Commission will not fail to keep you regularly informed of the development of the procedure in the Council where it is sparing no effort to achieve a favourable result .
Mr President , I must thank Commissioner de Silguy and say that , with regard to the minor details , we can certainly reach agreement on the deadlines .
Mrs Lulling , we cannot have a debate .
You may ask a question , but not reopen the debate .
Mr President , I must reply to the Commissioner ...
No , the debate is closed and there are no replies to be given .
It is late , and you are well aware of the Rules .
You may only ask a question .
Mr President , I must tell the Commissioner that we can reach agreement .
We are after all at the second reading and I do not see why I cannot answer him as he is saying that he cannot agree to the deadlines , whereas I hope that by discussing this we will be able to reach agreement ...
I am sorry , Mrs Lulling , but the debate is closed .
( The President cut off Mrs Lulling , who continued to protest without a microphone )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
External transit
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0442 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0536 / 98-97 / 0242 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2913 / 92 with regard to the external transit procedure ( Rapporteur : Mrs Peijs ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mrs Peijs .
Mr President , during the May part-session , Parliament adopted seven amendments at first reading .
Several of these have been adopted by the Council , in whole or in part .
Two important points remain which I think need to be raised again .
Firstly , an administrative note .
I am told by the Swedish representation in the Council that an error has crept into the Swedish translation of the first amendment .
The English text should be taken as the original .
I do not speak Swedish , so I cannot comment further .
As regards the two amendments , and firstly the transparency of the decisions taken by the committee , this has been a matter of concern for a number of years now , not least to Parliament itself .
Important decisions are taken in the committee on how firms operating in the area of Community transit should conduct themselves vis-à-vis the customs authorities .
In particular , the conditions which firms must fulfil if they are to use the simplified procedures on safety are crucial .
These can greatly affect the way in which individual companies operate .
Parliament has laid down the broad lines of these conditions in the legal text , but the committee will still have to finalise them .
There must be complete clarity to ensure that the legislation is applied uniformly to firms in comparable situations .
Secondly , I have retabled an amendment concerning the time-frame within which customs authorities must complete their work .
The transit system is still a paper-based operation , sometimes even a manual operation , scarcely credible on the eve of the year 2000 .
In future , this will have to be computerised and the year 2000 has featured in the planning , even now in 1998 .
But it will be a few more years before this computer system is in place .
As a result , the completion - the discharge , as the jargon has it - of an individual procedure for an individual shipment can sometimes take months , or even years .
Parliament is forced to accept this , but is launching its own inquiry into the reasons for this almost intolerable delay .
The lack of a computer system is one of the considerations relevant to the discharge for 1996 .
It has to be agreed that the internal market cannot be enlarged to include new applicant countries if we do not have a fully computerised customs system up and running .
I would urge a number of Member States to abandon their regrettable opposition to linking their national systems to the European system .
Complaining about fraud at borders in transit traffic cuts no ice if there is not close cooperation between national and European customs services .
The Commission has intimated that it intends to set a time limit of 30 days in the implementing provisions for customs authorities .
Purely on condition that this is actually done , I have agreed to incorporate an amendment into the recitals at this second reading .
Personally , I think it is unacceptable to impose all manner of obligations and restrictions on the industry without yourself being willing , as an authority , to be bound by administrative deadlines .
There has to be a balance in the obligations undertaken by all the parties .
Last week the Council working party responsible discussed the amendments and I gather , Mr President , that it may be possible to avoid a conciliation procedure .
That will save a great deal of time and money .
I hope the House will support the amendments we have tabled .
I have a little time left to say something which is close to my heart .
It is a remarkable dossier we are discussing here , a highly technical one .
It is crazy that all the fundamental questions and all the fundamental issues of our European Union should be raised in a technical dossier of this kind .
This is a question of transparency and democracy , and this transparency and democracy , which I have reflected in the amendments , are constantly being ignored by the Commission .
I had a letter this evening from the platform for freight transit or whatever name they have adopted , and this platform backs my request .
You cannot negotiate with an industry which speaks with different voices and does not speak with a single voice to the Commission .
They have now changed that .
They are now speaking with a single voice to the Commission .
But whenever there needs to be real transparency in the committee procedures , there is none .
Then the Commission says , yes , but we are talking to you .
Of course they are talking .
That is the most normal thing in the world .
If we had wanted to live under a dictatorship , we would not have needed the European Union , we could have made our own dictatorship .
We do not want to live under a dictatorship , even one headed by technocrats .
We want the European Commission to maintain the utmost transparency vis-à-vis the platform on transit , not least as regards the committee procedures .
I should like to be sure that the Commissioner will pass this message on to his officials .
We shall keep a watchful eye on things .
We are asking the European Commission to cooperate seriously here .
It should not confuse a normal consultation procedure with the industry with transparency in the committee procedures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like firstly to congratulate Karla Peijs on her commitment to the fight for simplification in this area .
We should actually apply SLIM rather than simply talking about it , and we should regard the impact statement as a fact .
We must involve those concerned and deal objectively with justified objections .
I myself was a member of the committee of inquiry that dealt with fraud in Community transit , and I know that there are problems in this area , but we must not throw the baby out with the bath-water .
Quite simply , what we need is a simplified procedure .
We need proper regulations concerning guarantees , and we also need the 60-day time limit so that the system is efficient and so that in future customs procedures are handled in such a way that the European Union can see where its money is going .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Peijs on this report .
It is an excellent piece of work indeed .
This action plan for customs transit is hugely important .
As the euro comes in we expect a growth in trade across our frontiers and the procedures for dealing effectively with this trade must be in place .
Objectives such as creating more efficient recovery procedures in transit operations and shortening the time taken for discharge are of considerable importance to our industry for cutting down their costs and burdens , especially considering that the procedure can take up to five years to be completed at present .
Central to these proposals is the need to curb fraudulent practices in the transport procedure .
We have heard a lot about fraud recently and the problems about fraud against the Community budget .
It is not helped by a lack of transparency in decision-making , which is why my group supports Amendment No 1 in particular .
It is , as Mr Peijs has pointed out , quite amazing that in this day and age we still have so much done on paper .
I have heard it said that to err is human , but for a real cock-up you need a computer .
I think that we have probably moved to the stage where computerisation is essential and that procedures that are introduced by Member States must be compatible with the rules governing Community transit procedures .
These rules must be clearly defined .
Calculations must be based on the operators ' liability and the risks attached to the goods .
I welcome this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the rapporteur .
The changes in the external transit procedure are based on the work of Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry , which approved the changes in 1997 .
I was involved myself , as was my colleague , Mr Rübig .
The transit system was reformed in three respects .
Legislation was reviewed and amended , cooperation was increased among Member States through Customs 2000 , and automation was introduced .
The system of automation that we are dealing with here , with the computerisation of customs and networking , is absolutely essential .
An efficient customs system in the European Union is not possible today without effective networking .
Ladies and gentlemen , we and the Commission are currently making life very easy for crooks and criminals .
If the Member States and the Commission do not realise this , it is very strange .
We talk about the information society , but it is not working in the area of customs .
I agree with the rapporteur that all committee-based decisions should be as open as possible .
But it is important that essential matters are not just left to the committee , but that Parliament should be able to debate them , as otherwise it is not just a question of avoiding transparency , but also bypassing democracy .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Peijs , for this vital contribution to reaching a fair compromise on the amendment of the Community customs code in connection with the reform of the transit procedure .
The Commission and Parliament have already demonstrated their joint interest in making the transit procedure more secure , so that reliable economic operators are able to benefit from a more flexible system .
That is why , as announced in its communication of 30 April 1997 to Parliament and the Council , when unveiling its action plan for transit in Europe - ' a new customs policy ' - the Commission embarked on an ambitious reform of the transit procedure , designed in particular to implement the recommendations of the parliamentary committee of inquiry into the Community transit procedure .
The reform consists of legislative measures , operational provisions and - an essential element - the computerisation of the service .
The proposed amendment of Regulation ( EEC ) No 2913 / 92 , which introduced the Community customs code , was presented in September 1997 .
The Commission accepted most of the amendments tabled by Parliament at first reading , modifying its proposal accordingly on 3 July 1998 .
The Commission can approve all the amendments to the Council 's common position which are now being put forward by Parliament at second reading , because it considers them to be fully consistent with the aims of the action plan on transit .
The first amendment , on the transparency of decisions taken under the committee procedure , is in keeping with the principles followed by the Commission in terms of both consulting economic operators and the design and implementation of the transit reform .
This amendment , already tabled by Parliament at first reading , has therefore been incorporated into the Commission 's amended proposal of 3 July 1998 .
The second amendment ties in with one of the most important aims of the transit reform , in that it refers to the operational measures which ensure a more secure and efficient procedure .
The quickest possible discharge of the transit procedure is essential to the monitoring of transactions and necessary in order to ensure that the holder is released from his financial obligations within a reasonable period of time .
Therefore , the Commission can likewise approve this amendment .
The Commission is satisfied with the progress made by the proposal in the codecision procedure , since it reveals that Parliament , the Council and the Commission are all keen to see the reform of the transit procedure - which is so important and , as we all know , so difficult - implemented at last .
I wish to conclude with a further warm word of thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Peijs .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Diversification out of certain fishing activities
The next item is the report ( A4-0463 / 98 ) by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Decision on a specific measure to encourage diversification out of certain fishing activities and amending Council Decision 97 / 292 / EC of 28 April 1997 ( COM ( 98 ) 0515 - C4-0543 / 98-98 / 0274 ( CNS ) ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Souchet .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 8 June 1998 , after a long debate , the Council adopted a regulation banning fishing with drift nets in the Atlantic and Mediterranean with effect from 1 January 2002 .
To provide compensation for some of the economic loss suffered by fishermen ( requirement to adapt vessels for deep-sea tuna fishing using new techniques , cessation of activities and so on ) , the Council drew up this proposal on the basis of Article 43 of the Treaty .
This proposal follows the broad outlines of the Spadare plan created for Italy in 1997 , which provided measures for seafarers and shipowners .
The measures proposed involve compensating fishermen following either the cessation of all economic activities before 1 January 2002 or diversification into other fishing activities .
Shipowners can be compensated following either the cessation of all fishing activities or diversification into other fishing activities .
This compensation is for shipowners and fishermen who have been involved in drift net fishing in 1995 , 1996 or 1997 .
This year could also have been included so that it is mainly those fishermen who are fully active who benefit from this measure , as is usual .
Five Member States are affected by this ban : Spain ( only in the Mediterranean ) , Ireland , France , Italy and the United Kingdom .
In order to limit budget costs and prevent possible abuse of the investments , this proposal sets only the maximum amounts of the premiums .
The Member States must themselves adjust these payments in line with the actual economic and social loss resulting from the ban on fishing with drift nets .
I must emphasise that the ban on the use of drift nets could cause the premature cessation of activity for certain fishermen , as the proposed measures provide for the establishment of an additional compensatory payment in the event of cessation of all fishing activity before 1 January 2002 .
Local authorities and fishermen have recently made significant investments in infrastructures such as markets , particularly to meet Community standards .
These investments will show reduced profitability following the cessation of activity by certain fishermen , in particular in those ports where the vessels affected by this measure concentrate the landing of their catches .
The Committee on Fisheries has adopted 8 amendments which I proposed as rapporteur .
Amendments Nos 1 and 8 aim to reestablish an equitable situation between Italian fishermen affected by the Spadare plan and fishermen from the other Member States affected by the decision to ban drift nets .
These diversification measures must not in any case produce a distortion of competition .
Amendments Nos 2 and 7 aim to allow the aggregation of the funding to enable the financing of diversification by fishermen for the period between 1 January 2000 and 31 December 2001 .
These amendments are particularly important as certain Member States have initiated studies and are experimenting with possibilities for adapting other fishing equipment for use as a substitute for drift nets .
A large number of the fishermen affected are waiting for the results of these studies so that they can provide for the necessary investments for the technical modification of their vessels .
Amendment No 3 specifies that only fishermen over 50 years of age can benefit from the compensatory payment of ECU 50 000 if they cease all economic activity before 1 January 2002 .
This amendment will prevent the possibility of windfalls , the risk of fraud and the abuse of a measure which is not meant to turn young fishermen away from their chosen profession .
Amendment No 4 specifies that it is necessary to ensure that the measures provided under this decision apply only to the fishermen and owners of vessels who suffer a real loss because of the ban on fishing using drift nets .
Amendment No 5 specifies that the age of the vessels should be taken into account only in the specific case of a payment for cessation of activity .
If the owner has to make investments to convert his vessel in order to be able to use other fishing equipment , it is essential to take account of all the investment needed for this conversion , without having to apply an abatement coefficient linked to the age of the fishing vessel .
Finally , Amendment No 6 asks the Commission to make provision for the necessary financial resources so that all fishermen who are eligible can benefit from the diversification measure .
Certain Member States , particularly Ireland , have used or will use all the funding allocated under the FIFG .
In my opinion , all these amendments which have been adopted by the Committee on Fisheries are in line with the spirit of the measure which the Council felt obliged to adopt in order to assist the diversification of those fishermen severely affected by a measure which they feel is particularly unfair .
This measure aims not to dissuade but rather to encourage young fishermen from our Member States who fish for albacore using newer vessels .
It is essential that we encourage the continuation of deep-sea fishing as this involves a particularly healthy resource and helps to conserve species which are struggling .
Mr President , my group supports this report with the amendments .
It is a very necessary report .
Now the governments of the European Union have decided this , and the European Union and this Parliament have supported the measure to abolish driftnets , then they have to do something about the livelihood of the fishermen concerned .
It is absolutely necessary that we do this .
Driftnet fishing was considered bad by this Parliament .
It was considered that the by-catch of dolphins and other sea creatures was too important , so we abandoned driftnet fishing .
But now we must do something about the fishermen .
Firstly , we have to provide compensation , retirement , or whatever you call it , for those fishermen who go out of business and fish no longer .
That is one aspect of it .
The second aspect is to change the methods so that fishermen are still going out , catching their tuna , but using different methods of doing so , which do not have the by-catch consequences that driftnets have .
We have to remember that , although fishing is a very small part of the European Union total gross domestic product , or however we should like to measure it , to those communities such as western France , Italy and Ireland , a few areas in the United Kingdom and some in Spain , fishing is about the only thing they have .
There are very few alternatives .
I totally agree with the rapporteur that the European Union should offer compensation for those that go out of the industry , and for retraining and re-equipping vessels for different methods of fishing for those that want to carry on .
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Souchet for his report and to say that if his proposals are accepted it will be a more generous and more acceptable package which the fishermen deprived of their livelihood are being offered .
The Parliament agreed the ban in the first place along with the Committee on Fisheries .
I was one of the people who had serious doubts about it , in that I considered it was political considerations rather than scientific knowledge that led us to believe that this method of fishing was seriously damaging to marine life .
Having said that , I think that many fishermen believed that this ban was not necessary .
Therefore , if the Commission is to propose and the Union agrees to prevent them from earning a living and not to propose any compensation , this measure without Mr Souchet 's proposals will not provide any new money or any new assistance to fishermen .
The money that had already been allocated to Member States for the improvement of their fleets and of marketing and processing and port facilities is what they are expected to use to provide compensation for the people who have lost their livelihood .
This was a make- believe measure and it is still that for most of the fishermen involved .
If extra money is not provided in the case of the countries that had provided their plans for the development of their fishing industry and had spent their structural funds , then we are offering them nothing .
We are coming to the time of year when we will have new quotas and new arrangements for allowable catches .
Fishermen are feeling extremely frustrated .
There is sometimes an unjustified feeling in the fishing areas that the European Union is being rather oppressive and is busy thinking up restrictions and regulations .
To do that without scientific knowledge and to fail to provide compensation would have been a mistake .
There is only one provision we do not accept in the Souchet report , and that is where he makes reference to the fact that they should not be put into effect until the Court of Justice has made its decision .
Of course this cannot be put into effect until the ban itself comes into effect and we believe we should let the position stand .
If the ban comes into effect when it is supposed to , then their compensation should automatically come into effect and the reference to decisions that may or may not be taken by the Court should be left out of it .
Mr President , as long ago as 1994 , Parliament tried to get drift nets banned .
On 8 June this year , that is to say four years after our efforts , the Council finally approved an amendment to the regulation which will outlaw fishing with drift nets in the Atlantic and Mediterranean after 1 January 2002 .
In doing this , the Council is at last partly heeding the wishes of Parliament .
I say partly , because the job is far from over .
It is still possible to fish with drift nets in the North Sea and the Baltic .
Even though these seas do not have dolphins swimming in them which can get caught in drift nets - that is not a problem in these waters - the problem of by-catches still remains .
Hence my question to the Commission .
When shall we be getting proposals to have the ban on drift nets declared applicable to the North Sea and the Baltic too ?
This is a first step in the right direction .
We need now to have this ban properly implemented and complied with .
I would also ask the Commission what additional control measures it will be taking ?
I should like to know how it intends to prevent this fishing activity from switching to non-Union countries .
It is right that fishermen should be compensated for some of the financial loss , but I should also like to know what conditions the Commission proposes to attach to this , namely the fact that nets should indeed be destroyed so that they do not simply disappear to non-Union countries .
Naturally , Mr President , my group stands fully behind the rapporteur Mr Souchet and the amendments tabled by the Committee on Fisheries .
Mr President , we all know that the decision taken to ban drift nets was a political decision without any scientific basis .
Proof of this aberration has been given today by those who previously saw in an alleged shortage of tuna a reason to ban drift nets , and who now seem to be discovering that it is essential for the tuna fishermen in the Bay of Biscay to convert ... to tuna .
In line with this view , which we obviously support , the amendments tabled by the rapporteur provide essential improvements to the Commission 's proposal .
With regard to fishermen , it is clearly desirable to ensure a payment for cessation of activity only for those for whom this is appropriate , namely those of an age to retire .
With regard to vessels , while it is reasonable to take the age of a vessel into account when calculating the payments for cessation of activity , surely it would be unfair to reduce the assistance available for converting some old vessels , provided that this involved adapting these vessels to other techniques allowing them to continue fishing for tuna , in order to prevent the transfer of their activities to sensitive species .
Finally , we feel that it is absolutely appropriate to aggregate the funding so that the conversion period can last until the end of 2001 in order to profit fully from the studies and experiments being carried out to try to adapt other equipment to tuna fishing .
To neglect this point would encourage some fishermen to diversify prematurely and disastrously by turning to other species of fish , specifically threatened coastal species .
Mr President , the Green Group welcomes the decision that was taken in June to get rid of driftnets for albacore , tuna and certain other species .
We also welcome the Commission 's proposal to provide funding for fishermen affected by this decision .
It is important that proper and sufficient funding for compensation is made available for fishermen to convert to more selective and appropriate fishing gear .
We hope that the EU draws a lesson from this whole experience .
Driftnets were encouraged for use in several countries by national governments and by the EU , despite the fact that experience elsewhere had shown that these nets had high levels of by-catch .
Proper evaluation should have been conducted before their use in the EU but this was not done .
The nets were introduced on a commercial scale and then expanded .
More selective gear was available which should have been promoted instead .
My other points concerns the motion for a resolution .
As other speakers have mentioned , it has a very unusual clause to the effect that the Council should delay the implementation of this decision until the EU Court of Justice has issued its decision on the case brought by certain French fishermen .
It should be pointed out that the French Government had intended to bring a similar case but decided against doing so as it was clear that such a case had no chance of success .
The French Government is being extremely cynical in this case by having their own lawyers advise the fishermen on a case which the French Government itself knows will fail .
We feel that if this clause is not taken out of the resolution we will have no option but to vote against the whole resolution .
It is very important that this clause is removed so that the resolution can be passed by a vast majority of Parliament .
As has been said by another speaker , it is not correct to have a clause like this regarding the Court of Justice and a decision that must be taken there .
We have to keep that separate .
Mr President , Commissioner Monti , if I did not have another exciting topic to deal with this evening , I would like to ask you about the new duty-free development .
But this is not the time to do so , so I will turn now to the Souchet report .
Having fought for it for so long , as we have heard , fishing with drift nets in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean was finally banned in June of this year .
This was long overdue in order to protect our scarce fish resources in an ecological and sustainable manner .
Yet we must not forget that the ban results in further economic loss for the fishermen in the countries concerned , fishermen who were already experiencing serious problems .
We must provide at least some compensation for this loss .
According to the Commission proposal , both the fishermen serving on board and the owners of vessels should receive compensation .
But the authorities and other investors will also suffer financial loss , as in recent years a great deal of money has been invested in improving infrastructure such as port facilities and markets .
As fishing activities decline , however , these investments will become economically less viable .
And this is in a situation where fishermen are to receive compensatory payments for giving up fishing , which may lead them to stop early .
But we want the profession to remain intact , so incentives must be created to help in particular the younger generation of fishermen to change to alternative fishing methods .
We would remind the Council that it wanted to promote diversification into other techniques .
It now has an opportunity to do so .
Furthermore , the Committee on Fisheries is of the opinion that the aggregation of funding to allow diversification by fishermen should be guaranteed beyond the end of the FIFG in 1999 .
The Group of the European People 's Party approves Mr Souchet 's amendments here .
However , in the opinion of my group , diversification must take place immediately and should not wait for a decision by the European Court of Justice .
Mr President , though I acknowledge the considerable amount of work that the rapporteur has had to do , I would , however , like a number of my colleagues , like to express my disagreement on one very important aspect of his report .
Paragraph 4 of the motion for a legislative resolution calls on the Council to delay implementation of the financial measures contained in its proposal for a decision until the Court of Justice of the European Communities has given its verdict on the appeal lodged by several drift gillnet users against the regulation prohibiting them from using this piece of fishing equipment from the year 2002 .
Contrary to what the rapporteur said and wrote in his report , I think that such a request is absurd and , what is more , is extremely detrimental to the fishermen concerned .
The Council 's proposal is aimed at reducing the economic effects this ban on drift gillnets entails for fishermen and encouraging them to diversify into other activities .
Therefore , the fishermen will be entitled to receive compensation as they gradually cease this type of fishing activity until 2002 , when the ban will be fully implemented .
No-one - and least of all the fishermen - would deny that fishing with drift gillnets does not have any future in the European Union .
We must therefore bear in mind that when the Court has given its verdict on the appeal lodged , the majority of fishermen will have already ceased this type of activity and many will want to do so as soon as possible so as to promptly establish their new activities .
As a consequence , it makes no sense to deprive those who wish to receive payments from having access to them .
Not all the fishermen concerned have appealed to the Court of Justice and nor should their entitlement to the fixed compensation be subject to conditions because of the attitude of others who , on their own account and at their own risk , have decided to take the matter to the courts .
So , as I believe that this is detrimental to all and beneficial to none , I call on you to vote against paragraph 4 of the motion for a resolution .
Mr President , the Commission has taken note of the report by Mr Souchet , to whom it is grateful .
There is a broad consensus among the three institutions with regard to compensatory payments and diversification in the case of fishermen affected by the ban on the use of drift nets , for which the Council gave a mandate to the Commission at the meeting of 8 June 1998 .
As regards the amendments proposed in Mr Souchet 's report , the Commission regrets that it cannot adopt the following : Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 7 , which are formal amendments having no practical effect ; Nos 5 and 8 , which restrict the scope of the decision ; and No 6 , which oversteps the mandate given by the Council to the Commission .
On the other hand , the Commission can fully endorse Amendment No 4 .
One which deserves particular attention is Amendment No 3 , introducing a minimum age for beneficiaries of these measures .
The different rules existing in the Member States on the pensionable age , however , make it impossible to set a single minimum age across the board .
The Commission will therefore ensure that the spirit of Amendment No 3 is taken into account at the bilateral negotiations with Member States concerning the diversification plans and their implementation .
I should also like to touch briefly on two or three points which were raised during the debate .
As far as the introduction of the accompanying measures is concerned , the Commission will take care to ensure that the banned nets cannot be reused elsewhere .
There will be a mandatory clause to this effect in the Member States ' diversification plans .
As for the possibility of banning these nets in the North Sea or the Baltic , that is not of course the subject of this debate ; today we are discussing the measures accompanying the ban imposed on 8 June .
At present , the Commission has no intention of extending the ban to other marine areas , where the impact of this type of fishery on marine mammals has not been proved .
Finally , several Members raised the question of the timing .
I would point out here that every Member State is at liberty to designate an intermediary body responsible for implementing the accompanying measures .
Under the general provisions governing the Structural Funds , such a body may be regarded as the final beneficiary of structural aid , and all that is required is for the total allocations to be awarded to that body by 31 December 1999 .
In this way the monies are committed , and payments to the final beneficiaries - the fishermen and shipowners - may continue until the end of 2001 .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Emergency food aid to Russia
The next item is the report ( A4-0506 / 98 ) by Mr Colino Salamanca , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on a programme to supply agricultural produce to the Russian Federation ( COM ( 98 ) 0725 - C4-0678 / 98-98 / 0343 ( CNS ) ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Colino Salamanca .
Mr President , the Committee on Agriculture 's decision to fully endorse the Commission 's proposal on the food aid programme to the Russian Federation will , I believe , also be supported in the House tomorrow .
Moreover , I believe that the Commission , the Council and Parliament share the same concerns in relation to this proposal . The first of these is whether the proposal can achieve its aims .
In other words , we need to ensure that the raw materials or processed food products that are essential for the survival of the Russian Federation 's population reach the disadvantaged regions they are destined for . And as we saw in the memorandum , the aid is being distributed amongst the regions most in need .
In addition , as far as possible , this aid needs to reach the most disadvantaged through free distribution .
The second concern - which again is one I think we all share - is to ensure that the operation is transparent and is sufficiently monitored so as to achieve its aims . Given all the rumours about possible mafia groups operating within the Russian Federation , it is good to know that such food aid will be able to meet its objective .
And in this respect , the European Union is donating aid to a value of EUR 400 million . It thus follows that Parliament , and particularly the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Budgets , have emphasised the importance of ensuring that adequate monitoring takes place to guarantee that the aid will meet the objective of this initiative .
In this connection , we must obviously ensure that the food aid does not distort the Russian Federation 's domestic markets , as it represents quite a substantial amount , including 1 million tonnes of wheat , 500 000 tonnes of rye , 50 000 tonnes of rice , 1 million tonnes of pork , 150 000 tonnes of beef and significant amounts of skimmed milk powder .
I would stress that these conditions have been established by the Committee on Budgets and accepted by the Committee on Agriculture , and are , in my opinion , of great interest .
It means that the operation will be monitored by both the European Union and from within the Russian Federation itself .
The aim of this is to enable us , through the Commission and the Court of Auditors , to monitor the operation even from within the Russian Federation itself to ensure that these objectives are met .
That is why the amendments tabled relate directly to these objectives . They hope to ensure that the aims behind the launch of this programme are met and also to ensure that the significant financial contribution that the European Union is going to make is clearly reflected through these objectives being met .
In addition , I think that this has fulfilled the very resolution Parliament adopted recently , on 19 November , a resolution that took account of both the circumstances that have been relayed to us essentially by the Russian authorities and the commitment made by the European Union , together with the United States , to assist and support regions suffering from acute food shortages .
Mr President , the Committee on External Economic Relations was asked for an opinion on supplying food aid to Russia but , in view of the urgency of the matter , we have not had a chance to meet in Strasbourg to discuss it and adopt an opinion .
This is why , as chairman of the committee , I will make a few points with which the majority of the members of our committee will very probably agree and which are totally in line with what Mr Colino Salamanca has just said .


Firstly , we are obviously totally in favour of supplying emergency food aid to Russia , particularly given that this is based on Russian requests made during the visit of the President of the European Commission to Moscow in October .
The supply situation is appalling in certain regions of the Russian Federation and we clearly have a humanitarian duty to a population threatened by famine .
I would add that it is also in our own interest to see the political and social situation stabilised .
Obviously I am not interested in the resulting positive effect of a reduction in stocks of agricultural products in the European Union .
Secondly , we can only agree to the method of supplying and distributing the food aid , while hoping that the Russian public authorities will be able to distribute the products free to the neediest people .
Thirdly , it is clear that we must follow closely the implementation of this measure .
I would remind you that , in view of the political and financial situation in Russia , this House , during the first reading of the budget for 1999 , put into reserve a significant amount intended to help Russia .
This was based on an amendment proposed by our committee .
We are not actually sure if our assistance is reaching the intended beneficiaries or if it is being used for the objectives specified .
The same concerns apply to the food aid and we invite the Commission to apply the Memorandum of Understanding to the letter and to inform Parliament immediately of any possible cases of fraud or speculation .
Finally , it goes without saying that the funding of this food aid action through the Community budget , which involves a large amount - EUR 400 million - must not be regarded as a subsidised export .
I would remind you of the European Union 's undertaking , signed in the context of the WTO agreement , to reduce the quantity and volume of subsidised agricultural exports in the budget .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.51 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I have a comment relating to page 12 of the Minutes .
Yesterday , I asked the President of the sitting about the application of Annex V of the Rules , as it involves all of us when considering the 1996 discharge .
I asked that , pursuant to Article 3 of this Annex , the amendments that had been tabled be forwarded to the Committee on Budgetary Control so that it could give its opinion as required by this Article .
The Committee on Budgetary Control met yesterday but did not have these amendments as they had not been translated at the time of its meeting , even though I was assured that this would be done so that the Committee on Budgetary Control could give its opinion .
What measures do you intend to take to ensure that we can give an appropriate opinion on the various points of this Annex and so that the Rules are applied in full for this important vote on whether or not to grant discharge for 1996 ?
Which Rules did you refer to , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy ?
I mentioned Annex V , Article 3 of the Rules , which applies in the case in point as a proposal for granting the discharge has been submitted to us .
I believe I also mentioned paragraph 2 or 3 , which states that the Committee on Budgetary Control must give its opinion on the amendments before they are put to the vote in the House .
I shall look into what is happening in this case .
As soon as we have the full details , they will be passed on to you .
Mr President , we discussed this matter at yesterday 's meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Since , as Mr Fabre-Aubrespy rightly says , the amendments were not available , the committee decided that the rapporteur would deliver its opinion here in plenary during the vote .
There were no objections .
But if you want to check all this again , I would ask you to inform me of the fact as soon as possible , in case there are any other procedures to be followed .
Mrs Theato , you yourself explained that the Committee on Budgetary Control is not in breach of the Rules of Procedure by choosing to present its report in this way .
This therefore conveniently responds to the objection raised by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
The rapporteur will deliver his opinion on each amendment in the House , as was decided by his committee .
Thank you very much for your remarks .
Mr President , I was also present yesterday but my name does not appear on the attendance register .
However , I wanted to mention something of far greater importance , namely our concern for what has happened to Mrs Hebé de Bonafini who cannot be with us today due to action taken by the police at the Eceiza International Airport in Buenos Aires .
We understand that you have had contact with the Argentine Government , yet she is still unable to come and she therefore joins the list of people who have been awarded the Sakharov prize and who are in prison .
On behalf of my group - and I am sure that I speak for many here - I would like a formal protest to be made to the Argentine authorities regarding this matter .
Thank you , Mr Puerta .
I should like to inform you of the latest developments concerning this matter .
Mrs Hebé de Bonafini will be with us today .
She is coming in to Frankfurt airport .
Negotiations with the Argentine authorities yesterday meant that the mistaken action of one of the officials was overruled , thus enabling her to catch a plane yesterday .
She is due to land in Frankfurt at 10.30 a.m. where a car will collect her and bring her to Parliament so she may attend .
I should particularly like to thank publicly the European Union representative in Buenos Aires for such swift and effective action , which enabled this lady to obtain a ticket and travel here , and I should also like to thank the Argentine authorities for acting so promptly on my request .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are currently celebrating the anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , and it is belief in those rights that inspires the award of the Sakharov prize .
It is our habit in this House to condemn all acts of terror or violence committed by groups or by individuals .
So I am surprised to discover that we are being invited by the ' Pro-Life ' movement to visit an exhibition they are holding this afternoon on these very premises .
The Pro-Life movement has gained notoriety for its advocacy of capital punishment and its scant concern for human life - going so far as to shoot dead doctors who are simply doing their job .
Mr President , might it be possible to have this exhibition moved to a commercial site , sparing us its presence in the buildings of the European Parliament and Council of Europe ?
Mrs Eriksson , we shall forward your request to the College of Quaestors , but please bear in mind that when Parliament allocates rooms at the request of Members , it naturally does not take their political allegiances into account . Instead , the College of Quaestors allocates them as it sees fit at the time and without becoming embroiled in complex political issues .
Mr President , I would ask Members to sign the written declaration by our Vice-President Mr David Martin on the effect of the WTO on animal protection .
We have always given strong support to animal protection and consumer protection in this House .
I believe that this declaration could obtain enough signatures ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mrs Graenitz , that is not a point of order , and the House cannot become a forum for announcements by each and every Member .
Let us follow our Rules correctly .
Mr President , I wish to draw to your attention something extremely offensive and insensitive that I received in my mailbox this morning .
I received an invitation to sample foie gras .
Considering that we are coming up to Christmas , this cruel and inhumane way of producing so-called food is unacceptable .
We should not be presented with invitations to sample something produced ...
I would repeat what I have just said , Mrs McKenna : this is not the time to begin a debate on your favourite political subjects .
Mr President , I should like to say to Ms McKenna that all she has to do is not turn up if she does not wish to .
Foie gras is a national product of many countries .
If she does not wish to try it , then she does not have to turn up !
( Loud applause ) Mr President , I do however wish to comment on the Minutes as yesterday evening during the night sitting , as rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I presented its recommendation for second reading of the regulation on the statistics on trade in goods between Member States .
After Commissioner de Silguy commented on our amendments , I wished to state my position .
However , the President of the sitting cut me off , saying that I was only allowed to put questions to Mr de Silguy , even though I should have been able to give my opinion regarding the Commission 's position on our amendments .
Mr President , I protested then and I would like to protest again .
Perhaps there is a need to organise training courses for certain Vice-Presidents so that they understand how parliamentary customs operate .
I was a member of a normal parliament for 25 years and I cannot understand why we cannot have normal discussions here , particularly when it involves a second reading where we have experienced problems with the Council over the common position .
Therefore , Mr President , may I suggest that that particular President be sent on a training course ?
I shall take note of that and check with the President of the sitting in question what the problem was , and you will receive an explanation in due course .
One moment , Mr Casini .
We are not going to open a debate on the ' Pro Vida ' movement , and I will stop you if that is the subject of what you have to say .
We are not going to have a debate on that topic .
Mr President , I asked for the floor merely to say that it is incorrect to assert that the ' Movimento per la vita ' is in favour of the death penalty .
We in the ' Movimento per la vita ' in Italy oppose the death penalty , and we prove it by belonging to every association campaigning against the death penalty .
We were the first , in Italy , to petition for the release - subsequently obtained - of Paula Cooper .
So it is we who launched the fight against the death penalty in Italy .
Mr President , as we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration on Human Rights and the tenth anniversary of the Sakharov prize , I should like to ask whether any invitation was sent to Leila Zana , a previous winner of the Sakharov prize , and whether any approach was made to the Turkish government concerning her presence here , and what was the response ?
The invitation was sent but I shall check again .
It seems I was informed yesterday of an initial difficulty - which was resolved - owing to the fact that she had to look after a family member , which prevented her from travelling .
But I shall check this information and will let you know immediately if it is correct .
Should it be incorrect , I shall let you know exactly what is happening , Mr Alavanos .
Mr President , though I wish all the members of her family good health , I wish that were indeed the reason .
From what we know , however , Leila Zana is still in prison in Ankara , and a new sentence was passed upon her - two years if I am not mistaken .
Does your answer mean that the Turkish authorities gave permission for her to be present but for some family reason she is not here , or that the problem of her imprisonment persists ?
I do not know .
I told you that I cannot give you exact details for the time being , but I will do so as soon as I receive them .
That is all I can say .
I do not wish to make assertions that later turn out to be wrong .
I will give you the exact information when we receive it .
( The Minutes were approved )
Welcome
I should like to welcome to Parliament a delegation from the National Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia , led by Mrs Darja Lavitzar-Bebler .
European Council in Vienna - Austrian Presidency
The next item is the joint debate on :
the European Council report and the Commission statement on the European Council meeting of 11 and 12 December in Vienna ; -the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the activities of the Austrian Presidency.I now give the floor to Chancellor Klima , on behalf of the European Council , whom I should also like to thank for the courtesy which he personally showed , as President-in-Office of the Council , to the representatives of Parliament in Vienna on 11 December .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad to have a second opportunity , in the space of a few weeks , to discuss the developments in our Union with you here in the European Parliament .
Let me thank you at the outset for the good cooperation between the Austrian Presidency and the European Parliament , which has made it possible to deal with many subjects , such as the fifth framework programme of research and development , the legal basis for the NGOs ' special programmes and the joint efforts in relation to the 1999 budget .
When I was with you here a few weeks ago , just before the meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Pörtschach , I perceived a certain anxiety on the part of some of the Members who took part in the discussions , anxiety that the integration process might be coming to a standstill , anxiety about certain statements that reflected trends towards renationalisation and so on .
I am glad to be able to report to you that exactly the reverse was the case during the Austrian Presidency , as confirmed by the Vienna summit .
We took that informal meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Pörtschach as an opportunity to discuss the future of Europe , and we agreed that the best way to help promote the European idea was by focusing our future policy on creating European added value in policy areas that are of central concern to our people , such as labour , employment , internal security and the quality of life .
I believe that what was special about this Vienna summit was that it took place just before an event that can rightly be described as historic , namely the introduction of the common currency .
The euro has proved its worth even before its actual introduction .
During the crisis on the international financial markets in the last six months , Europe proved a centre of stability , and that success gives every reason for confidence , confidence that it is possible to maintain the stability achieved with such great effort while at the same time setting out in new directions , that it is possible to strengthen stability and growth , and therefore employment too .
But the introduction of the euro also means that we must improve cooperation in economic policy as a whole , as well as in other policy areas .
In future the substance of our policies , but also the way in which we resolve problems together , will not just be a subject of political analysis and critical commentary but will also be looked at by the financial markets .
Five years ago any dispute , disagreement , euro-deadlock or whatever was unpleasant .
As from 1 January 1999 , it could have very damaging effects for our common currency , for stability , for the economy and for employment in Europe .
That makes it all the more necessary for us to solve problems in such a way as to show the financial markets , the analysts across the world , that Europe gives priority to working with each other rather than against each other .
In my view , the Vienna summit set some very decisive courses for the future .
We drew up a strategy for Europe which clearly establishes the tasks to be tackled , the timetables and how we intend to further develop the policy areas of the European Union .
That is a response to the scepticism regarding further steps towards integration .
This Vienna strategy , which is the outcome of Pörtschach , clearly sets out the priorities : employment , growth and stability , improving internal security and the quality of life , guaranteeing stability and prosperity and enhancing Europe 's political role in the world and , of course , the necessary political and institutional reforms .
Let me briefly go into a little more detail , for example on Agenda 2000 , a subject that concerns us all .
It was a central area of work for the Austrian Presidency .
As we all know , it is not just a question of money and finances , it is more particularly a question of the shape of our future political approach to key political issues , to agricultural policy and to structural policy , which means it is also a question of reforming the substance of European policy , of reforms which must undoubtedly be carried out in a spirit of financial prudence - since we have made the utmost effort to consolidate our budgets at national level - but also in a spirit of solidarity , because that is the cornerstone of European integration .
In Vienna we managed to achieve what the Austrian Presidency called for in Cardiff , namely to set out the key elements of a final agreement in a specific document and to propose options for action .
It is surely clear to anyone willing to take a closer look that the technical part of the examination of the legal texts has now been concluded .
Subject to one reservation , the pre-accession instruments have been agreed unanimously .
There is also agreement on the regulation on the trans-European networks and the Guarantee Fund regulation .
I believe that , although we must of course take special situations into account , in terms of structural policy and the Structural Funds a consensus is emerging on how to resolve the really fundamental issues .
With regard to the common agricultural policy , a solution seems to be on the horizon for rural development and some parts of the organisation of the market , although - and this must be said very clearly - many questions still need discussion in this area too , and there are differences of view .
The basic differences here relate to two crucial questions .
They are the overall volume of expenditure and its distribution under the various headings , and the question of the distribution of the burden between the individual Member States , which was raised by some Member States and also in the Commission 's report on own resources .
I believe that on the basis of this document , of the key political elements and of the fact that everyone now recognises that the proposals for solutions are on the table , it will prove possible , through serious and constructive negotiations over the next three months , to conclude this reform package of Agenda 2000 by March next year under the German Presidency , as we confirmed again in Vienna .
The second point is enlargement .
I am convinced that the Austrian Presidency managed to sustain the momentum of the enlargement process .
The Commission submitted an outstanding report which very clearly highlighted and welcomed the progress made in the individual Member States , but also openly described the areas in which the reform process sometimes slowed down a little in some states .
This excellent Commission report therefore made it very easy for us to say at the Vienna summit that we welcome the fact that negotiations have now begun with six applicant countries .
We welcome the progress made with the reforms in the other countries , but point out that further reform efforts will still be needed ; we can now offer the other five Central and Eastern European states a new element in the form of the beginning of the bilateral phase of acquis screening during the first quarter of next year .
In this context , and in line with the Cardiff approach , the European Council also strengthened relations with Turkey .
It noted the political need for Turkey to take a more European approach and adopt a European perspective .
But it was also pointed out that many efforts will still be needed here , an area where we have agreed to strengthen Turkey 's European strategy .
The third point is monetary union .
I am very glad that we succeeded in agreeing to speak with a single voice on the world financial markets in relation to our common currency , that we managed to settle the question of the external representation of the euro - not entirely yet , because some improvements are certainly still needed , especially regarding support for the Commission 's work and so forth .
But we have taken a first step , which has enabled us to reach this agreement on the external representation of the euro . In two days ' time , at the USA-EU summit , I will have an opportunity to address this matter of the representation of the euro in the G7 .
But what I consider at least equally important is that we now have the first outlines of a European position on the reform of the world financial system , the reform of the International Monetary Fund .
Clearly we need greater verifiability , more transparency , an early warning system in the international financial system so that we no longer find ourselves apparently overtaken by critical events that destroy the entire economy in some countries and disrupt the world economy .
Here we are working towards a European position that reflects Europe 's strength , and this question will have to be included in the international discussions on financial market reform .
The fourth point is Europe 's political role in the world , the question of the foreign and security policy .
We greatly regret that , because not all the states have ratified the Amsterdam Treaty , it did not prove possible in Vienna to decide on a Mrs or Mr CFSP .
I would have regarded that as a good sign .
But because they had not all ratified the treaty , we did not manage this in Vienna , although we would of course have liked to do so ; but we have to recognise that some Member States were simply not yet ready to do this .
However , one very positive note is the fact that a decision was taken in Vienna on the European Union 's first common foreign policy strategies , which means that at last we have a more common approach , for example a strategy for Russia which covers all the questions of economic policy , of purely foreign policy and of security policy relations between Europe and Russia , which is an important partner in terms of European stability .
Strategies were defined in Vienna for Russia , for Ukraine , for the Mediterranean region including the Middle East , and for the western Balkans , as aspects of a common foreign and security policy .
What I also consider most important - and I am saying this in full awareness of being the Chancellor of a neutral country - is that , starting with Pörtschach , with what I believe was a well-considered statement by Tony Blair , followed by discussions in France and Germany and in many other countries , we have now begun to consider ways of strengthening the European security architecture in conjunction with our Atlantic partners .
Added to that is the acceptance that a politically strong Europe must also be in a position to resolve regional crises by undertaking Petersberg-type missions , and to do so in a way that enables all 15 Member States of the European Union to participate in resolving them , in close conjunction with their Atlantic partners .
That is a question where I did not dare hope the discussion would gain so much momentum so quickly .
It is a discussion which I regard as most important with a view to establishing a strong political Europe in the next century .
Another major topic was internal security .
It is without doubt a European added value if we can combat international organised crime on a common European basis .
Europol has become operational and active during the Austrian Presidency .
We now have this action plan for the common area of freedom , security and justice .
We are convinced that we must also jointly develop migration policy strategies , and it was decided in Vienna to set up a special task force to that end .
Here we managed both to take practical measures and to define political orientations , to call for this topic to be given priority next year and to make provision even at this stage for a special summit to be convened on the subject in Tampere under the Finnish Presidency .
On environmental policy , we took clear decisions in Vienna to reflect our conviction that environmental policy is a horizontal , a mainstreaming policy , that it is a policy which should not just be pursued in the Committee on the Environment but must also be integrated into all other policy areas .
So in addition to what the transport ministers , the energy ministers and the agriculture ministers have proposed , we have called for other sectors such as industry and the single market also to be included .
One central issue was and still is the question of employment .
Let me say to you quite openly : the first time I had an opportunity to take part in a European Council , employment policy was a taboo term .
Many people thought it inconceivable that there could be a European dimension to employment policy .
When we now look at the results we have achieved during the Austrian Presidency , building on the good work achieved in Luxembourg and continued by our British friends , we see very clearly that we need national employment policies , but also that we can and want to learn from one another , that we are all committed to achieving the additional , verifiable objectives decided upon in Vienna and , over and above this , that we firmly believe that employment is a European added value .
We are not looking for some kind of populist miracle , applying some miracle cure chosen at random , but are simply trying to establish a closely coordinated approach to fiscal policy , research policy , external economic policy , the policy of the structural reforms , the policy of preparing and empowering the workers , but also to a policy of growth that does not jeopardize stability .
Those are some of the important signals that were sent out by the Vienna summit , and I am very glad that it proved possible to strengthen the guidelines for employment policy in relation to the questions of older workers , of equal opportunities for women on the labour market and of the entrepreneurial spirit .
In fact , until recently I would have considered it quite inconceivable that we could now clearly state that , in addition to a stability pact , we want to have an employment pact in the European Union .
That pact is to be agreed in Cologne in March .
We also had a very good meeting with President Santer , a kind of mini-summit on the social dialogue .
We now have an agreement to the effect that , for the first time , small and medium-sized enterprises will also work together with UNICE and secondly - something I consider most significant - we have an agreement between the social partners at European level whereby they undertake to draw up a practical list of subjects , to say what subjects they want to work on at European level within their area of responsibility , what solutions they are seeking ; it is important to ensure that matters are not always dealt with by politics in cases where it would be preferable to seek a solution through discussions at European level between employers and workers .
I believe the Austrian Presidency has managed to maintain the spirit of Pörtschach in Vienna by firmly committing itself to further deepening the discussion of political issues in the European Union .
I am also grateful that Members have presented what I believe is a very constructive and good draft statute for Members .
In Vienna , we asked the appropriate institutions to continue working on it without delay .
I believe the top priority of the first presidency of one of the youngest Member States was to clearly show the people of Europe that it makes sense to work together in Europe , that there is a European added value if we jointly give top priority to European employment policy , that it makes sense to try to improve European security , to cooperate more closely on achieving internal security , and that it is important to work together to strengthen Europe 's political role in the world .
That is why the Austrian Presidency 's first priority was to bring the people of Europe a little closer to this powerful vision , this idea of Europe .
I hope that will also be reflected by large-scale participation in the European Parliament elections in June .
In that sense , I would express my warm thanks for the good cooperation on the part of the Commission , the Council and especially , Mr President , the European Parliament during this first Austrian Presidency .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the Vienna European Council concluded the first presidency of the Union to be held by one of the countries that joined in 1995 , and I applaud the work carried out by the Austrian Presidency .
These six months will surely be remembered in the history of the construction of Europe as the Pörtschach six months - and quite rightly so , I believe .
In fact , contrary to all that the established analysts predicted , the Pörtschach meeting of Heads of State or Government was an opportunity for frank and constructive discussion on the future of the Union .
There were , however , no guarantees that this new type of meeting would be a success .
On the whole , the objective was achieved .
We are already reaping the benefits in the way we address Community matters at the turn of the century and the Austrian Presidency should take credit for this .
The Commission is delighted to have worked with the Austrian Presidency in preparing this meeting .
But the Pörtschach meeting must not mask the progress made on the other major aspects of Community integration .
I will not list them all here ; I will leave that to the President-in-Office .
I will simply mention some of the successes to give you a general idea of where the Union is making progress : the agreement with Switzerland , the fifth framework programme for research and development and the 1999 budget , on which you will vote tomorrow .
The Vienna European Council , for its part , has given concrete expression to the spirit of Pörtschach in a new strategy : the Vienna Strategy for Europe .
This Strategy should help us respond to ' Europe 's needs ' , which were clearly identified at the informal Pörtschach meeting .
Citizens want to see less of one type of Europe and more of another , one that is more democratic , better managed , more efficient and that shows true ambition .
So what are the main points that emerged from Vienna ?
There are three that stand out for me personally , along with those just mentioned by the Federal Chancellor : firstly , employment , growth and economic stability ; secondly , Agenda 2000 ; and lastly , enlargement .
The European Council held debates on employment , on growth and on economic stability .
There is now widespread agreement between the Heads of State or Government on the choices to be made in the fight for employment and on the clear need for a common European framework .
This is all the more satisfying because I have defended most of these choices before you , ladies and gentlemen , for four years now and because , since the Luxembourg Summit , employment has been a topic for Community debate .
In Vienna , the European employment strategy was given a new and far-reaching momentum .
The Heads of State or Government have , in fact , decided to take the convergence of employment policies further and the employment guidelines will now be at the heart of national strategies .
To this end , these guidelines will be clarified and refined as expertise is gained at European level , particularly through the definition of sectoral objectives .
Such objectives will allow us to check that Member States have fully respected their commitments .
The need to support growth , employment and competitiveness has also led the European Council to look carefully at investment issues .
You are aware that the Commission had presented a communication on public investment within the framework of the economic strategy .
A number of conclusions have been reached on this issue , through the Commission 's constant work in this respect .
From amongst these conclusions , I should like to highlight the role of the European Investment Bank , the importance of developing a pan-European risk capital market , the role of investment in human resources and the need to continue with our strategy for completing and extending the internal market .
The fact that points of view on growth and employment are converging is naturally linked to the arrival of the euro .
In fact , everything is already in place for the arrival of the euro .
It will enter into force on 1 January next year .
I will not go back over the advantages we are expecting from it on an internal level .
The European Council has noted the report on the coordination of economic policies .
This is a crucial challenge to the success of Economic and Monetary Union and I believe that all the Members of the Council are aware of this .
We also had a constructive discussion on fiscal policy , on the basis of the Council 's report .
On an external level , I would like to point out how many opportunities there are for promoting European interests , thanks to the arrival of the euro .
In this respect , the decisions taken on the external representation of the Community are a first , but nonetheless important , step forward .
They show that the Union is aware of the international responsibility that the creation of a single currency entails .
An initial debate on strengthening the international economic and financial system was also held .
The Council has now been given a mandate to give further consideration to the reform of this system .
The Council will also have to analyse in its report the wider implications of globalisation , as the Commission started doing in a document it submitted to the European Council .
Still on this theme , I believe that the European Council is aware that the European Union has a responsibility to assume .
Mr President , the second issue covered in the Council discussions was , of course , Agenda 2000 .
Yesterday , I once again told you that the adoption of Agenda 2000 would be one of my main priorities in 1999 .
So what stage have we reached after the Vienna European Council ?
It is true to say that the Council conclusions on Agenda 2000 are modest .
But to begin with , I must say that it would be wrong to think that nothing has changed , or that we have not made any progress .
The progress made in Vienna in this respect should not be measured on whether the beginnings of an agreement have been drawn up .
As I have said more than once , if there is not agreement on everything , then there is not agreement on anything .
There would be no point in seeking partial agreements when what is needed is an overall agreement .
From this point of view , we can applaud the fact that , for the first time , this issue has been addressed in a sensible manner .
Everyone knows that an agreement is needed .
Everyone knows that concessions will have to be made on all sides .
So we may as well begin the debate and seek the views of all those seated round the table , where the rank and file are more involved than the negotiators .
It was important for a real debate to be initiated , for all aspects to be laid out on the table and for everyone to state they were ready to work towards reaching an overall agreement .
And I did , in fact , notice that all the Heads of State or Government realised that the time for purely tactical positions was past .
I would also like mention something I became aware of in Vienna .
I listened to all the Heads of State or Government and I believe that the Commission 's proposals will be at the heart of the final agreement , whatever form it may take .
Everybody knows that an agreement must be reached , and that such an agreement will be found .
It will be difficult but there will be agreement , as it is in the interests of all the Heads of State or Government .
Mr President , let us not hide the fact that enlargement is the backdrop to these negotiations .
The process is already underway and the Council has renewed its support for it .
The negotiation process has been welcomed by the Council and is in place .
It is a good and inclusive process .
The Commission is fully playing its dual role .
It is contributing to the preparations for the negotiations led by Member States and is actively encouraging reforms in the applicant countries , while implementing coherent strategies concerning the preparations for membership .
Today , as the European Council acknowledged , the major determining factors for this process have been accepted by all partners , by both the European Union and the applicant countries .
The main aim is to respect the commitments made on both sides .
Annual meetings have been arranged to begin precise assessments of the progress made .
Vienna was the first of such meetings .
The second will be in Helsinki , at the end of 1999 .
Such patient work must not be constantly interrupted by speculation on when enlargement will take place .
Mr President , I should like to conclude this presentation of the conclusions of the Vienna European Council by emphasising the detailed nature of the Vienna Strategy for Europe .
The European Council felt the need to explain the main aspects of its action to its citizens and this was one of the priorities of the Austrian Presidency .
I believe that there are four main aspects .
The first is to promote employment , economic growth and stability , as I have already mentioned .
The second is to improve security and the quality of life .
The third is to reform the Union 's policies and institutions . And the fourth and final aspect is to promote stability and prosperity throughout Europe and the world .
For each of these main aspects , the European Council has set itself objectives and laid down deadlines .
Marking out the future in this way is the best way of channelling our energy into meeting real objectives .
As a result , the important meetings in Cologne , Tampere and Helsinki have gained momentum .
By making simultaneous progress in these four main aspects , we will shape the future of the European Union and its appearance at the beginning of the next millennium .
The future face of the Union will emerge from the constant and determined work carried out .
The Austrian Presidency has contributed to this over the past six months and I should like to congratulate it once again .
Thank you , Mr Santer .
Mr Haarder has a point of order .
Mr President , we all know from the media that one of the main issues was the tax-free sales , on which a lot of time was spent .
Why have we heard nothing about it ?
I hope it is because you are embarrassed that you wasted so much time on it , but Parliament should be made aware of what you spent your time on in Vienna .
That is not exactly a point of order , but in any case the President-in- Office of the Council is still here and he can respond to the questions that Chancellor Klima has not dealt with .
Mr President , I would like to thank both the President of the European Council and the President-in-Office for their reports here this morning .
I would like to congratulate Mr Klima .
He brought a refreshingly realistic assessment to this Parliament , recognising both the successes of the Austrian presidency but also , where there are disagreements within the Union and where I am sure he has experienced the frustrations which we in this Parliament feel as a result of those disagreements .
We do not often hear that sort of honest assessment given in this House and I hope it is a sign of things to come .

So I want to thank both Mr Klima and Mr Schüssel very much for that and also for the efficiency , the diligence and hard work of the Austrian Government during their first presidency .
Mr President , in your speech to the European Council on Friday , and again this morning , you expressed your thanks on behalf of Parliament for the way in which the presidency has cooperated with Parliament .
On behalf of my group , I should like to add my thanks to the many ministers who have attended here and helped and supported the work of this Parliament .
Particular thanks are due to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner who has been our regular partner here for the past six months .
We offer our thanks .
The Austrian presidency came at a particularly awkward time , sandwiched as it was between the British and the German presidencies .
In the former presidency negotiations were started to enlarge the Union - a momentous event - together with a decision on which countries should join the euro , the establishment of a central bank , arguably an even more momentous event .
The forthcoming presidency is destined to conclude the Agenda 2000 package which is of immense significance for existing Member States of the Union and for enlargement .
So the presidency had to steer a path between one set of mighty events and another without having any of that timetable fall into its own lap .
The Austrian Government is to be congratulated for making sure that the way ahead is clearly timetabled to Cologne and to Helsinki , that the decisions needed are identified and that the broad outlines of many initiatives are set .
It was never the intention that major decisions which have absorbed the European press in recent days would be concluded at Vienna .
In particular , it was never the intention that decisions would be made on future financing of the Union .
Let us be frank and clear about that .
But it has been possible to continue the debate on some of the key issues facing the Union : the next stage in our employment strategy and a European employment pact .
My group very much hopes that the initiative which the Council outlined in Vienna will allow us to establish a counterweight to the growth and stability pact which will secure future monetary security in the euro zone .
Whilst the single currency will have a great impact on the lives of our citizens , employment is even more immediately crucial for every family in the European Union .
In this respect , my group particularly welcomes the express invitation of the Council to allow those Member States who so desire to initiate reduced VAT rates on labour-intensive services which are not exposed to cross-border competition .
This was a proposal which was put to the Luxembourg special summit in a report from this Parliament by my colleague Wim van Velzen and which the Council at that stage felt needed more analysis and assessment .
Your agreement that such an idea could be an important employment generator gives us great satisfaction and we will certainly do what we can to facilitate progress on that in this House .
Chancellor , I note that in the conclusions the Council pays special attention to the fact that this moment coincides with the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Indeed , Mr Schüssel mentioned it himself just now .
The Council is asking the Commission to draw up proposals to counter racism in the applicant countries and invites the Member States to consider similar measures inside the Union .
I want to commend the Council for calling for action in this very sensitive and important area . Perhaps we could ask you to take back to the Council an appeal from us , that it should issue a firm declaration that it will ensure that the European elections will be fought throughout the European Union free of manifestos or platforms which promulgate racist or xenophobic hatred or fear .
Such a declaration coming from the special summit in March on the eve of the European election campaign would be an important signal of the Council 's serious intent to fight the politics of hate wherever they are to be found in Europe of the next millennium .
An issue of particular significance already mentioned in this House and one which has absorbed an inordinate amount of our time is the question of the Members ' Statute .
I want to thank Mr Klima in particular for his willingness to receive the draft statute so carefully developed by our colleague Mr Rothley .
I recognise , as we all do , that the statute contains elements which will require detailed negotiation but I cannot stress how important it is that rapid progress is made if we are to have it in place for the June elections .
We welcome the fact that the Council considers the draft an appropriate one on which to begin discussion .
We have our negotiating team ready .
Could we ask you to press the secretariat of the Council to get on with it ?
It is political will that matters .
Please urge your successors to get on with it .
There are some in this House and many outside who have always argued the cynical case , that we would never get the agreement of the Council to put the need for a statute in the Treaty .
Amsterdam did that .
Then they argued that we would never find agreement amongst ourselves on a draft statute .
Mr Rothley did that .
They argued that the Council would never deal with it in Vienna .
And you did that .
Now they argue that we are deluding ourselves if we think we can reach a final result by the time of the European elections .
Together we can do that .
I urge the Council to help us demonstrate that we can now conclude this issue fast and fairly .
I would like to mention just a few issues concerning third countries .
The agreement with Switzerland is a particular success .
It is especially noteworthy that it should have been the Austrian presidency which resolved this problem and demonstrated the value of using the expertise and shared experiences of particular Member States with third countries .
However , my group is increasingly irritated and disturbed by the length of time it is taking to find a solution to the negotiations with South Africa on the trade and cooperation agreement .
I know you agree with me but we note that the Council expects that this will come to a conclusion in the next six months .
Frankly , we must succeed .
On the day on which the European Parliament awards the Sakharov prize for freedom of thought to Ibrahim Rugova who struggled so valiantly for peace in Kosovo , it would be wrong not to pay tribute to the work of the European Union in working for political dialogue , peaceful solutions and humanitarian support in that troubled part of our continent during the last six months .
This debate should not just be about the Vienna Council .
We all know that not every Council can provide dramatic , earth-shattering changes .
We here are always too ready to demand such results , in my view rather naively .
So I want to pay tribute to the ongoing work of the Council in which the Austrian presidency can take particular pride .
I have already mentioned the much delayed agreement with Switzerland .
Another very big success was the fifth action programme on research .
For a year this has lain unresolved on the table : a programme which contains the fourth largest spending area in the Community budget .
It is to the credit of your ministers that agreement was finally reached on this programme as well as many others in the past six months - a six months in which Austria can take pride .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , all in all we are disappointed by the results of the Vienna European Council meeting .
Nevertheless , you made good preparations for the summit and the meagre outcome is certainly not your fault .
Perhaps this was the European summit of consolidation and a new harmony .
Even so , we have the feeling that once again important decisions have been put off .
Worse still , the policy guidelines on which the German Presidency will be basing its decisions remain vague and unclear .
There is still no result concerning the Commission 's proposals as outlined in its Agenda 2000 .
Reform of the structural and agricultural policy and the financing of the European Union cannot be carried through unless the Member States are prepared to reach an accommodation .
This willingness to compromise is a sine qua non for renewing and strengthening the contract which unites our countries and through them the peoples of the European Union .
This is the real reason for all the delay and prevarication .
Some governments , in their advocacy of the highly debatable principle of the ' net contributor ' , are in fact deeply entrenched in their positions .
I fear that unless there is a spectacular turn-around at the European summit in Brussels in March 1999 , the European elections will be spoiled by a confrontation between national self-interests .
The common European interest must take precedence over the simplistic amalgamation of national concerns and the misguided principle of ' fair returns ' .
Will the German Presidency manage to overcome this obstacle which is currently bedevilling the accession to the Union of the Central and Eastern European countries ?
Our group will never allow this integration , this historic undertaking by our continent , to be hampered by the inability of governments to resolve their financial quarrels .
Europe must not be reduced to its lowest common budgetary denominator .
We must stand by the ideas and inspiration of our founding fathers .
They were motivated by a broad vision of Europe .
Consequently our group is particularly pleased by the decision to confer on Helmut Kohl the title of ' Honorary Citizen of Europe ' and acknowledge his place in history as equal to that of Jean Monnet .
Unless we revert to these ideas , to the Community way of doing things , things will not improve and the Union 's current difficulties will not be resolved .
The ' European Employment Pact ' is certainly a good thing .
The governments need first to translate into action the guidelines adopted in Luxembourg .
You have reinforced the aspirations voiced in Luxembourg and you want to add to the value of the results obtained .
This ' European Employment Pact ' is an essential adjunct to the stability pact .
Mr President-in-Office , on a more optimistic note , I must congratulate you on what has been achieved in security and defence policy thanks to the initiatives taken by the presidency .
The meetings between the Union 's defence ministers , between the Secretary-General of NATO and the Council presidency and the policy lines agreed at the Franco-British meeting in La Rochelle open the way for a European identity on defence .
This important project heralds a new phase for Europe 's presence on the world stage and for a true political union .
These perspectives and these new ambitions must shape the pattern of debate in future European Councils .
Only then will public opinion be persuaded that the European Council remains true to its fundamental mandate and is determining Union strategy and policy , rather than having to spend time and energy worrying about duty-free shopping .
My thanks to you too , Mr President-in-Office , for all you have done for the Members ' Statute .
Mrs Green reminded us of it .
My heartfelt gratitude to you .
This was a very difficult matter and there is no doubt that you handled it very well .
Mr President , on behalf of the ELDR Group I would like to begin by congratulating Chancellor Klima and Mr Schüssel on completing the first ever Austrian presidency .
Organisationally , this presidency has been a great success .
It is one of which you and your colleagues , and indeed your public service , can be justly proud .
Politically , however , I regret the failure of the Vienna Council to adopt specific decisions of substance .
The Council has continued and I believe intensified a growing tendency , exhibited also at Cardiff , to carry forward innumerable key issues for future presidencies .
Inevitably each Prime Minister puts his own spin on what summits achieve .
This time , in the United Kingdom and elsewhere , many of the headline writers point to the fight to save duty-free sales .
In Holland , potentially lower VAT rates and labour-intensive services produced headlines about cheaper haircuts .
In the context of the challenging issues facing the Union , such diverse headlines , downbeat as they are , capture more vividly than I can the absence of strategic progress .
The Commission proposed Agenda 2000 one and a half years ago .
It is alarming to note how little real political progress has been made so far in advancing this agenda ; a decision is not due now but it has not shown much advance .
This is especially true in the context of the nothing-is-agreed-until-everything-is-agreed formula with a deadline set for next March .
The Union runs the risk of a prolonged period of uncertainty and crisis , and stands on the threshold of sending deeply negative and dispiriting signals to applicant states .
This drift in policy terms has to stop .
The ELDR recognises that the primary responsibility for employment creation rests with Member States .
While welcoming bench-marking and sharing best practice at Union level , we see such measures as complementary to , but no substitute for , structural adjustment in labour , product and service markets and employment-friendly tax policy at Member State level .
Recycling the Luxembourg guidelines grandiosely as an employment pact will make no difference to Europe 's unemployed .
Something more profound is needed than relabelling old wine in new bottles .
It is important that the emphasis on European added value in employment policy should not become an escape clause designed to mask the unwillingness of a number of social-democrat-led governments to embrace necessary domestic economic reform .
My group regrets that , 15 months after the signature of Amsterdam , the Council has not integrated Schengen into the acquis .
Like others , I urge the Council to fast-track the statute so that we , as MEPs , can fight our next election under the politics of Europe and not the politics of expenses .
- Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Vienna Summit marks a transition between a period that is drawing to a close and a new period that , in a few days ' time , will celebrate the birth of the single currency and undoubtedly bring profound changes to the European order .
This new period will be dominated by questions on the enlargement of Europe towards the East and the South , and will lead to the long-awaited birth of the ' greater Europe ' .
This summit has led to satisfaction on some points and , in particular , to the renewed confirmation of employment as a top priority . This is a response to the repeated demands the European Parliament has received from public opinion in our various Member States .
All that remains is to give operational content to this determined approach , and this will be a job for the coming German and Finnish Presidencies .
On the other hand , in terms of the immediate future , we can only express our disappointment that no progress was made on Agenda 2000 , on future financing and on the institutional reform , which must undoubtedly take place before the first enlargement .
If the truth be told , negotiations on these various issues have not really gotten underway and the Austrian Presidency could not give us more than an appraisal of them .
But this is not a criticism , as we knew that the political context prevented further progress from being made .
As far as future financing is concerned , it is like attempting to square the circle .
Some countries wish to reduce their contribution to the Union 's budget , yet no-one wishes to pay more or receive less .
Nonetheless , we must find a dynamic balance soon , a balance between the demands for budgetary rigour being imposed on the Union and the wish to preserve the work on solidarity and cohesion that has been evident over the past decade . And all this must be done whilst meeting the demands of enlargement .
It is difficult , it is even extremely difficult , but we must use our imagination .
It would certainly be easier to solve these problems if , at the same time , the Union were to better define the common policies it intends to develop , whilst respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
To conclude , I should like to congratulate the Austrian Presidency for working so hard on furthering European integration , on such vital matters for the future as employment or research policy , as well as in other areas .
As a result , the Austrian Presidency is passing on the baton to the coming Presidency in good condition and we should thank them for this .
Chancellor , please forgive me for not joining in with all the praise but I believe that the conclusions of the Vienna summit are extremely limited .
These conclusions lead to an alarming feeling of being stuck , of putting off until later all the issues where we disagree , although this , of course , is not part of the Presidency 's responsibilities .
This is particularly true for the future financing of the European Union .
In this connection , I would like to express my group 's opposition to the fair return theory and to the cofinancing of agricultural expenditure , as well as the importance it places on solidarity amongst Member States , without which there would be no Europe .
A large part of the Council 's work concentrated on employment and launched the idea of a European employment pact .
This is a good idea .
But , one year on from Luxembourg , decisions should have been made on concrete objectives , yet this is unfortunately not the case .
Of course , the fact that we have stopped proclaiming the virtues of monetarist dogmas as the only true basis is a positive step .
But the 10 % of the working population and the 20 % of young people hoping for employment need to see more obvious results in the fight against unemployment .
I do not feel that the Council has fully grasped the risks of slower growth from 1999 , and from the launch of the euro .
According to the Council , the employment pact must complement the Stability Pact , but both pacts will not sit easily with one another .
We must turn the approach around and the reasoning behind it .
The stability pact , which is a real yoke around the necks of national economies , should be lifted to allow internal demand to recover and to give Member States the option of using their resources to stimulate growth .
In view of this , the European Central Bank 's mission and powers must be redefined .
We need to introduce a political counterweight and democratic control .
The drop in interest rates - which I welcome - should be selectively applied in order to promote employment and not speculation , which should be taxed .
Lastly , we should call on the services of the EIB and this , with the launch of a European loan , could form useful contributions to promoting investment that generates employment .
The content of the future European employment pact must learn from previous experience .
The drop in labour costs , alongside flexibility and insecurity , are all among the principal causes of poverty .
At the dawn of the year 2000 , the reduction of working hours , a steady job , fair salaries and good training cannot be viewed as unachievable utopian ideas , but rather as rights for every man and woman .
To conclude , I will highlight an important sentence from the Vienna conclusions : ' Employment is the top priority of the European Union ... serving as the basis of the European social model ' .
I believe that the European social movement must gather strength so that this sentence becomes a reality .
Mr President , this presidency of the Council could be commemorated with the words with which the German literary critic Reich-Ranicki tends to conclude a famous TV programme : ' the game is over , the curtain is closed and there are no answers ' .
The Vienna summit was in fact rather like a play , staged with great pomp and circumstance , which has left us rubbing our eyes and wondering : is that all that has come of those great histrionic promises ?
Chancellor Klima , you said : ' we discussed the future in Vienna ' .
That is true , but that was not your job .
Your job was to resolve the problems of the present , because that is all a policy for the future can do .
The problems you have to resolve are sufficiently known , and they have become bigger rather than smaller since the Vienna summit .
European employment policy is slowly turning into a farce .
Let us think back : the Luxembourg summit instructed the Vienna summit to adopt an employment pact .
The Cardiff summit instructed the Vienna summit to adopt an employment pact .
The Pörtschach summit instructed the Vienna summit to adopt an employment pact .
And what did the Vienna summit do ?
It instructed the Cologne summit to adopt an employment pact .
That is an insult to the millions of unemployed in Europe !
And the reform of the institutions : the greatest obstacle to the development of the EU !
Six months have passed , and it has not even proved possible to agree on practical objectives and practical timetables .
Evidently , it has not yet penetrated the Council 's mind that there is an urgent need for a comprehensive democratic reform of the European Union , for the establishment of European basic rights and citizens ' rights .
The enlargement of the EU , the historic task of overcoming the division of Europe , of repairing the devastating damage of the communist regime and creating a common area of freedom and stability , has gone under in the petty dispute about net contribution interests .
In recent years the Council has assumed more and more power and turned the Union more and more into a bazaar of national interests .
Let me conclude by offering a piece of counsel to the Council : hand over the task of European ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) ... to the parliaments .
Believe me , they can do it better !
Mr President , Chancellor , Mr President of the Commission , as the end of this year and this presidency approaches , we cannot hide a certain feeling of disappointment .
Of course , 1 January will mark a major event , the launch of the euro , but this very positive progress cannot really compensate for the feeble conclusions of the Vienna European Council , which are due to the differences of opinion between the fifteen Member States and to their lack of common political will .
Almost all the issues were put on hold and are to be dealt with later .
This is the case with the reform of the institutions .
There are many of us who firmly believe that the Amsterdam Treaty must soon be supplemented by reforms of the Council of Ministers , particularly its composition and qualified majority voting procedure , and of the Commission .
In Vienna , absolutely no progress was made on such reforms .
Secondly , no progress has been made on enlargement either , with the European Council merely reiterating what it had already said .
Even an issue such as Turkey , which is currently badly handled , was not clarified in any real way .
As regards the very important issue of Agenda 2000 , we will have to await the next European Council to see exactly where the governments wish to strike a balance between what the presidency conclusions call the spirit of solidarity and budgetary rigour .
In the meantime , we can only speculate on and fear the resurgence of national selfishness .
As the President of the Commission said , the Vienna conclusions on Agenda 2000 are indeed modest .
I should like to end on two more optimistic notes .
Firstly , the Vienna Council wanted to concentrate on employment .
Of course , not everything is perfect , but as you have just said , Chancellor , the governments are now aware of the European dimension of employment , which does not just depend on national policies .
Like you , I welcome the 1999 employment guidelines , which , in a European context , aim to have a positive influence on national policies .
I also welcome the determination to strengthen the Luxembourg process and to highlight the roles of the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament so that we can work towards a global strategy for employment , growth and stability .
In this respect , I was pleased earlier to hear the President of the Commission stress the need for a policy , or at least a coordination of policies , on investment , particularly as regards risk capital investments .
The second positive point that I would like to emphasise concerns human rights .
Mr President-in-Office , Minister , you are asking for our support for your proposals on human rights .
Well , you have my unreserved and wholehearted support .
Mr President , to the strains of the mantra of closeness to the people , we are now planning even more Union . A new theme , a common tax policy , is on its way , and the Cologne summit will put a proposal for a fourth pillar , common armed forces , on the agenda .
The summit in Helsinki will expand common policies and set in motion an intergovernmental conference on more majority decision-making and more votes for the large Member States .
Externally , we shall have a strong statesman to represent the Union .
Common strategies are being developed , the caterpillar tracks are being brought out and put on .
We are in the middle of the construction of a new superpower , a USA in Europe , but without American democracy .
A military superpower without democracy is a dangerous quantity and , in any case , that is not what a large number of European voters are demonstrating for .
It is now time to sound the alarm over these plans and to prevent nationless Eurocrats , civil servants and ministers from creating an EU state without democracy .
We should instead set a course for a Europe of nations and democracies which can also accommodate and find room in its heart for the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe .
I would rather see a much more specific timetable for enlargement than the timetables now established for the currency , the armed forces and the police - a timetable for more power to the Union .
What we are advocating is a Europe of nations and democracies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Vienna summit has brought few concrete results .
Whether this was a summit that set a new course , only the future can tell .
I would not wish to reproach the presidency of the Council for not being able to achieve everything it set out to achieve .
It is understandable that the difficult and controversial package of Agenda 2000 could not be brought to a conclusion .
After all , Agenda 2000 concerns interests rather than visions .
That is what makes things so difficult , and it means that a political decision will probably be taken in what some commentators have called the ' night when heads start to roll ' .
The disappointment of Vienna is reflected in other areas too , especially employment .
The Vienna strategy may well designate employment as the top priority , but it is marked by a paucity of concrete proposals .
No qualitative or quantitative objectives were fixed .
So there has been nothing concrete since Luxembourg .
Freely following the motto ' what we cannot do now we shall put off till later ' , the Vienna meeting did in the end produce one result : it fixed the agenda for the next meeting .
That is a rather miserable result for 17 million unemployed .
The guarded comments of the social democratic family of Europe are unlikely to offer much consolation to the unemployed .
Mr President , I think that at this stage in the debate neither the President-in-Office nor the President of the Commission are in a position to listen to too much .
I would firstly like to take time to reflect a little on the Austrian Presidency that we are about to say goodbye to , a friendly presidency , and one that should be , or is , of enormous symbolic value .
It is also a presidency that represents one of the oldest political concepts in Europe and at the same time is hailed as one of the most modern .
Austria is unique in joining the old with the new and on some occasions , we are not sure whether we are referring to the Austria at the turn of the century or the young republic that emerged during this century .
Whichever it is , over the past few months , the presidency has consistently demonstrated the Austrian spirit of cordiality and goodwill .
And , what is more , it has been a timely presidency because we have now in fact reached a period of transition .
Austrian people appear to possess dual vision : the ability to look forwards and backwards , to see that times are changing and that we are currently living through a period of transition .
The fact that we are moving from one century to the next is perhaps in itself not of great significance , but it is certainly of symbolic significance to those of us experiencing it .
And added to that , we are moving from one Europe to another .
We are moving from the Europe of the internal market , which is more market-oriented and service-based , to the Europe of Economic and Monetary Union and a Europe that concentrates more on the issues in society that affect individuals , namely , environmental and social issues .
The Austrian Presidency has , in my opinion , acted very intelligently given this climate of change .
I always read the minutes of the presidency 's declarations in some detail and in doing so I can tell that they have been written intelligently , first and foremost , because they include an agenda and a timetable , which is something we urgently need at the moment . In other words , the period of change Europe is currently undergoing needs an agenda and timetable setting out exactly what we hope to achieve .
This is something that was neatly brought together in the so-called ' Vienna Strategy for Europe ' .
The Austrians have presented us with a very demanding and full agenda but one that we can still complete .
In my view , experience has shown that here in Europe everything is resolved at the eleventh hour and that we usually do not achieve anything if we try to get ahead of ourselves .
I think that the presidency has gone to great lengths to lay the groundwork that the German and Finnish Presidencies will be able to complete next year .
The Vienna Strategy for Europe has been very clearly explained and I would advise many of my colleagues who have criticised the presidency as being inefficient to closely follow future meetings , first in Brussels , then Cologne , Tampere and Helsinki , to see how each and every one of these results will be achieved .
The German Presidency undoubtedly has a very difficult task ahead .
We are all aware of the complex economic issues that currently need to be addressed - and I do not think that it is my place to take that particular debate further here - , but at each of these sittings there is evidently an agenda that the presidencies will be able to prepare , and to do so from now on , so as to ensure continuity between the successive German and Finnish Presidencies .
The chairman of my group , Mrs Green , spoke before me , and has therefore left me with very little to say on socialist issues .
But in reply to an earlier remark , I would like to say to the Austrian Presidency that , as far as the Socialist Group is concerned , the Union has one priority at the moment and that priority is employment . More specifically , my group believes that the governments that currently make up the majority in the Union , some of which are socialist , while others are a coalition between socialists and Christian Democrats , are highly concerned about employment because it is the issue that also concerns us as citizens .
We cannot say to the Council that it has no representative value .
Governments receive citizens ' complaints just as we do , and at the moment , the questions on everyone 's lips relate to employment : What is happening with employment ? What are we going to do with our children ?
Where shall we put them ?
How can we guarantee their integration into society ?
This is clearly an area in which little progress has been made , but at least we are beginning to advance a little .
There is , in my opinion , one decisive issue , that of the Delors White Paper , which we should have supported more than we did .
In my view - and you should read the conclusions of the Essen Summit in this respect - , the White Paper by Delors was too easily dismissed at Essen and I think that it is time to look at it once again .
There is a whole series of proposals on the table - and I do not wish to bore the presidency and the remaining Members - , but we need to reconsider the ideas in the Delors White Paper , because without investment there are no jobs , and for there to be investment , the financial means need to be provided .
This is , if you like , perhaps stating the obvious , but that is the way it is .
Lastly , Mr President , I believe that the statements made concerning the third pillar were very important , as were those on the creation of an area of freedom and justice , which , as the presidency pointed out to mark the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights , is becoming extremely important .
Europe may be an area of asylum and freedom , but what it will never be , of course , is an asylum for criminals , terrorists , drug-traffickers , dictators and torturers .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , my verdict on the Vienna summit is of course rather less euphoric than that of the Chancellor , because basically it was a reiteration of objectives , statements of intent and tasks to be tackled that had already been defined ; in parliamentary language , that means it was a summit which assigned responsibility for the items pending on the agenda , no more and no less .
But I too lay the blame less on the Austrian Presidency than on the general weakening of the will to reform within the European Union .
Chancellor , if you cannot see any trend towards renationalisation , I must firmly contradict you and cite the example of the debate on financing .
That showed quite clearly that the social democratic leadership in particular , which has taken such a centre-stage position at the moment , is giving precedence to interests that tend entirely in the opposite direction and are in the main purely national .
Just take a look : Schröder wants to cut the funding , as for that matter you do too with the idea of lower spending ; then there is Blair who says he can still get something out of Europe in the agricultural sector , and Jospin who contradicts him on precisely that point .
That is the real reason why no progress was made with Agenda 2000 , except for another postponement of the debate !
I would like to address a second point , employment policy .
Chancellor , I believe that what is decisive in this important area is that we do not confine ourselves to a purse full of ideas .
That is why I cannot understand why it was not made quite plain that the employment pact must be binding .
Referring to the stability pact and the employment pact in one breath only makes sense and is only justified if they are both equally binding !
So this is my verdict , Chancellor : this summit has not broken down the blockade on reform in the European Union in relation to enlargement and the decision-making ability of the European Union and its ability to master problems .
These questions were passed on , which I regret and which is a pity given the need for further European integration .
Mr President , the Heads of State and Government have set an ambitious target in trying to find agreement on the Agenda 2000 package at the March summit .
This package of proposals amounts to the most wide-ranging and fundamental examination of all the major political issues dealt with at European Union level : budget and financing , common policies , the process of enlargement , as well as the prospect of economic and social cohesion .
At the Vienna Summit it was clear that some Member States at least preferred to view this package in the narrowest possible manner as an accounting exercise .
I believe that we should include in the discussion not only purely budgetary matters but also the many additional factors which are also relevant to Agenda 2000 and the process of enlargement .
The suggestion put forward by some Member States that EU spending should be frozen at current levels until 2006 means , in effect , that the richer Member States are seeking to have the cost of enlargement met by the less-developed countries .
I support the position that EU spending should remain as a percentage of gross domestic product and should not be stabilised at current spending levels .
This would mean a reduction in the EU budget over time .
Freezing the budget level in practice means diverting money from the CAP and the Structural and Cohesion Funds into Eastern Europe .
Any suggestion of renationalising spending within the common agricultural policy would also work to undermine the fabric of the CAP , which would fly in the face of the interests of European farmers and rural regions .
I believe that those countries which are currently net beneficiaries from the funds will have great difficulty in accepting such a proposal in March .
It is worth noting that those countries which are currently net beneficiaries are situated to the south and the west of the Union and , as a result , they are likely to benefit far less from enlargement than the already better-off countries in central and northern Europe , which will be better able to take advantage of their proximity to the markets in these new Member States .
It is also important to factor into these calculations the huge benefits of issues such as improved security for countries such as Germany and Austria , as the Union 's external border takes a decisive step to the east .
In conclusion , the whole question of financing the enlargement of the Union must not be confined to a narrow accounting exercise but must also take account of less tangible but no less important factors , such as security issues and likely shifts in trade patterns .
Mr President , before I begin , I should like the Minister and the President of the Commission to put on their headphones , unless they speak Greek .
Mr President , your Presidency commenced with optimism and hope , but it is ending amid serious concerns .
This is because during the current Presidency we have seen social-democratic governments establish a neo-Thatcherite presence - the President of Parliament stressed that too - , we have witnessed selfishness in relation to resources , and we have seen an attempt to build a larger Europe with less money .
We had expected and , if you will , we still expect in future to see more resistance from the government of Austria , a country rich in history , culture and traditions but one that does not suffer from the complex that affects major powers and does not feel that it is the subsidiary of some major power in the European Union .
It was with sorrow that we saw the Austrian Presidency 's document on the funding of the European Union .
I should like to address Mr Schüssel , President-in-Office of the Council and ask him , during his reply here in Parliament and not in secret meetings between governments , to address Greek farmers directly - I am raising this particular subject - and give them an assurance ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the President-in-Office of the Council gave us an impressive list of all the issues discussed at the Vienna summit .
I am happy to acknowledge that , but unfortunately none of it has penetrated through to the outside world .
What has come through is that there were negotiations about money .
Perhaps that is partly to do with the new German approach .
I would certainly not dispute that .
Obviously , things were done differently in the past .
More information about the substance of policies used to penetrate through to the outside world and people would haggle about money at midday around the fireplace .
Perhaps that was a better system .
At any rate , at this summit not much got through of the visions which Chancellor Klima said should be opened up for the citizens .
Admittedly , the Austrian Government has achieved a great deal in terms of agricultural policy in its discussions with Parliament - or at least when Mr Molterer was present in the committee - and defined directions and outlined courses to be followed .
I do not dispute that .
But what was not addressed at this summit was the fact that employment is also linked to the stabilisation of agricultural structures and structural development .
That did not come through , even though it opens up new prospects , and I am very sorry that at this high level no account is evidently taken of the need to connect with the people .
Mr President , single currency or no , the Heads of State and Government were not of a single mind at the summit on financial matters .
The questions of the Community 's finances and how to share the burden were too difficult and were therefore shelved .
Thus the Council has saddled itself with a very crowded agenda for 1999 .
I hope we shall get a decision on the Agenda 2000 agreement in March 1999 .
We cannot have the applicant countries made to suffer because we freeze our spending .
The European Parliament has worked hard to get a draft statute for Members ready in good time .
I hope the Heads of Government who stressed the importance of that system will keep up the pressure .
I welcome the draft agreement which the presidency has concluded with Switzerland on the Eurovignette and transit tariffs .
I am taken with the idea of experimenting with labour-intensive services .
I am disappointed that the abolition of tax-free shops has been postponed , because that question was settled back in 1991 .
The President of the European Parliament said in his speech in Vienna that the EU had created a further 1.7 million jobs .
I ask myself how far that was due to the EU and how far it was due to the economic climate .
If jobs are lost again in the period of recession which is to come , will the EU have destroyed those jobs ?
Lastly I must voice doubts about the plans for a European defence force .
We have NATO for that , and it is perfectly well able to do the job .
Mr President , as a mark of respect for this House , I shall refrain from repeating the speech I have given after each of the last three meetings of the Council . It is nevertheless true that the outcome of the Vienna meeting is no different from that of previous ones .
Even though the serious issue of unemployment was on the agenda , the conclusions were nothing but fine words , not decisions leading to the creation of new jobs .
According to the Austrian Chancellor , the summit paved the way for setting out fresh objectives ; the main priorities , he went on , are employment and the coordination of the most urgently needed economic policies .
We have been hearing such statements for at least two decades .
Despite the major sacrifices made by the peoples of the Union to bring about the single currency , the problem of growth has not been solved , and consequently unemployment remains at intolerably high levels .
The pact for jobs has again been postponed until next June .
After the initiative launched with great media hype by the Jospin government in the run-up to the Amsterdam summit , we had hoped that an agreement would be in place after last December 's meeting of the Council in Luxembourg .
Two more unproductive summits have been and gone since then .
Now that the euro is about to arrive , even though broad swathes of public opinion are concerned about the future it was proposed in Vienna that agricultural spending be reduced , spreading incalculable discontent in rural areas .
It will be an almighty battle , the Irish Prime Minister , Bertie Ahern , told the press ; it will be an affront to the acquis communautaire , asserted Jacques Chirac , and Alleanza Nazionale shares their opinions .
Finally , perhaps to defuse the tension caused by such concerns , Chancellor Schröder announces that Germany wishes to reduce its net contribution to the Community budget .
All of these are worrying signs ; our citizens perceive this Europe as being ever more remote from their day-to-day problems , and for my country amongst others , unemployment represents the number one problem , especially for young people .
Why this inability to solve the mounting problems ?
The explanation might perhaps be that whereas 13 of the 15 governments - I mean the Socialist ones - did not share the principles which inspired the Maastricht Treaty , they are now clumsily attempting - painstakingly and unsuccessfully - to circumvent it , and are committing the idealistic errors which Maastricht sought to eliminate once and for all .
Vienna did not solve the problem of unemployment ; nor did it offer any concrete prospects for the creation of the third pillar , which is becoming increasingly important , given the enormous problems being caused by unregulated immigration and political connivance with the perpetrators of terrorism .
This should be of concern not only when outrages are committed , but also when seeking to prevent and overcome a political culture which indirectly protects terrorism and its authors .
Members of Parliament continue to ask questions , the Council continues not to reply ; whatever next ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , if we look at the beginning of the Austrian Presidency we see that rather a lot was expected of it .
For instance , this presidency was to ensure that the Commission became less omnipotent and that Europe became more renationalised again , in the sense of becoming more decentralised .
And indeed if you look at the situation today , as the Chancellor pointed out , not only has any de-Europeanisation been prevented but in fact Europe is stronger today than it was at the beginning of the Austrian Presidency .
Let me give a few examples , starting with employment policy .
There have been signs of movement in employment policy .
Of course starts were made earlier - in Luxembourg and so on - but there have been instances of movement , although sadly the Austrian Liberal Member , Mr Frischenschlager , has not set any example here .
When he joined this Parliament , he vehemently rejected the idea of any kind of employment policy at European level .
Today he complains that the employment pact is not binding .
That clearly shows that there has been a shift in the mind-set of some Members , thanks not least to Austrian initiatives taken even before its presidency .
But employment policy also implies social partnership .
We know that we need these social forces ; that too was confirmed in Vienna and I hope the social partners too will increasingly find the appropriate solutions at European level .
Secondly , it keeps being pointed out that Europe is an economic giant but a political dwarf , and that is indeed how we have often behaved .
Not that all this is now behind us , but in particular through the external representation of the euro - and however critically one might regard some aspects and I would also like to see the Commission have more scope here - it has now been made clear that we must not forget that we are or can be a global power , perhaps one should say a global factor .
So we must have a strong say in the reform of the international financial institutions , in the WTO measures , because we also have a substantive input to make there .
It is not as though we were simply trying to flex our muscles in some kind of power struggle .
After all , we established , formulated and framed a social market economy in post-1945 Europe , with a few inadequacies here and there which we must put right ; but we do have a model to offer , which is after all not just a European model .
We do not want to impose it on anybody , but we can regard it as a model worth presenting , and these social market economy components should also be apparent in the international financial and trade regulations .
Had that happened earlier , we would not have seen the events that occurred in Asia and also in Russia , namely liberalisation on the surface without the appropriate institutions for backing it up .
In that respect , I think it is most important that we should increasingly speak with one voice in external economic and foreign policy matters .
The Foreign Minister referred to a range of common strategies , especially for Russia , which is a particular cause for concern and where we are making particular efforts to do something .
Let me take this opportunity to say - since Foreign Minister Schüssel also referred to this - that we must take more rapid decisions .
We are very much in favour of that , and Parliament must do the same , but so must the Council .
We had preliminary talks yesterday with Commissioner van den Broek on the TACIS regulation .
We would like to be able to discuss and adopt the new TACIS regulation in this Parliament before the summer , if we get it on time from the Council , if it is not left in the drawer for months again , because of course the individual countries would like to exert their influence in certain areas .
So I really would beg you to tell your colleagues in Germany too : please forward the appropriate measures that we want to implement to Parliament , so that we can take an early decision on the foreign policy aspects in particular .
The European security policy has also strengthened Europe .
We must take up the proposals that have been put forward , especially since the meeting between France and the UK - where the UK surprised us all by calling so clearly and unequivocally for a European security policy in partnership with the Americans .
That will give all the Member States of the European Union a chance to turn this European security policy into a genuine common security policy .
I need not say anything more at this point about Switzerland 's special concerns and the related question of transport measures .
Some people seem to believe , wrongly in my view , arrogantly and I might almost say superciliously , that this was ' only ' an interim presidency .
Perhaps it was not a very newsworthy presidency and did not have any great high points , perhaps it was an anticlimactic presidency ; but it was a presidency which has brought progress in many areas that had often been neglected for years - I need only think of transport , or of the framework research programme .
We should also show the people that beyond the great media events there is a Europe that is alive , a Europe that is becoming stronger , and that is what the Austrian Presidency showed !
Mr Schüssel , your intelligence and dynamism are impressive ; and nonetheless we have to ask ourselves why it is that this outcome has disappointed and embittered almost everyone .
The European Council in Vienna was an important one , in my opinion , because it made plain that there are certain new and unavoidable problems - jobs , enlargement , tax harmonisation - but ones which are not easy to tackle .
Yes , we were expecting more .
But the fault does not lie with the Austrian Presidency ; the problem is a political one , and this should be emphasised .
The European Council in Vienna was the first one since the expansion of the borders of the so-called ' social democratic Europe ' .
This new social democratic Europe is of course showing obvious sensitivity towards certain issues such as employment , which we share , but is faltering and revealing that it is not yet strong enough to tackle them .
This is the new political dimension .
What is more , the new social democratic Europe is changing the internal geography of Europe , so that this geography is no longer homogeneous .
In Vienna , the Paris-Bonn axis lined up against the Madrid-London axis : politically these axes are not homogeneous , meaning that there is no social democratic Europe after all . They are axes which indicate the likelihood of a future north-south divide in Europe and a probable split between those wishing to tackle problems in advance and those preferring to address them after the event .
The question of funding , raised in no uncertain terms by Chancellor Schröder , is a very real one which had already been raised by Chancellor Kohl .
As to the time-frame laid down by Chancellor Schröder , it could disrupt the balance within Europe and is thus very worrying .
All of which confirms , as I have already said , that this social democratic Europe may well be capable of winning elections , but is not yet proving capable of leading the continent .
It is a pity , Mr President , that instead of celebrations at the Vienna summit , we had squabbles over money .
With the introduction of the euro just three weeks away , the Union is beset by indecision .
That is not a reproach to the Austrian Presidency .
On the contrary , the presidency has been a good intermediary and has operated intelligently in many areas .
My special compliments here to Mrs Ferrero and Mr Schüssel .
The ambitious programme of reform for the twenty-first century is meeting with resistance from certain sectors and a number of Member States .
There is no question of blank cheques from the Members States to the Union any longer .
The struggle for a balanced sharing of the financial burden will be painful , and to my mind deserves to be called a crisis .
It will make our citizens more involved with Europe , but I do not think that the farmers , who do a great deal for our quality of life , should be made to suffer as a result .
The big question is how the incoming German Presidency will address this task .
The previous speaker , Mr Castagnetti , said something about that .
My question is this : is Mr Schröder , who has not yet gained a firm hold on the reins of political power in his own country , going to be willing and able to play the leading role in Europe which we have come to expect from this important Member State ?
Reading this morning 's Süddeutsche Zeitung , I am not sure that he is .
To quote this German newspaper : ' According to Schröder , Bonn will not be pressing to get reform of the EU institutions completed during the German Presidency . '
When , then , Mr President ?
I find this alarming .
Mr President , I think that the information that the Austrian Presidency has given us comes as no surprise to anyone and Europe is going to follow the same course that it has followed in previous years .
As a result , the situation is going to become extremely worrying .
Given the developments in the financial world , we can see clearly that the world economic system is becoming extremely unstable .
It is in this context that we are going to introduce the euro next year and in subsequent years .
The birth of the euro means that Member States will no longer have a monetary instrument allowing them to regulate the economic situation .
They will have to withstand asymmetric shocks using fiscal policy and wages and incomes policies , shocks that might hit any economy , given the disparities between the economic structures in the various Member States .
This means that when we need to combat inflationary tendencies in one Member State , we will either have to raise taxes or freeze salaries . In other words , we will , to some extent , have to apply a particularly harsh policy of social austerity that will undoubtedly destabilise the social situation in the country concerned .
Consequently , we are heading towards a situation that is only getting worse and that is compounded , in some way , by the quasi-colonial position of the European Union today in relation to the United States .
No-one really wants to face up to this problem .
Of course , there was some vague resistance to the negotiations on international trade relations and the d 'Amato law , as well as other similar matters , but that has not stopped this situation of dependence from deteriorating every day .
There is absolutely no doubt that the American economy is in good health and we look a rather sorry sight next to it .
Therefore , we need to think seriously in order to change the course of the development of European policy , both in terms of its relationships with the United States and in terms of its internal economic policy .
We are not on the right track .
In this respect , I fear that next year will be a year where , at least on an economic level , things will only get worse for the majority of Europeans .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Austrian Presidency was of course a typical working presidency .
That happens to be the case in national policy-making too : after a period of hard work and preparation , the time comes to take decisions .
That is the way it is !
But while a presidency of the Council can be as diligent and as clever as it may - and the Austrian Presidency was both - it still cannot deliver more than the other 14 are willing to give .
That is why we must always remember that 15 times ' national policy still does not equal European policy .
That is a truism , but it is one we must always bear in mind .
Under these conditions , the Council presidency - and I am not just referring to Vienna , where I am sure the President-in-Office of the Council would have liked to see a highlight here and there , I am referring to the presidency of the Council as a whole - did achieve a breakthrough , an about-turn on one major issue , as several speakers have appreciated . It is that the Union no longer only discusses money and the euro , but also discusses people and employment policy .
And the presidency has produced more than just a working agenda .
Thanks to the Austrian Presidency , firm promises have actually been made to apply economic and financial policy for the benefit of employment policy .
That is a real about-turn .
Everyone supported this , of whatever persuasion their national government .
In my view , this presidency has done us an enormous service here .
But my question concerns a point that has been almost totally forgotten .
Both in Vienna and during the presidency , there was talk of reforming and slimming down the institutions .
What does that mean ?
When we look at the huge mountain of work we must tackle jointly in the next few years - and let me address my own forthcoming presidency here and say that not even the German Presidency can accomplish it all , we should not expect any miracles of the Germans - we must also realise that we have to reform the key players , the institutions .
That applies to the Commission - and it also relates to the debate on the discharge we will be holding this week - just as it applies to our Parliament and , of course , to the Council .
What does more efficient policy-making mean ?
I believe we cannot confine ourselves to slogans here .
It also involves the Council 's future working methods , and it does not just mean that Parliament should determine with the Commission what is the most efficient way of framing policies ; it also concerns the Council .
When we then look at the many tasks set out by the Austrian Presidency and the positive decisions it has taken , we Germans might well be scared by the expectations placed in the German Presidency .
We can do it , but let me repeat : we can do it only if the 15 national interests are supplemented by a major common denominator on European issues .
There will always be national interests in Europe , just as there are also different regional interests in each Member State .
My compatriots in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania obviously have different interests , especially in relation to agriculture , from the Bavarians .
But nevertheless there is always a strong element of common interest at national level , and that is where improvements can still be made in European affairs .
I am also specifically addressing the incoming German Presidency here : national interests have to be formulated , compromises have to be found , but at the same time we must always look to the common European interest .
We are no longer a Community , we are a Union , but sometimes I almost have the impression that with the disappearance of the word ' Community ' , the sense of community has receded a little into the background The next presidencies should be measured against the example of the Austrian one and place more emphasis on this aspect again in their negotiations .
Mr President , I join the endorsement of the Austrian presidency .
Everything which enthusiasm , energy and charm could do has been done .
In those areas that I follow - foreign affairs and defence - it is my view that real progress has been made .
But none of that could stop the Vienna Summit from being inevitably a summit-in-waiting , a pastoral interlude before the storm in the spring .
All I hope is that underneath all the posturing there is a sense amongst the leaders of Europe of how that deal is to be done in the spring .
It is going to require courage and concentration , not posturing for national audiences and not philosophical ramblings about the unattainable such as tax harmonisation - I am sorry , that should be tax coordination .
What we are facing in the spring is a Grade 1 crisis , an internal crisis in the Union set against a very difficult international background : the reform of the common agricultural policy , a new budget deal , the key argument over the timing of enlargement ; set against a background of a Russia in crisis , a Middle East dragging itself towards 4 May , an unresolved tragedy in Kosovo , a Washington summit of NATO .
I appeal not just to you , Chancellor , but to all the members of the European Council to concentrate on the essentials : on enlargement , defence and foreign policy .
I am not going to add to the chorus of criticism over duty-free .
There is enough of the politics of sound-bites .
I remember my own Prime Minister , on the eve of a breakthrough in Northern Ireland , condemning the idea of sound-bites and then saying that he felt the hand of history on his shoulder .
I have to say that when the Council meets in March it will not be the hand of history on our shoulders ; the hand of history is at our throats .
We really have to solve that major crisis before the elections so that Europe can restart its progress towards the end of this century .
Good luck and thank you .
( Applause )
Mr President , it is a great pleasure to speak after Mr Spencer , after such a moderate and reasoned presentation .
I congratulate the Austrian presidency on the work it has done .
In particular I refer to the work that has been undertaken by the presidency in the fight against unemployment .
One of the sad things about the press reports of the summit meeting that was held in Vienna was the fact that it did not pick up the enormous progress that has been made during the Austrian presidency in tackling unemployment .
I should like to say on behalf of the Socialist Group and , I am sure , on behalf of this House , that we hope the Austrian Government will continue to press during the German presidency for the implementation of measures that will help to tackle unemployment .
There are measures that need to be taken in terms of employability , training and education for our citizens , but we also need levels of investment improved , both in the public and in the private sectors .
From that point of view what we need in the context of the new single currency is an understanding that in activating the pact for stability and growth we do not strangle investment in either the private or public sectors .
One of the problems we have at summit meetings is that of ideology and dogma .
My own country used to be governed by a party that treated every summit meeting as though it was a combative exercise with our neighbours in the European Union .
The good thing now in the European Union is that we try to work together to improve society .
But we recognise that there are also things individual governments must achieve .
Therefore we should not look at every summit meeting as though it is a test of strength between national governments .
What we have to do is share sovereignty where we can improve society but agree that things should be left to individual governments where appropriate .
Therefore the significant thing about Vienna was the way in which we are now starting to drop dogma and ideology and recognise that there are some major problem areas in which the European Union must act .
In that regard I would like specifically to refer to the issues of external relations , the international financial crisis and the negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
We are now seeing a United States Congress that is increasingly protectionist .
The European Union cannot be protectionist .
I hope that , when the summit meeting is held between Europe and the United States within the next few weeks , the President-in-Office of the Council will stress the fact that we urgently need a new round of world trade negotiations .
If we want to kick-start the global economy after the crisis of the last 12 months , international trade plays an extremely important role .
But we also need to stress to the US that we need fair trade .
This means that in relation to developing nations we must make sure that trade relations can actually help their economies .
The banana regime , as you know , is something that has caused major problems between Europe and the United States .
But we must make them understand that either we help the communities in the Caribbean through special trading links with the European Union , or else we hand those Caribbean nations over to drug traffickers and people involved in organised crime .
I wish you well and congratulate you on your presidency , but I also ask you specifically to press these points with the United States of America .
We cannot have a transatlantic partner that is protectionist as we move into the 21st century .
The debate will be continued this afternoon at 3 p.m.
VOTES
Ladies and gentlemen , I would propose that we adjourn the votes now so that the Chamber and the galleries can be prepared .
As you know , we have guests , and the formal sitting deserves to be prepared with all the necessary care .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.35 p.m. )
Report ( A4-0506 / 98 ) by Mr Colino Salamanca , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on a programme to supply agricultural produce to the Russian Federation ( COM ( 98 ) 0725 - C4-0678 / 98-98 / 0343 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
We would stress the paramount need for further regulation to prevent illegal fisheries in Antarctica .
Fishing is vital for securing world food supplies . All fisheries must be subject to stringent rules so as to pre-empt the exhaustion of stocks and halt the continued threat to biological diversity .
The proposed new system is therefore to be welcomed .
We wish to stress the importance of the Commission 's proposal to change in the way certain fishing activities are carried out . The purpose is to promote sustainable development for fisheries in the Atlantic and Mediterranean .
We believe that a comprehensive overhaul of fishing practice is required so as to ensure that this goal is achieved . The European Union 's efforts at regulation carry great weight here .
We should not underestimate the role to be played by the common fisheries policy in safeguarding world food supplies and encouraging ecologically sustainable development .
Both the Council of Ministers of the European Union and the European Commission are suffering from a guilty conscience as a result of this poor course of action of banning the use of drift gillnets in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean for European fishermen only .
In order to forget this as soon as possible , we are willing to show our generosity by tossing a few bags of ecus to the main victims , that is , the unfortunate fishermen and owners of vessels .
But these fishermen do not want to receive compensation .
They want to be able to carry on with their job as netters , harnessing one of the world 's healthiest resources . They want to carry on using one of the most selective tools there is , which spares more endangered fish stocks and thereby helps ensure better sustainable management of this resource .
What these fishermen do not accept - and nor does a large majority of public opinion supporting them - is the injustice that has been done to them .
Neither majority votes nor fleeting compensation can prevent an injustice from being an injustice .
Even when voted through by a majority , an injustice is still an injustice .
Our fishermen will not allow the Commission and the Council to go back on the founding principles of the common fisheries policy by basing their decisions purely on political opportunity , in order to please lobbies and fulfill selfish interests , and by abandoning the scientific bases on which their decisions had been based until now .
The netters in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean do not accept the discrimination they are being subjected to .
At the end of last night 's debate , Commissioner Monti , in as clear a manner as possible , confirmed that this discrimination does exist and is continuing .
When pushed by a few Members who wanted to see an end to such discrimination , Mr Monti said , and I quote , ' the Commission has no intention of extending this decision to other waters ' .
In other words , for the Commission and the Council , although fishing in the Atlantic with a 2.5 kilometre net is terrible practice - even though scientific studies have shown the low level of significant catches of marine mammals in such nets - fishing with 21 kilometre nets in the Baltic Sea is still highly recommended practice , even though marine mammal populations - porpoises , etcetera - are very close to extinction .
I am delighted that an overwhelming majority of this House has voted to adopt my report and the amendments I tabled .
I should also like to thank the 52 Members who supported my proposal , which was adopted by the Committee on Fisheries , to wait for a legal decision before allocating any compensation , so that fishermen and shipowners do not then have to refund aid that may no longer have a legal basis .
But I am disappointed that the majority of the European Parliament has sided with the Council of Ministers and the European Commission , with those who would have us believe that the fishermen affected are only a handful of old men awaiting retirement . I am disappointed that the majority is siding with those who promote a policy of fait accompli in order to try in advance to make a legal decision unworkable as they fear it may go against their wishes .
I think that , on the contrary , it is essential that we do not anticipate this and that we wait for justice to be done on the four appeals filed against the Council Decision of 8 June .
Madam President , on behalf of my group , and Georges Berthu in particular , I should like to say that the Commission 's work programme for 1999 seemed to us to be very full , and we wonder how it will be able to take it on , given the state it is in at the end of 1998 .
In effect , an effective instrument would be needed to undertake a programme of such a scale .
Currently , the Commission seems to be severely affected by its management problems , not to mention fraud , and the reforms envisaged by the work programme do not measure up to the size of the problem .
It is , of course , praiseworthy to want to modernise structures and rethink internal management methods .
This is what the SEM 2000 and MAP 2000 initiatives are for .
It would also be useful to establish an independent financial control body , as the President of the Commission promised , and we voted in favour of this .
But all this does not resolve the Commission 's major problem .
This administration is driven by a thirst for power .
It cannot accept being controlled by the nations that do , however , pay for it .
It would like to be the first successful example of an ' omnipotent ' institution , regulated only by its members ' virtues .
Recent events have shown that this does not work .
When we look at the programme itself , the diagnosis does not improve .
The main priority , which overshadows all others , is to obtain an agreement on financing the Agenda 2000 programme for the 2000-2006 period .
But this may take rather a long time as the European institutions ' compulsive drive for power will eventually meet with financial resistance .
Nonetheless , the Commission hopes to close this case before the European elections by expecting to present the citizens of the Member States with a fait accompli , in accordance with good old federalist methods . The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations hopes for the contrary .
We hope that it will be possible to discuss this during the election campaign , that citizens will have their say , and that this will give us a clear idea of the institutional reforms that will one day have to be carried out , in order to let the Member States regain their vital control over Europe .
We wish to use this explanation of vote to say that we cannot support paragraph 15 , since it implies that the EU should become involved in wage policy .
This would interfere with the negotiating privilege enjoyed by the social partners .
We do , however , endorse the underlying aim of improving coordination between economic policy and other relevant policy areas , whilst at the same time increasing incomes so as to fight poverty .
But statements suggesting that the Union should restrict the right of management and labour to negotiate wages are not acceptable .
Nor can we countenance the proposals on defence policy in paragraph 42 .
And we note that paragraph 24 re-addresses the question of an ' operationally independent anti-fraud office ( OLAF ) ' .
Given that there are grounds for strong criticism of the Commission 's management of Community resources , we have decided to go along with our political group 's stance on this matter .
We believe in maximum information for the public to ease the euro 's introduction .
Vulnerable members of society in particular will need practical advice on using the new currency in their everyday lives .
This is the spirit that should underpin the launch of the euro . We cannot endorse a political campaign designed to persuade the citizens of certain Member States that their countries ought to join the single currency .
The changeover to the euro on 1 January next year affects all of us , whether we have a job or are retired , whether we are adults or children .
However , with only a few days to go to this unprecedented event , many Europeans are ill-informed , indifferent or overtly hostile .
The European Parliament cannot be content with this state of affairs as there is a danger of it causing the single currency to fail , but also because a ' successful ' euro is a powerful factor in forging a common European identity .
Until now , the assets we have available to inform people about the changeover to the euro have , in my opinion , not been used effectively .
Information is too patchy and too vague for professionals , traders , SMEs and SMIs .
It is poorly targeted at the man in the street .
The 370 million Europeans , whether or not they will participate in the euro , are not asking for information on the main general points , interspersed with overviews of monetary history since the Middle Ages .
Depending on their country of origin , they want specific information that will increase their confidence .
Information campaigns are useful , particularly when they are not general and when they meet the specific needs of the elderly , the disabled and the economically and socially disadvantaged .
We will all need to rebuild our scales of values in terms of our salaries and our daily expenditure .
For some people , this will be relatively easy . For others , it will be more disconcerting .
We must focus our efforts on these people in order to be successful in our campaign .
Local and regional authorities are not sufficiently involved in this approach .
The European Union must make better use of their abilities , which , in this respect , are almost limitless .
These authorities are also the best link to associations that have not been sufficiently spurred into action , in spite of their best efforts .
In view of this , I am certainly in favour of the Arroni report .
We are only at the beginning of the euro 's introduction .
This strategy must be permanently maintained and assessed , for a large number of participating countries and for a long period of time .
The vote on this report gives me an opportunity to stress that the introduction of the euro must take the citizen into account .
We must naturally inform citizens , but we must also involve them .
This is why , on my initiative , we have created ' Citizens for the euro ' clubs in northern France .
These clubs , which bring together interested citizens from all political persuasions and backgrounds , monitor the information campaigns and suggest slight changes and modifications .
They will suggest new forms of action . The citizens will become involved in these campaigns in a pro-active manner .
Another main aim of such clubs is to unmask and flush out all the little ' swindles ' that the arrival of the euro will certainly entail .
There will undoubtedly be a great deal of work to do with those who will try to bill for ' euro-related ' services and those who will try to exploit more vulnerable groups of people .
Incidentally , and to conclude , I would particularly like to highlight the importance of the period that will begin for Europe in 16 days ' time and that , to this day , is without precedent .
The UK is participating in the Euro information strategy , which will cause confusion as the UK does not intend to enter the EMU nor will it even set a date for UK entry .
I support the main thrust of this report , which calls for a substantial increase in the budget for comprehensive information campaigns relating to the issues that need to be addressed in the context of the introduction of the single European currency into Europe .
The Irish Government has certainly set about its task of informing the Irish people in a structured and coherent manner and I would like to commend the efforts of the Euro Changeover Board which has been set up to oversee this informative task .
The euro currency will touch every aspect of corporate life and will lead to a big shake-up in company policies and procedures .
The creation of a single market with a unified currency will have far-reaching implications for the marketing , production and supply strategies of Irish businesses .
The fact that the euro notes and coins will not come into circulation until 1 January 2002 must not disguise the fact that the euro currency becomes a reality in non-cash format on 1 January next .
This means companies will have to change their procedures appropriately .
Information technology will also have a key role in helping to reshape the way business will be done .
The arrival of the single currency will have consequences reaching well beyond information technology departments .
Moreover , companies will also have to identify many measures which can be taken both in the short term and in the medium term so as to protect their business at all times during the period when Ireland participates within Economic and Monetary Union and Britain remains out of the euro zone .
One big pre-single-currency fear , that a big systems disaster would take place , has receded as the launch date approaches .
Now it is a question of who will gain and who will lose in the new marketplace and much will depend on how companies handle the transition period between January 1999 and January 2002 .
Disseminating information to a population of 291 million people within eleven participating countries is not a cheap exercise .
The European budget must reflect this fact by ensuring that sizeable increases in information campaigns relating to the new euro currency are put in place .
Moreover , monies must be made available for comprehensive information campaigns in the four countries that are not participating in the new European single currency regime from 1 January 1999 , namely , Greece , Britain , Finland and Sweden .
If the European single currency is to fully complement the workings of the internal market in Europe then the single European currency should apply in all fifteen Member States of the EU .
Information campaigns must play their part in this regard so as to ensure that the European Union has one single currency operating within all its Member States in the near future .
The information strategy for the euro affects both the ' in ' countries and those that have elected to remain ' free ' outside EMU .
We agree that the euro 's introduction will have a bigger impact on our citizens than any other single EU measure .
All the more reason to ensure that the exercise remains what it claims to be - an effort to provide information - and does not spill over into propaganda .
Advising people on the use of the euro does not involve forging a ' European identity ' .
We would question the appropriateness of the reference to ' the role of information multipliers that young people and specifically the youngest may play ' . Nor are we too sure about ' targeting women not in paid employment , whose household budgetary powers and influence on opinion within the family should not be underestimated ' .
Information is to inform and should be kept general . It must not become confused with drumming up support for consolidating the EU and its institutions .
EMU is a political project with a broad-ranging impact on ordinary EU citizens ' daily lives .
The whole enterprise therefore needs to be debated and discussed . This report does not seek to stimulate reflection , however .
Instead , it focuses on a currency : the euro .
It deals with money , in other words - and people know how to use money .
Consequently , I cannot see the need for an information strategy .
I am not happy either with assertions that the euro should ' constitute an important factor for building a common European identity ' .
Nor can I endorse the condescending tone adopted here towards EU citizens . We are told at one point that ' an important part of the population ... may not be reached by the usual communication tools ' because - amongst other things - of their ' political or philosophical position ' !
I repeat : we do not need an information campaign for the euro .
This report sometimes seems to be no more than a front for pure political propaganda .
Paragraph 19 offers a prime example of what I find disturbing .
Civilised and democratic societies should not be engaging in the kind of hard sell advocated here .
Europe must henceforth consign such methods of persuading people of the supreme merits of its policies to the scrap-heap .
The changeover to the EU 's common currency entails the largest currency conversion in the history of the world .
Such a changeover means that large demands will have to be made in terms of information strategy .
In addition , a good , targeted information policy is a crucial element in the efforts to introduce the euro in Denmark as well , where the scepticism of the population is partly due to a lack of information about the advantages of the common currency .
It is therefore pleasing that the Commission and the European Parliament are making such extensive financial and political efforts in the area of information .
We thank the rapporteur for this important report .
We believe that the introduction of a single currency will , in time , contribute towards creating more jobs , ensuring sustainable development and enhancing the EU 's competitive position .
We are , however , aware of the dangers involved and would have liked to see more attention paid to the risk of asymmetric shocks . Clearer analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of regulatory mechanisms is required .
The whole of the European Union - and not just the Euro-11 - would suffer from the after-effects of asymmetric shocks .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Metten report concerning adjustment mechanisms in cases of asymmetric shocks , because the proposed adjustment mechanisms will help to ensure the stability of the European economy when the third stage of EMU begins , which is in the interests of all the EU Member States .
When the 11 countries participating in the common currency lock their internal exchange rates on 1 January 1999 and replace their national currencies with the euro in 2002 , they will no longer be able to make use of exchange rate policy , in other words they will no longer be able to devalue or revalue their currencies .
Theoretically , this puts them in a worse position in the event of their economies being hit by an asymmetric shock .
Saying that the shock is asymmetric means that it only affects one particular country or one particular branch of industry .
In the past , currency devaluation could be used to restore lost competitiveness in connection with the economic shock .
Because this instrument is no longer available , the range of economic cards left to play is largely reduced to public spending policy , but the freedom of action of the euro countries is restricted in this area too , because they must fulfil the requirements laid down in the growth and stability pact . This means , amongst other things , that the budget deficit must not exceed 3 % of the gross national product and that public sector borrowing must be no more than 60 % of GNP .
The report therefore recommends that a stabilisation fund should be set up which , if a country or industry is hit by such an asymmetric shock , can lend money to the country or industry concerned and thus alleviate the shock .
These loans are only to be granted with the unanimous approval of the Council , which is also to determine the terms for use of the assistance .
The text that has been submitted to us is the fruit of detailed work by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and by its rapporteur , Alman Metten .
Once again , this parliamentary initiative is proof of the creative spirit of our House , no matter what the nature of the problem may be .
Whilst I firmly believe in the ' security ' aspect of the euro , I support this report as I believe that , from now on , we should prevent these risks , which will certainly be diminished but which will always be present .
In this respect , the creation of a Community fund to help the countries in the euro area in cases of asymmetric shocks should help us build a solid foundation for our single currency for the future , particularly for those countries that have decided to adopt it .
It is also a guarantee of stability for the euro in relation to strong currencies such as the yen and the dollar .
On the other hand , although we believe that asymmetric shocks will decrease as of 1 January 1999 , a prediction confirmed in recent months of great stability in Euroland currencies , we must take the diversity of legislation and policies into account .
Strong disparities might indeed weaken the structure of the Community .
Also , I would like to join with those calling for a better coordination of our economic policies and for our social security contributions , particularly the indirect ones , to be brought into line .
As we know , Denmark is not going to participate in the third stage of EMU which begins on 1 January 1999 .
The Danish Finance Minister otherwise argues enthusiastically in favour of it , and is also conducting a ' stability-oriented ' policy as if we were going to participate .
Something which the Finance Minister does not say in the debate in Denmark is made clear by the Metten report , namely that the implementation of EMU may make it necessary for the participating countries to have an instrument which makes it possible to overcome economic crises within the euro system .
A stabilisation fund should therefore be established to ward off the greatest damage .
At the same time , preparations are being made to conduct a more active budgetary and wages policy , and direct pay restraint is recommended , particularly for the small countries , which of course includes Denmark .
The situation in Denmark is that we leave it to the social partners to negotiate pay conditions , and that is how I think it should stay - no interference from the EU in this area .
The report points out that individual Member States are losing influence over monetary policy and also over financial policy .
This can already be seen with the cut-backs in the public sector .
In Denmark , where practically all social benefits are publicly financed , this has noticeable consequences for those people who depend on public benefits .
We have seen recently in connection with the budget debate that the redundancy pay scheme is gradually being privatised .
I am thinking in particular here about the special redundancy contribution which individual members of unemployment insurance funds will have to make if they subsequently wish to benefit from redundancy pay .
This is a first step , and surely not the last we are going to see if this development continues .
It can be no surprise that the timing of this coincides almost exactly with a critical letter from the Commission about the existing scheme .
Nor can it be a surprise that the change in the redundancy pay scheme makes it more like a personal insurance policy .
The only remarkable thing about this is that the change is barely radical enough to satisfy the European Commission .
The report by Mr Metten on the adjustment mechanism in cases of asymmetric shocks contains a number of references to the need for increased coordination of the economic strategies of the 11 euro countries in relation to their budgetary and pay policy which we are against .
The report points out that the risk of country-specific economic shocks will not disappear after the introduction of the euro , and that it is therefore necessary to establish a stabilisation fund which the euro countries will be able to borrow from in cases of asymmetric shocks .
We agree that the risk of country-specific economic shocks will not disappear within the euro zone .
In spite of considerable vertical integration in terms of the coordination of the economies of the Member States in recent years , there have been many examples of purely country-specific shocks .
The introduction of the euro will entail a definitive locking together of the monetary and currency policies of the 11 euro countries .
The 11 Member States will thereby lose a vital economic instrument in the event of a financial crisis .
The option of devaluing the krone or allowing it to float freely - which for example is what happened in Finland with the markka at the beginning of the 1990s , with great economic success as a result , an increase in exports and low inflation - will be irrevocably abandoned .
Instead , the Member States can try to improve their competitiveness by allowing the economic crisis to filter down through the pay structure , with lower minimum wages and poorer working conditions as a result .
This situation will be reinforced by the fact that the EU is not an optimal currency area because , amongst other things , there is little cross-border mobility of the labour force .
At the same time , a stabilisation fund will not significantly modify country-specific shocks because there is a ceiling on the EU 's budget of 1.27 % of total GNP .
Therefore it will not be possible to channel sufficient funds to regions or countries with economic crises .
Together with the UK , Denmark and Sweden have chosen to remain outside the third stage of EMU .
We will stick to this policy , because we consider it vitally important that it should be up to the citizens of the individual Member States to decide on economic objectives and instruments .
This regulatory power should not be left to the European political élite and the ECB .
Therefore Mr Metten 's report , which stresses that the EU 's economic powers should be strengthened in connection with EMU , that it will be necessary to ' coordinate the Member States ' economic policies ' and that we should promote ' closer coordination of academic studies and vocational training and removing the obstacles to the transfer of social benefits ' , is a step in the wrong direction .
This report deals with the issues confronting a single currency .
The first paragraph indirectly sheds light on the real problem with a heavily regulated common monetary policy .
In fact , some sound ideas are put forward here . However , I am highly critical of large sections of the report and consequently cannot vote in favour .
Economic and monetary union is a political project , entailing the introduction of a single currency .
Paragraph 2 of the report states that ' it will be necessary to coordinate the Member States ' economic policies more closely ' .
Economic policy is our ultimate means of securing jobs and guaranteeing welfare .
Once countries are tied by the Treaty 's criteria for EMU , employment and welfare are not exactly set to benefit .
Some Member States have actually chosen not to participate in the third phase of monetary union .
And I would of course challenge the rapporteur on the need for wage adaptation .
The issue of asymmetric shocks has become a priority given the fact that the introduction of the euro has coincided with an economic crisis facing every country in the world .
Let it not be said - as is both implicit and explicit in the report - that , despite the euro , the Member States might still be confronted with asymmetric shocks even though the single currency should lessen the likelihood of them occurring .
Asymmetric shocks have their origin in asymmetric national economies , a reality which the euro does not eliminate , and in the way that they can react to any situations and shocks that might affect them asymmetrically .
With the introduction of the euro what some countries have lost is the possibility of using an instrument , namely the currency of those economies and its exchange rate relationship with other currencies .
Shocks can actually be made worse by having an instrument that actually exaggerates what triggered them in the first place , and because the defences of their victims are being watered down into a group which is not just disregarding but actually ignoring the asymmetries of the various national situations .
However , our basic reservations about this motion for a resolution will not stop us from supporting the creation of a Stabilisation Fund , but we do so grudgingly as this has to be seen as inevitable ; it would be compatible with the Stability Pact , the main plank of the strategy , and it would provide a guarantee mechanism with loans to be repaid with interest - something that we object to .
The positive aspect of the creation of a Stabilisation Fund to deal with certain asymmetric shocks , the whole philosophy behind the motion for a resolution and the unacceptable characteristics of this vital fund explain why we voted as we did .
This own-initiative report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is a reflection of a strong desire to take into account all the problems which could occur in the financial markets after the introduction of the euro .
It is also an expression of great clear-sightedness and very thorough economic analysis which deserves praise .
The common currency can only be the stabilising economic factor which everyone expects if the necessary attention is paid in good time to all the danger signs which arise inside and outside the EU .
This report is a step in the continuing assessment of all the relevant factors in any effects the euro may have .
Just 15 days before the beginning of the third phase of EMU and the creation of the euro , the European Parliament is turning its attention , albeit only partially , to the consequences that these will have in different Member States and regions of the Community and their impact on various branches of industry and economic sectors .
As usual , despite repeated urgings , even by Parliament itself which adopted a number of related amendments of ours in previous reports , the Commission still remains silent and is not disclosing studies , which we are sure are in its possession , concerning the consequences of EMU for the economies of the Member States , the various branches and sectors of the economy , employment , labour relations , social security and peoples ' incomes .
On the contrary , it is wasting billions on propaganda for the euro in an effort to make it acceptable to working people , who are strongly opposed to it and voicing their disapproval in mass events in all the Community 's Member States in defence of their rights .
The Metten report , perhaps for the first time , mentions certain consequences of EMU and the euro which will affect the Member States , especially those with the weaker economies .
This amounts to public acceptance of the law of unequal development which is inherent in the nature of the capitalist system and can be seen even within our countries .
However , they have to hand an important means for dealing with it , namely the national budgets which amount to nearly 50 % of their GDP , even if they use those means ineffectually .
Apart from a timid reference to the Community budget , the Metten report proposes as a means for dealing with the forthcoming crises that a loan fund should be created , to which Member States that fall victim to the crisis can have recourse for loans subject to interest , in order to cope with the crisis .
The report itself recognises that national monetary policies will cease within the euro area , and that this will essentially happen also with Member States outside its area , and the absolute arbiter of monetary policy will now be the European Central Bank , which will set a uniform interest rate that will inevitably be quite inappropriate for some Member States thereby sparking off crises .
The same will happen in the event that Member States cannot observe the deficit index when , in accordance with the stability pact , they will be required to pay fines while simultaneously applying for a loan from the proposed fund .
To deal with crises at national and Community level and to harmonise the economies , harmonisation of tax policy is advanced as an essential element . This will mean new burdens for working people who in one way or another and in any event will be called upon to bear the cost of economic and monetary union , the euro , economic recession and the crises .
The great truth brought out by this report is its emphasis that ' after the end of national monetary sovereignty , more drastic financial and pay policies will be necessary ' .
After the scrutiny of national budget expenditure in the light of financial discipline and the stability pact , after the reduction of public expenditure on education , health , social security and regional development , the Member States are now being asked to exercise control over their budget resources , increasing those contributed by the public , working people , farmers and the self-employed , and to increase their pressures for the continuation of low pay settlements or even reduced wages by changing labour relations .
Such plans cannot be and are not acceptable to working people throughout Europe , who are struggling to oppose this policy which goes completely against their interests and stresses monopoly preferences .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

European Council in Vienna - Austrian Presidency ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the European Council report and the Commission statement on the European Council meeting of 11 and 12 December in Vienna , and the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the activities of the Austrian Presidency .
Mr President , the Austrian Presidency 's task was certainly hampered by outside circumstances .
Nevertheless , I note today that agreement has been reached on the 1999 employment policy guidelines .
The European Investment Bank 's interim report on the implementation of the special action programme on employment is also positive .
The Council is , so I hope , about to agree the European company directive .
On the other hand , there is little sign of progress on Agenda 2000 .
Here I do not share the optimism of the presidency of the Council .
The proposal by the Austrian Commissioner responsible for agriculture policy , who is now present , is not acceptable as it stands .
For my farmers , who are mainly dairy and meat producers , it means certain doom .
A sensible approach would be national - or in Germany regional - cofinancing for correspondingly high compensatory payments .
The forthcoming German Presidency of the Council can now prove whether it supports the farmers , given that Austria has not resolved this issue .
At the same time , it could defuse the issue of net contributors .
The proposals on Objective 2 structural policy flagrantly disadvantage our rural areas .
That applies in particular to border regions and third countries .
Here too I see no sign of progress , although Austria should be particularly interested in this question .
Under the principle of subsidiarity , we should give regional and local authorities considerably more freedom to allocate national aid money .
Closeness to the people is a crucial European added value .
The more the Union distances itself from the people , the more it endangers itself .
In future , all decisions must take account of this important factor .
The same applies to enlargement .
It is to be welcomed .
But first the applicant countries must make their own contribution .
Transitional periods are necessary for agriculture and the free movement of workers , in the interest of both existing and future Member States .
Unfortunately , the President-in-Office said nothing about that .
But ignoring the problem is no help either .
The European CSU group will therefore be carefully monitoring future developments on these questions under the German Presidency of the Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , in order to assess the work of a presidency , due consideration must be given to both the objective progress made in terms of the process of European integration and the dedication and willingness with which the presidency has fulfilled its role as a driving force and as an arbitrator .
On this occasion , the Austrian Presidency was faced with , among other challenges , an extremely difficult task : that of giving impetus to the process of completing , within a reasonable timescale , the various pillars that make up Agenda 2000 , and of doing so at a time when the Union was fraught with budgetary tensions .
No-one who was aware of the objective difficulties the pending issues posed would have expected the Austrian Presidency to have concluded the most important elements of Agenda 2000 .
Internal Council deliberations on the matter , on a package that needs to be looked at as a whole , had not reached a conclusion .
However , positive progress has been made in relation to many technical aspects of Agenda 2000 and these will contribute effectively in helping to make it possible to reach an overall agreement during the present legislature .
Nonetheless , Mr President , we might wonder about the support the presidency gave at a stage to unbalanced initiatives in the financial and budgetary fields , which , far from facilitating a consensus between the various Member State positions , were clearly aligned with one of the conflicting national positions .
We do , however , welcome the fact that the Vienna European Council managed to restore balance to the situation and that the Commission 's initial proposal is again being used as a sound basis for negotiation , which will have to be a core element of the final agreement , as President Santer pointed out this morning .
Lastly , I would like to congratulate the Austrian Presidency for placing considerable emphasis on active employment policies and for encouraging the Member States to define policies in their national action plans and establish additional objectives and more precise timetables .
This might mean the beginning of a genuine Community social policy that could act as a counterweight to the single currency and single market .
It may be true that the progress made has not been spectacular , but no-one in this Parliament can deny the effort , dedication and professionalism that the Austrian Presidency has shown over the past six months .
Failure to tackle the real strategic issues in Vienna - contrary to the original plan - meant that the summit did not quite fulfil its promise .
Time was devoted to undoing a long-sealed package on duty-free sales .
But it is an ill wind that blows no good , so let us hope that those governments with a penchant for high taxation might come to the realisation that lower taxes across the board - and not just in this trivial area of duty-free sales - make economic sense and create jobs .
I deplore the slowdown in the process of enlargement to the east that was consecrated by Vienna .
The most flagrant evidence of this is the Commission 's shelving of its position paper on Latvia and Lithuania .
Enlargement is not purely about pleasing the ten applicant countries in Central and Eastern Europe .
We are not offering alms to our poor neighbours .
No round of accession has so far taken place , yet the EU is already drawing great benefit from its eastward links .
The applicant countries have reformed their economies in such a way as to furnish us with new markets and jobs .
They know what is expected of them .
Political reform has consolidated democracy ; and this commitment to human rights and democratic principles has delivered a more peaceful Europe .
If enlargement is put on the back burner , such gains could be lost .
Those concerned need a clear target in their sights ; only then will they be able to reconcile conflicting wishes and continue along the road to reform .
The security situation in the Baltic area is a sensitive one , and I find it particularly distressing that the Swedish Government should have gone along with this pruning of the agenda , to the detriment of Latvia and Lithuania .
Mr President , I think that we should all welcome the fact that the Council , in its various forms - and on this occasion , the European Council itself - , increasingly participates in our debates .
Such participation reveals the true nature of the Community institutions .
However , so as not to confuse public opinion , each institution needs to fulfil the role assigned to it , and the Council , when giving press conferences and making statements , would do well to remember that the role of the Council of the European Union is to define main policy areas . It is then incumbent upon the Union 's institutions to adopt and implement these policies .
In this way , we would avoid the confusion that has built up over the past few weeks , especially in relation to funding . What is more , each institution should fulfil its own responsibilities .
And in relation to funding , it is indeed true that the European Council stated quite a few months ago now that it was not prepared to increase the European Union 's own resources .
This is a political decision .
But it was then up to the Commission to have either accepted or debated it , or to have put forward a sufficiently ambitious proposal itself .
But in this instance , the Commission did not rise to the occasion and it did not have enough ambition . It is a surprise to public opinion and , of course , Parliament that the Commission is talking about financial perspectives for the next seven-year period without having even met the targets set for the end of next year .
This lies at the heart of all the troubles and tensions we are likely to experience in the coming months . What is more , we are , of course , completely overlooking the fact that , in light of the principles evoked by Member States regarding European integration , there is also the principle of precise budgetary control to be taken into account .
In other words , each institution needs to have sufficient financial means to fulfil the tasks assigned to it .
If the budget is insufficient , we cannot achieve our aims .
Mr President , we are back to the usual routine .
Once again a summit has declared that employment is the top priority .
Once again nothing has come of the new emphasis Parliament had expected to be put on coordinating economic and monetary policy .
The recommendation that additional , quantifiable objectives and timetables should be laid down at national level is commendable .
But there are no concrete agreements .
One exception , Mr Fischler , is the European Commission .
Mr Santer said that existing programmes will be packaged together .
We will target them at the ESF and at employment .
That is indeed a European added value , a major initiative .
Yet it is highly questionable whether we will obtain the employment pact at European level which the Germans are to achieve by March .
The new German Government is endeavouring to preach the virtues of this package at national level , but with little result .
Chancellor Schröder , who is inexperienced in office , and particularly so at European level , is providing against the future by saying that we must not place too high hopes in the German Presidency .
The Austrian Foreign Minister is right on one point , when he said that much improvement is still needed in relation to foreign and security policy - something which also applies to employment .
There is nothing further we can add .
Mr President , no spectacular decisions have been taken in the Council over the past six months , but Austria 's diligent diplomacy has taken the Community forward .
I wish to concentrate on one particular area : promoting the social dialogue .
At business level , let me refer you to the Austrian compromise proposal on a European limited company , which follows years of discussion .
In 1997 , the European Parliament made it clear that it is important to prevent certain national codetermination systems from simply being exported , but also to prevent any weakening of codetermination in countries which already have far-reaching rights .
The Austrian compromise largely satisfies these demands .
But we have had enough discussions now .
We expect the forthcoming German Presidency finally to bring about a political agreement on the sound basis of the Austrian proposal .
Mr President , the Vienna European Council was a huge failure despite the efforts of the Austrian Presidency .
The fact that everything has been postponed until the German Presidency has been compounded by a negative overall result marked by the controversy about how to finance the Union , which could lead to a reduction of 10 % in agricultural spending and 25 % in the Structural Funds .
We should not be afraid to seize the bull by the horns , even if it is financing enlargement or correcting the unfair contributions by some of the richer of the Member States to the European Union budget .
But it would politically inexplicable if these two problems were to be resolved at the cost of funds aimed at the poorest countries and regions among the current 15 Member States of the European Union , turning Article 2 of the Maastricht Treaty on economic and social cohesion into a dead letter .
On this score , the memorandum on financing presented by the presidency is a disgrace to whoever drafted it and is politically irresponsible .
I say this because , when presenting it , the presidency knew full well that it could not possibly be used as a basis for credible work , it is so unfair and short-sighted .
Therefore I can only conclude that it did so for tactical reasons with the aim of obliging the cohesion states to lower their expectations in relation to Agenda 2000 .
In other words between a disgrace and a cataclysm obviously the former option would be the lesser of two evils .
I have a nagging doubt about whether or not this position was taken in cahoots with the next Council presidency !
If it was then we are facing a serious crisis in the history of the European Union - curiously at a time when 11 out of the 15 prime ministers are socialists .
They are all aware of the complex negotiations behind Agenda 2000 and the difficulties faced by the Council in finding fair and reasonable solutions .
But that is why the various governments that make up the Council were elected .
We respect the work done by the Austrian Presidency , although we disagree with some of the options taken and we wish the German Presidency - due to take up its functions in a fortnight 's time - more success .
Mr President , sadly we cannot say that the Vienna summit was a success .
Worse still , it was actually a failure .
It was a flop , although I do not think that was the fault of the Austrian Presidency .
I honestly believe that Mrs Ferrero , Mr Schüssel and Mr Klima too did their best .
But one way and another , things were managed away from the summit in a way which offered no chance of a better outcome .
To my mind , it beggars belief that the European summit of Heads of Government should concern itself with tax-free shops and VAT on the services of hairdressers and shoemakers .
Not that these are not useful matters , but they can be dealt with in the specialist Councils by the specialist ministers concerned .
And all this at a time when fighting is breaking out across our borders in Kosovo , when the situation in the Middle East is extremely tense , when the financial and economic crisis in Asia and South America is spilling over into Russia , when unemployment remains high .
And here are Europe 's Heads of Government worrying about tax-free shops and VAT on haircuts .
More seriously still , the Vienna summit was a trial run for the debate on the future financing of the Union .
There was a dreadful row over this , as regards the contributions .
It means in fact that the whole question of contributions will increasingly block one of the most important projects of the European Union , the accession of new countries .
I find that somewhat amazing .
I think it would be helpful , for example , if the Commission would designate some people of high standing to try to solve the whole problem of the Union 's finances and come up with an objective and honest proposal on it .
That would stop this issue from dominating the agenda for months to come .
Mr President , for the first time we had a summit of eleven Social Democrat Heads of Government , but looking at the outcome I have to say in all honesty that it did not distinguish itself by sound management and wise decisions .
We really must hope that things are better in the future , and that the spirit of Jacques Delors and Helmut Kohl will light upon these Heads of Government again , otherwise we shall be heading for a fine catastrophe in future .
Mr President , although the Vienna summit produced meagre results , the question of the Nordic dimension is one of the most prominent .
The Commission 's document on the Nordic dimension , which was officially presented at Vienna , is excellent .
It covers many areas of policy , from future nuclear and environmental policy to cooperation with our EU neighbours .
The document sets forth clear operational proposals for the development of different forms of collaboration .
The stabilising effect of the Nordic dimension cannot be underestimated .
The economic and political crisis in Russia has underlined the need for the Union to take action to dampen down its effects .
The culmination of the Russian crisis will have repercussions for issues such as nuclear safety and Union enlargement , especially regarding the Baltic countries .
It is vital that the operational proposals put forward by the Commission are realised .
Cooperation among the countries that share the Baltic coastline must be improved .
Urgent measures have to be taken to prevent marine pollution .
Better exploitation of the vast energy resources in north-western Russia , and , on a wider basis , in the Barents Sea , has to be made one of the main objectives of the Nordic dimension .
I have been particularly concerned about nuclear safety in Russia amid the social turmoil there .
Let us hope the Commission will implement its proposed research projects concerning nuclear safety and the treatment of spent nuclear fuel as quickly as possible , so that we can gain a clear picture of the real state of affairs and problems can be solved as soon as possible .
The debate is closed .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Human rights in the world
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0409 / 98 by Mr Roubatis , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on ' The European Union and the external dimension of human rights policy : from Rome to Maastricht and beyond ' ( COM ( 95 ) 0567 - C4-0568 / 95 ) ; -A4-0410 / 98 by Mr Barros Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on human rights in the world in 1997 and 1998 and European Union human rights policy ; -A4-0466 / 98 by Mr Torres Couto , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the draft Council Regulation laying down the requirements for the implementation of development cooperation operations which contribute to the general objective of developing and consolidating democracy and the rule of law and to that of respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms ( 9581 / 98 - C4-0507 / 98-97 / 0191 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , with this report I wish to pay tribute to my many friends who have been lost , victims of the bestiality that has characterised a large part of recent history .
To Felipe the painter , his wife Elpis and his son Ernesto , two years old , all three of whom disappeared in Pinochet 's Chile .
To Mustafa and Akim from Van and Diyarbakir , who were murdered by the Grey Wolves in Adana .
To my schoolmate Theodoros , who was murdered during Turkey 's invasion of Cyprus .
To Sasha , the judge from Nis , who died somewhere near Split after dreadful torture , as we heard later .
To Maté , the doctor from Zagreb , who was found with a bullet in the back of his head outside Tuzla where he had been working as a volunteer because , as he said , blood is red whoever you are , and doctors should not let it flow .
And to the others from East Timor , Nigeria , Tibet , whom I did not have a chance to get to know because they were murdered .
You know , it is only when we personify barbarity that we can comprehend what the loss of a human life means .
Only when we can see the effect on specific people of any policy we decide upon will we grasp the consequences of our statements .
Only then will we understand that we cannot use empty and slick expressions to assuage our guilt when our words are not translated into deeds and we are to blame .
There is unfortunately still a large gap between words and deeds .
The European Union 's reactions to the issue of human rights vary greatly .
Likewise , the human resources and Community funding allocated to human rights activities are fragmented .
There is therefore a need for the Commission to organise the administrative and decision-making structures into a single body ; to reconsider the idea of creating a fully developed service for human rights and democracy ; to entrust a Vice-President of the Commission with the coordination of foreign relations and a Commissioner with responsibility for matters related to human rights .
To overcome one of the most important deficits in the present institutional structure , in my view an integrated appraisal and monitoring system for human rights must be created before any decision or agreement involving third countries is implemented .
Such an appraisal , which is consistent and cohesive , will form the basis for subsequent monitoring of the human rights situation .
That integrated system for the appraisal and monitoring of human rights will be governed by the fundamental principles accepted by the European Union .
Principles which must not be abandoned for reasons connected with the economic , strategic or political interests of the Union or any of its Member States .
You know , it is much easier for us to be strict with countries whose resources are limited , but if we really believe in the principles we proclaim , then multilayered interests which take into account various motives that conflict with the demands of consistency , and the deployment of tenuous strategic and other arguments , should have no place in discussions about human rights , because then our words are not translated into deeds and the words themselves become prejudicial .
I do not think we can continue behaving as we have until now , in other words with empty references to principles and values but no action .
And we cannot do that in order to assuage any guilt we may feel for our lack of action .
A consistent attitude demands that we must make it clear that there is no refuge anywhere for any tyrant , no refuge anywhere for any despot , none for any of the leaders we pretend have been democratically elected in utterly undemocratic situations .
These are harsh truths , but we would do well to face up to them .
We must add flesh and bones to what we say .
Human rights are an essential aspect and element of the European Union 's foreign policy .
It is not enough to declare good intentions .
Human rights should be at the heart of the EU 's foreign policy , and I appeal to the Council and the Commission not to see human rights in relation to other policies and to regard human rights as something quite separate and act accordingly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I present this report I should like to begin by thanking everyone who has helped to draft it , in particular my colleagues in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and , above all , members of the secretariat whose great technical skills and professionalism have made a major contribution to the heritage of democratic culture and human rights that honours the European Parliament .
This report is being debated at a particularly significant moment for human rights : we are commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration and the 10th Anniversary of the Award of the Sakharov prize .
Following the decision in the Pinochet case we can also celebrate a gigantic step against impunity , bringing an end to what might be called the ' free circulation of dictators ' .
Suharto and others watch out .
Thus we can see that the strength of democratic public opinion can prevail over the requirements of realpolitik and help to bring into action elements - albeit in their early stages - of an international human rights order currently being sketched out in the European Union , with its supranational institutions based on the principles of the rule of law and its area of freedom , security and justice .
The report , however , neither hides nor sweetens the reality .
On the most elementary human rights , such as the right to life , freedom and dignity , the Universal Declaration continues largely to be a dead letter .
I thought it both important and instructive , however , despite some of the pessimistic discussions that we have heard in recent days , to emphasise the positive aspects : the progress in ratifying international pacts , the creation or approval of the statute of an International Criminal Court , which , despite its limitations , opens the door to creating an international legal order , and last but not least the strength of democratic public opinion , of a universal opinion going beyond national frontiers and capable of defending and often imposing the fundamental principles that we fight for here .
It is this movement that should give us all hope and it is this movement that is alive and well here , as we celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration .
Now that the Cold War has come to an end , it is high time to dissociate the fight for human rights from ideological conflict and apply human rights effectively in their universality , interdependence and indivisibility .
There are no ideological or geopolitical prejudices that can legitimise different standards in terms of human rights .
We cannot have different rules for different people as we did during the Cold War when we excused Salazar , Franco , Mobutu and Suharto for the sake of anti-Soviet discipline .
On the other hand , it is not admissible to weigh up individual rights against the rights of the people , or to weigh up civil and political rights against economic , social and cultural rights , just as it is impossible to differentiate between substantive , economic and social democracy and so-called ' formal democracy ' .
As we said a long time ago , along with Gorbachev , human rights are an end in themselves .
The report that I am presenting you on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs deals with some of the classical themes of human rights : the death penalty , the rights of children , the white slave trade , refugees .
But , with the support of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I wanted my report to go a little further and not just to place responsibility on governments and states , but also to take into consideration the consequences of the globalised economy and finances and the effectiveness of human rights democracy .
Although I myself think that this globalisation in itself is a positive development , the situation is not risk-free .
It calls for the creation of supranational mechanisms able to exercise political regulation while preserving democracy and upholding human rights , substantially and fundamentally .
The report proposes that European politics should be shored up by human rights .
But it does not propose the export of a eurocentric political order .
Instead it proposes that the European Union should be seen as a civilian power which , at international level , promotes the values of solidarity and justice but does not set out to impose an order . Its aim is to preserve its own European model of democracy and human rights and fight trends towards a levelling down , while not imposing any form of protectionism .
This , however , requires the European Union - as the report says - to be able to be coherent between its external policy on human rights and the need to make sure at the same time that , within the European Union itself , it respects the rights of people settling within the European Union from third countries .
I believe the European Union has the means and the instruments to act .
But we also need political will .
I therefore call on the Commission to respond to the practical proposals set out in this report .
I should also like to say that I am going to table an oral amendment of my own , calling for an international effort proposed by our President for a so-called ' Millennium amnesty ' so that , in this way we can celebrate the values we fight for here in the promotion of human rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing the future rules for implementing European Union operations which , as part of its policy on development cooperation , contribute to the general objective of development and the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law along with human rights , fundamental freedoms and the proper management of public affairs .
By approving this regulation , the Commission will be setting the conditions for granting , mobilising and implementing aid as well as those for sustaining the actions needed to give more visibility to the effects of this aid on democracy and human rights .
In the future , full satisfaction will be given to the European Parliament 's concern - which it has successfully defended - that , in the cooperation relations that it maintains with all developing countries , the European Union will have to attach greater importance to the promotion of human rights and democratic values in those countries .
I would even go so far as to say that the promotion of human rights , democratic values , the rule of law , good governance and the fight against corruption should become essential elements of any future agreement .
When we look at the African continent and see that there are open conflicts still taking place in sixteen countries , costing thousands of victims every day and wasting on military equipment the resources that should be spent on health , education and water supplies for its people , and when we know that 1.3 billion people in the developing countries have a purchasing power of one dollar per day , we cannot continue to dither in a way that has prevented cooperation aid from pursuing noble objectives and causes that would have easily identifiable results in relieving extreme poverty among those populations .
In countries subject for decades to brutal dictatorships , so often supported and even nourished by European states , and in others subjected to long and bloody armed conflicts , the European Union cannot be satisfied with free elections as a sufficient and lasting means of transition towards democracy .
Elections must be followed up by the necessary constitutional and legislative reforms to promote the strengthening of the rule of law and , in particular , to provide support for the independence and strengthening of the judiciary and for a penitentiary system that respects human beings , and to foster pluralism both in terms of politics and the civil society , by strengthening the institutions needed for ensuring pluralism in society , including non-governmental organisations ; this should also be accompanied by the promotion of independent , pluralist and responsible media and support for the freedom of the press , as well as respect for the rights of freedom of association and the promotion of equal opportunities and non-discriminatory practices , including measures to fight racism , xenophobia and sexism , and supporting initiatives for abolishing the death penalty .
Unless all of these transformations are carried out the dictators and those in power in countries with single party regimes will be limited to a democratic baptism without any real change in the basic political practices , and without ensuring rules of democratic alternation , which requires support for consolidating democratic political parties .
Without the existence of parliaments with effective powers of taxation , without the existence of courts and an independent judicial system , without free press and media , it will be always impossible to consolidate democracy , the rule of law , respect for fundamental rights , public freedoms and proper management of public affairs , all preconditions for economic growth and combating poverty .
But in addition to all of these problems , I would draw particular attention to the fight against corruption and good governance as essential elements that all cooperation and development agreements with third countries should contain .
The latest report by the World Bank , ' Assessing Aid ' , is clear on this score : aid can be extremely positive and effective in the promotion of growth and the reduction of poverty as long as it is applied in a healthy economic environment .
Rigorous economic management is more important for developing countries than international financial aid , which can only have positive impacts in countries which have already carried out the necessary political and institutional reforms .
I think a case in point is that of Mozambique , an example which should be borne in mind , promoted and rewarded .
Aid is useful when it goes into the hands of those who know how to use it .
If on the other hand it goes into the hands of all of the Mobutus and Mugabes of this world then only the tax-havens where so much money laundering takes place will benefit , along with certain western politicians and financiers who support them , because - let us not forget - there is only passive corruption in the developing countries and the actively corrupt all live in the rich countries .
If genocide took place in Rwanda or war is still raging in Angola it is only thanks to certain European countries and their leaders .
At this moment in time , defenceless children and adults are dying in the central Angolan highlands because , in Antwerp , there are people still buying diamonds with complete impunity , scorning the sanctions imposed by the European Union and the rest of the international community .
Unfortunately , cases where interests take precedence over duties are innumerable , and they all contribute to the worsening of the misery in which millions of human beings live .
We are forever hearing news of dictators with personal fortunes equal to or greater than the foreign debts of their countries .
There are plenty of examples of countries such as Tanzania into which two billion dollars were channelled to build roads , and yet the communication networks do not function because of the lack of maintenance .
Donors should , in the future , sell good ideas and not bad projects .
We cannot continue to let these wrongdoers benefit .
On the other hand , there are countries that make huge sacrifices and have managed to implement stable macroeconomic policies , opening up trade , strengthening laws and rights and fighting corruption , and they should be rewarded by strengthening cooperation and totally writing off their foreign debt .
To paraphrase Martin Wolf , I would like to say that we should first of all help those who help themselves .
Mr President , events have proved that Parliament was fully justified in its desire to create a solid legal basis for cooperation in the field of democracy and human rights in the European Union .
For our part , we have sought , throughout the parliamentary debate , to improve the European Commission 's text .
Firstly , the foundations have been laid for determining the correct procedures and for establishing an overall plan for European cooperation . This will enable actions to be coherently programmed , strategies and priorities to be determined , and an agreement to be reached on how best to detect and select the specific actions needed to optimise the impact , sustainability and visibility of the resources earmarked to this end .
Another fundamental objective is to ensure that coordinating instruments exist at all levels , in particular as regards cooperation with the Member States of the Union .
In my opinion , special mention must be made of the proposals on the Commission 's responsibilities , the procedures to be followed for adopting and monitoring projects , the intervention of the planned consultative committee and , above all , the European Parliament 's role in the development of these programmes .
Monitoring , evaluation , control and post information systems have been substantially modified both from a political and an administrative point of view . This will undoubtedly heighten the impact of the actions , enable any problems to be remedied and improve their future implementation .
In this particular respect , the role of the European Parliament has been modified as it was evidently insufficient in the initial draft of the proposal .
I would just like to mention the annual report , which will contain details of the implementation of the programmes in the previous financial year and the planning and selection of the programmes for the current financial year , and the Commission will have to submit this to the European Parliament . It must be submitted in good time to enable Parliament to hold an annual debate in the House during the first half of the year and before it considers the corresponding budgetary section as part of the general debate on the annual budgets .
I shall end by saying that I think it is vital for this regulation 's approval to be accompanied by actions that will give its content real meaning . I shall just mention the two that I consider most important .
The first is the need to review the structure of the Commission in order to better coordinate the units involved in cooperation , in line with the proposal for a horizontal coordinated structure , which has been referred to in previous parliamentary resolutions . The second is the urgent need to increase human resources , which are currently unable to cope with the ambitious programme that , with the implementation of the regulation , has to be developed in terms of cooperation in democracy and human rights .
Mr President , respect for human rights and basic rights and the consolidation of the rule of law are key principles of the EU .
Mr Torres Couto 's report concerns a regulation that confirms the position for a legal basis for these principles in developing countries .
I wish to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
The Committee on Budgets drafted an opinion on this matter , which mainly concentrated on funding procedures .
Firstly , with regard to how long the programme should last , the committee suggested there should be no time limit .
This has been approved in the report .
So has the committee 's view that appropriations should be decided on an annual basis in association with Parliament 's budget debate .
The Committee on Budgets was also concerned about what is clearly differentiation in technical support .
For that reason the Committee wanted an addendum to Article 3 which called for differentiation in the relevant funding in the budget .
Similarly the committee has asked the Commission to put forward a proposal as to whether we should use part A or B of the budget .
Perhaps one of the most important organisational changes to have taken place in the Committee on Budgets is the importance given to the interinstitutional working party .
In connection with this year 's budget an advisory working party is to be set up to focus on human rights , and the Council and Parliament have sanctioned it for next year .
Its purpose is to coordinate activities each year , and regulations on this are included in the report .
Such working parties enjoy a good reputation , for example in the MEDA Programme , and this working party would be handled in the same way as committees made up of Member States .
It is vital that this report should be approved so that a legal basis may be established for the appropriations concerned .
That is why strong representations must be made to the Council for this regulation to come into force as soon as is possible , and no later than March , so that appropriations can start to be used .
Mr President , I fully endorse the reports by Mr Roubatis , Mr Barros Moura and Mr Torres Couto .

I shall not go into them in detail , since the Commissioner knows very well what he has to do .
These are good opinions .
I also wished to express my appreciation of the work which Mrs Lenz has done in recent years in this House .
Perhaps we shall have an opportunity to do that before the end of this parliamentary term , but her contribution should not go unacknowledged .
Our thanks too to the officials who give you such good support .
I have just one or two points to make .
Who could have thought , 50 years ago , that a recommendation to the UN General Assembly would be so important ?
It is a recommendation which contains some Utopian ideas and some paradoxes .
It is still a delicate flower , but some notice is being taken of it .
However , the ' never again ' of genocide is not yet a reality .
Think of Bosnia , Rwanda , Kosovo and what Mr Torres Couto said just now , the things going on in Angola which are not in the media spotlight .
The whole business of enforcing human rights is based on two approaches , legal and political .
I have some comments concerning the legal aspect .
The Union has given a great deal of support towards achieving this outside the Union .
But I think that progress in this respect is somewhat under threat , because there are too many human rights .
For every ill , there is now a human right .
The right to holidays , the right to sleep - I think it has all gone rather too far .
With any luck , there will be the right to immortality too , and we know for a fact that we cannot have that .
So I would advocate setting limits , so that the traditional human rights , those concerning the individual , are not devalued .
There is a risk that this may happen , and it is dangerous .
I want to guard against that .
Then there is the political aspect .
There is a High Commissioner , a Security Council which dithers and , in the case of Rwanda , decides too late .
It was known that genocide was going on , but no one wanted to call it by its name , with tragic consequences .
The EU vacillated in its foreign policy .
Ocalan is not brought to justice , Pinochet may be , Castro was not , and nor was Kabila .
Really , I give up .
Chinese dissidents have said : keep up the pressure from the bottom up , then the rule of law and the political aspect will be all right .
I totally agree with that , Mr President .
We must keep it up .
But the man in the street wants to see some concrete results .
On 10 December , I saw this little map in the paper showing the countries in the world which still have capital punishment .
You may not be able to see it too well , Commissioner , but there are not many parts which are coloured .
Can you see it ? The light blue bits ?
People want to see an end to it , they want no more children going to war .
But there are good things to report about the multinationals .
The Netherlands has published a book about human rights , and that is important .
I agree with what Mr Gil-Robles said in Vienna on 10 December : an amnesty for conscientious objectors .
That would be a good thing and something concrete .
Mr President , in no area is the European Union as visible and influential internationally as in external economic relations .
So there is hardly any other policy area through which it is so necessary to promote human rights and where there is so much chance of success .
We influence the human rights situation in third countries not just by supporting free elections , consolidating the rule of law and taking crisis-prevention measures .
We do it just as much and often to a far greater degree through our trade relations , imports and exports , investment , export credit guarantees and , last but not least , our agricultural policy .
Here we can and must intervene on a regulatory basis , by addressing our partners in third countries and also the operators in the European Union , such as the European multinational companies .
However , it is not enough to invoke the two human rights packages and the ILO conventions in the preambles to bi- and multilateral agreements , as in the most recent agreement with Mexico .
We are calling , for example , for annual Commission reports on the human rights situation and , where necessary , concrete sanctions .
At the same time , however , we also wish to give active support to positive trends .
The new GSP with its positive incentives clause , which rewards respect for human rights with tariff cuts , is an important step forward here .
Countries such as Colombia , which already enjoy free trade , will lose this preferential treatment if the human rights of the various generations are persistently infringed .
If freedom to join trade unions is denied , the health of workers put at risk or the habitat of the indigenous populations reduced , European companies are often enough partly to blame .
That is why we urgently need , as a first step , a binding code of conduct for the multinational companies based in the European Union .
But all these proposed measures must be applied in a coherent and transparent way .
This also means that the European Parliament must acquire a greater say , because the road does not just go from Rome via Maastricht to Amsterdam ; it leads far beyond .
Let me conclude with one further point : in many cases , non-intervention actually means brutal intervention .
Mr President , I should like to praise the good cooperation from members of all the groups on these reports , and in all the various committees .
What I do not praise , however , is the Bureau 's organisation , with us sitting up here while the Sakharov prize is being discussed downstairs .
That really was another master stroke !
Mr President , I have two minutes ' speaking time - we know a little more about human rights , which is why we cannot hold an exhaustive discussion here .
The UN declaration we are celebrating today was the outcome of a terrible war .
The Sakharov prize was an award for fighting terrible systems of bondage .
Originally human rights were only a matter for national policy , and there was no right of intervention .
Today , they are bound up indivisibly with the rule of law and democracy , with the activities of the NGOs , with civil society in its diversity and with the EU 's foreign policy .
Human rights can only enter the decisive phase of implementation if they mean more than simply very concrete measures to combat the violation of the dignity of individual human beings and become a policy instrument of free states which are guided by more than merely self-interest .
That is why we must recognise and experience them as a practical element of every domestic and foreign policy in the EU .
The debate today concerns not only the situation of human rights in recent years , but something which goes beyond that , and in particular what we expect after Amsterdam .
They must and will remain an important aspect of the European Union 's foreign policy and , precisely because they can still be used as an instrument of national policy today , our Parliament must devote attention to them .
It is not just a question of money , it is a question of the guidelines to be observed by our committees .
Let me say on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs that we approve the broad lines of the Roubatis report and firmly support its calls for strengthening and concentrating the logistic personnel potential that exists in the Commission , in the form of a single Vice-President and a single Commissioner responsible for human rights issues , and for a comprehensive analysis and annual reports to the European Parliament and , where appropriate , sanctions .
However , I have some reservations about setting up a human rights unit because - and I wish to make this clear - it could externalise these questions again , so that we in the European Parliament no longer have the powers of control we need .
We are sometimes inconsistent , but there must be no moratorium on human rights policy - as well as an end to such things as inadequate speaking time ; instead , we must create new prospects for the future .
Mrs Lenz , the Bureau implements but does not determine procedure .
Procedure is determined by the Conference of Presidents .
I would therefore ask you to address your protest to them .
Mr President , human rights are a subject very close to the European Parliament 's heart .
In the 1993 Maastricht Treaty , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is for the first time mentioned in an article , Article 2 , and not just in a preamble .
Respect for human rights is an important precondition for the achievement of democracy , development and peace .
It is easy enough just to write it down in words , and everyone endorses them .
But what is the real situation ?
It is only logical to regard women 's rights as an indivisible part of human rights ; but it will take great efforts for this to penetrate people 's minds too .
Now we must make efforts to ensure that it does so .
In some countries , fundamentalist tendencies are increasingly targeting women .
Poverty is still feminised , and not only in what is called the third world .
Women find it doubly difficult to gain access to training and to establish a livelihood , and they are seldom appointed to decision-making posts .
We are shocked to hear reports of trafficking in women , abuse of women or violence against women in general . But all of that is happening today .
It is not a story from the last century .
The Committee on Women 's Rights demands in its opinion that respect for women 's rights , as a part of human rights , should be included in trade and cooperation agreements as a criterion for external relations with non-Member countries .
We have enshrined the need to respect human rights .
But the European Union must take further steps to promote and protect the dignity and human rights of women both here and throughout the world .
Mr President , let me begin by warmly congratulating the rapporteurs on their excellent reports , though I must admit that I am more personally familiar with the Roubatis and Barros Moura reports and therefore find it easier to evaluate them .
Mr Roubatis began rather poetically , by thanking the many women and men who have fought for human rights in their countries , and he has indeed dedicated his report to them .
We have heard Portuguese speakers and a Greek speaker ; in my case , as an Austrian I know that in the dark hours of our history , when we were oppressed , it was very comforting to receive signs of solidarity from other countries in the world .
In the case of Austria , this solidarity even came from Mexico , from far away .
It is an important task for the European Parliament and the European Union as a whole to give these signs of solidarity .
It is also important to mention at least some of the women and men who are fighting for human rights , as has been done during today 's solemn anniversary , because there is one thing we should make clear : it is not a question of Europe taking action against Algeria , against Turkey , against Indonesia or some other country .
In fact , we are often looking at these countries ' long-term interests .
We may be against governments , against armed forces or against those in power , but we are for the people themselves who are fighting for freedom , for human rights , in these countries .
We should constantly make it clear that we want to help them , but not out of any feeling of hostility , not out of any negative sense of superiority as improvers of the world .
However necessary it is for us sometimes to resort to sanctions , we should after all be realistic .
What we can and should do - and the reports contain some good ideas here - is to help those who are fighting a difficult fight on the ground , at the risk of imprisonment , of sanctions and perhaps even of death .
As the Commissioner knows and as we also know , that is why it is most important that we also make adequate budgetary funds available , so that we can help those who are fighting on the ground , so that we can publicise their needs and their distress , and so that we can give them political and moral support in their fight .
We cannot conduct this fight with resolutions or with speeches .
We can only point to where the fight is actually being fought by the people themselves .
We can give them moral and political support , as well as financial support on the ground , to ensure that in the end this fight is successful .
Because a successful fight for human rights is a contribution to peace - and we all have a right to peace .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say a few words at the end of a century that has witnessed so many massacres and attempts to exterminate different peoples on the European continent .
Without preaching to anyone , and as our colleague Mr Swoboda said a few moments ago , we undoubtedly have a few things to say to the rest of the world .
Yet what point is there in us boasting , we who are the world 's largest trading power , if , as we speak , a man is suffering in the depths of a prison or perhaps a women is being killed ?
We could say a few words here on the body of doctrines that we have built for ourselves over the past 50 years , and in particular over the past 10 years . Yet what purpose would it serve if , as an industrial power and irrespective of our country of origin , we are not in fact capable of saying : ' we will no longer work with you if you do not put a stop to these massacres , if you do not stop torturing people and , as a result , you will not be able to work with even the smallest business in Europe ' ?
If we cannot say this - and it is neither interventionism nor a moral dictatorship - , then we are not what the eyes of the world perceive us to be : the hard core of democracy .
How many democracies exist in the world today ?
There are not , at any rate , many more than double the number of countries in the Union , that is , fifteen countries .
This demonstrates precisely what our duties are .
I believe that we should take heart in the fact that we have today welcomed a number of men and women who have fought for freedom , who are currently speaking in another room .
As I finish speaking , let us simply remember that such freedom is fragile and can disappear in a puff of smoke .
Mr President , Commissioner , the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is an important moment .
Of course we are talking about long-term matters here .
We have all worked for human rights , every group , every Member of Parliament , we know that .
But statements about the longer term must not , of course , close our eyes to shorter-term issues .
We should remember here the resolution adopted ten days ago and the Commissioner knows , of course , that we remain vigilant .
The Union will also need to place its human rights policy on an operational footing .
I should like to know that whenever human rights are violated this will trigger the suspension of a cooperation agreement or any normal agreement .
Efforts will be made presently to have this incorporated in a new Lomé Convention .
Something of the kind must be done for non-Lomé countries too .
Universal human rights also means universal standards and potential criticism .
During the transatlantic summit with the USA , the Union must make it clear that it expects the United States , the great champion of the universality of human rights , not to undermine that universality .
It is reasonable to expect , for example , that the USA will take part in the International Criminal Court and that the Union will voice that expectation to the American authorities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to congratulate Messrs Roubatis , Barros Moura and Torres Couto on their excellent work , but I too believe that there is little to celebrate as we mark the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
There is little to celebrate for various reasons which have already been given , but which I should like to repeat .
First of all , the principle of universality is under attack .
Over the past few years , the idea has been gaining ground that - since different traditions exist - rules cannot be considered universal because values in some countries are different from European ones , for example Asian values , Islamic values .
Obviously this concept must be rejected but , clearly , Europe must take great pains not to appear always to be rapping others over the knuckles , as a schoolmaster does to a pupil .
The notion of indivisibility is likewise under attack : an à la carte notion of human rights is coming to the fore , whereby everyone selects his own favourite human rights but does not respect - according to the context - civil and political , or economic and social rights in their totality .
What is more , I do not believe either that the concept of interdependence is winning through , by which I mean that - even in the economic arena - it is necessary to advocate strongly and to strive hard to achieve democratisation , respect for law and order and human rights ; only in a free and open society is growth possible , including on the economic front .
On the other hand , things cannot be going too well at home either , if Europe is not managing to play a leading role in all these areas ; if it is true - and it is - that the EU still has a tripartite structure for its external activities , each area having its own administrative procedures and separate executive procedures ; if it is true - and it is - that in many cases democratisation is not genuine ; if it is true - and it is - that retired dictators are made to stand trial , whereas dictators who are still at the height of their powers remain in post .


Mr President , in the space of one minute I should like to highlight certain concepts that are , to my mind , fundamental : the universal nature and interdependency of human rights , as well as two other complementary concepts , namely , the defence and promotion of these rights .
An instrument to put an end to impunity is urgently needed to defend human rights .
By placing the Chilean dictator , Augusto Pinochet , in the hands of the law , we have severely dented the protective shield behind which those guilty of genocide , dictators and autocrats have hidden for a long time .
What is more , and with regard to the interdependency and promotion of human rights , we must not forget that development and political freedom are as important as economic freedom , and the most important of all is the right to live with dignity .
The European Union must act in accordance with this concept and implement what we logically provided ourselves with : the democratic clause and constructive measures to promote all forms of human rights .
Citizens ' requests for diplomacy must receive an adequate response from the European Union .
This citizens ' diplomacy has managed to ensure , for example , that treaties banning the use of landmines were signed and that an International Criminal Court was established , which , although it is a valid response , is by no means sufficient .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every individual owes it to others to recognise their worth .
This phrase was inscribed by young democratic parties in Brandenburg in their first democratic constitution .
Why ?
These words clearly mean that human rights policy is not just to do with moral appeals , but is a matter of practical politics .
Dictatorial regimes also applaud human rights policy , but a credible human rights policy means an active policy that affects people 's real lives .
Accordingly , the European Union too is judged across the world by its everyday political actions , by the way it protects human rights on an everyday basis .
Here trade and economic policy must yield to the primacy of human rights policy .
Here , the dictators of the world must never again be able to be confident that they will not be called to account .
The European Union will also be judged by whether it turns the ' International Court of Justice ' project into an effective organisation by ratifying it and providing financial support . Here , the Member States of the European Union must have the courage to stop exporting arms to governments that trample human rights under foot , such as the exports to Indonesia and to Turkey .
It is our international duty to speak out on every case of human rights infringements .
Here , the Commission must breathe life into the human rights clause in the treaties and not keep telling us why economic interests come first .
Human rights are universal and inviolable !
Mr President , human rights have to be secured not on the moon , but on this somewhat dark earth .
This can best be done within a triangle of peace , development and democracy - three pillars which are indissolubly bound together and which determine the extent to which human rights can be guaranteed .
It is clear from the committees ' reports that the Members of this House are aware of this , but evidence of it is often hard to find in Union policy .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation also quite rightly accuses the Union of being ambivalent .
When the chips are down , commercial and strategic interests are often deemed more important than human rights .
It would be an enormous step forward if trade policy were tied in more closely with the Union 's strategy on human rights .
That policy must be enforceable , and its success will depend on how effectively agreements reached on human rights are monitored .
Naturally , we agree with the priorities set for human rights .
But we should not always be pointing an accusing finger at others . In Europe too , there are plenty of infringements and we ourselves are responsible for those .
Human rights for refugees are coming under pressure .
The pressure to toughen our policy is assuming such proportions that the way in which we treat some asylum seekers and ' illegals ' or people with no papers sometimes goes beyond the bounds of what is humane and acceptable .
The rights of minorities continue to be violated in Europe too .
Not only in Turkey , for example , but in the Macedonian part of Greece as well .
We still cannot guarantee children 's rights properly , and trafficking in human beings continues under our very noses even as we talk about combating violence against women .
There is a code of conduct about arms dealing , but it is being flouted , as you well know .
I could go on , but in concluding , I hope that when we talk about Agenda 2000 tomorrow we shall also , when it comes down to it , think about human rights as well .
Mr President , as a result of the international economic and financial crisis , child labour and child sex tourism are increasing dramatically .
I would refer to paragraph 26 of Mr Roubatis 's resolution and regard the call made there for the introduction of standard human rights clauses extremely necessary and important .
In particular , the European Union must not silently and indirectly tolerate the social and sexual abuse of children .
Compliance with human rights and in particular the protection of children against any maltreatment must be made a condition for allowing any undertaking to be eligible for receiving state aid and to take part in public tenders .
We must not allow our European markets to be flooded with products from third countries that are produced by children who are treated like slaves , and nor must we allow European tourists to abuse children with impunity in states that receive EU assistance .
Mr President , I think it is significant that the European Parliament chose to celebrate informally the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , both by awarding the Sacharov prize to Ibrahim Rugova this morning and by keeping this joint discussion sharply focused on the search for a strong political line concerning human rights issues .
I believe that the three reports under discussion are equal to the task and are , above all , a sign of increasing political will and powers within the European Union to take tangible , active steps towards promoting human rights .
I am referring in particular to the excellent report by Mr Torres Couto - whom I thank - on the draft regulation laying down the requirements for the implementation of development cooperation operations which contribute to the general objective of developing and consolidating democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
This report stresses a concept which I regard as fundamental , namely the existence of an intrinsic link between the development of human rights and democracy and development per se .
If , as we have always maintained , development must be humane , participatory and sustainable , it cannot be achieved by infringing human rights or denying democratic rights .
Consequently , it must be realised that the promotion of human rights does of course mean asserting the inalienable rights of every individual and group - social , ethnic and so on - but it is not just that : it is also a precondition for the development of every people , every community and humanity as a whole .
Therefore , the promotion of human rights is inevitably intimately connected with the furtherance of democracy , the rule of law and good governance , and the affirmation of these principles is not tantamount to interference or Eurocentrism .
The European Union and its Member States must now make coherent moves on various fronts , basically the development of international law , above all its practical implementation ; full inclusion of human rights as an aim in all instruments of international cooperation ; and the promotion of specific direct operations , as referred to in the draft regulation .
Clearly , a broad view of human rights must be taken , encompassing economic , social and cultural rights in addition to civil and political ones , and practical work must be done to foster the human and institutional conditions under which these principles may be achieved .
Allow me to conclude by saying that investment in human rights is probably the most profitable form of investment nowadays , both because so many blatant violations are occurring and because some still aspire to a world which revolves around human beings .
It is also the best possible form of life assurance .
Mr President , I should like to emphasise something that Mr Torres Couto stated in the explanatory statement to his report , namely , that Parliament and its Committee on Development and Cooperation have consistently attached the utmost importance to promoting human rights and democratic values as they are elements that form the basis of its relations with developing countries .
There is a huge number of precedents that I shall not repeat here .
However , I must mention the recent reports by Mr Rocard and Mr Martens on the new framework for our relations with ACP countries and also the report on democratisation , human rights and good governance , for which I myself am rapporteur and which will be debated in the House next month .
As is , unfortunately , all too often the case , the institutions and legislators sometimes lag behind events .
Civil society has a dynamic all of its own ; it generates expectations , hopes and problems to which we must respond .
This is a case in point .
After more than two decades of our cooperation policy being in force , we are now obliged to shift the emphasis onto different areas , to take a different approach and to give new impetus to our relations with developing countries .
We need to strengthen a more mature civil society and democratic institutions that act as a counterpoint , as well as strengthening the surveillance and control mechanisms over public activities and the fight against corruption in all of its guises . These are goals that are not only worth fighting for but which , within our committee , inspire our daily work .
Mr Torres Couto included a number of interesting proposals in his report that may help create a legal body on standards . That might enable us to move away from grand statements of principles into the field of action and tangible facts .
On the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , something which is so often abused from day to day throughout the world , I believe that this is the best way in which we can promote the defence of these rights .
Mr President , the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which has become the basis for democratic values , has celebrated its 50th anniversary .
This was an opportunity for many celebrations around the world , and an opportunity for fine words and pious hopes for the respect of human rights and the construction of a more just world .
The assessment of human rights is nonetheless a mixed bag .
This is because , 50 years later , when all is said and done , the Declaration is only truly respected in approximately 30 democratic countries , with less than 1 billion inhabitants .
In contrast , it is scorned by authoritarian regimes in 30 other countries , where close to 2 billion people live .
The Amnesty International report is confirmation of this damning picture of torture , unlawful executions and prisoners of conscience being detained in a large number of countries .
Of course , progress has been made , and fortunately so , but persecution is still commonplace .
The number of legal instruments has increased , but why has the United States , the most important world power , still not ratified the 1966 Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights ?
Why does it still have the death penalty ?
Why does the Treaty establishing the International Criminal Court , signed in Rome in July , still only have about 60 signatures ?
Why do 1.3 billion people live off less than one dollar per day ?
Why do 35 000 children die every day of illnesses that could have been prevented ?
Why do 250 million children have to work to survive ?
Why is there such violence against women ?
The list of ' whys ' could go on and on .
Are the past 50 years long enough to make us hard-hearted and to make us sink into indifference and selfishness and accept the cruelty and lack of equal opportunities in this world ?
I strongly fear that all these political and legal instruments are worthless if such injustice still lives on amongst the human beings in this world .
Mr President , fifty years after the Declaration of Human Rights , the debate we are involved in now should normally be quite unnecessary .
Mrs André-Leonard stressed that just a couple of minutes ago .
Unfortunately , however , the problem still exists and in an extreme for in most parts of the world , and that is why the two very important reports we are considering today remain topical .
At least in its debates , the European Parliament has always shown sensitivity about human rights .
Before anything else I should like to stress that our group supports both reports and shares the view that respect for human rights depends on many factors , which are not just political , social , economic or cultural .
One can therefore only applaud the view expressed by Mr Roubatis on the need to create a global system of annual programmes for human rights , which will form part of foreign policy .
That integrated system will be able to provide better protection for human rights and in that way help to prevent interests from taking precedence over moral considerations - an issue which Parliament has debated at length - and to ensure that good intentions in the realm of foreign policy do not become a substitute for positive action .
As Mr Roubatis indeed stresses , human rights are an inseparable part of the Union 's foreign policy and that must be grasped by all its bodies and at all levels .
In his turn , Mr Barros Moura very rightly lays stress on globalisation which , as he says , restricts the substantive exercise of democracy and human rights .
We must pay particular attention to that , because quite often , unfortunately even here in Parliament , the appraisal of human rights violations seems to depend on the scale of certain international political and economic interests and motives .
I would like to end by congratulating the two rapporteurs for their very appropriate remarks and for the proposals they have made , which contribute towards a substantive and positive approach to such a serious issue .
Mr President there is no doubt that the reports we are debating contain very important and interesting ideas on human rights .
It could be said that the statements made by the Commission and the European Union 's other bodies contain the same thing .
The question arises , however , of how credible those declarations are .
In my opinion , an example suffices to demonstrate the extent of the hypocrisy that exists .
On the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights , the Turkish Press is bemoaning the situation in that country .
It states that there are no rights , only violations , and torture is used extensively by the authorities .
This year 150 people were victims of murder by persons unknown , 86 were executed without trial while in custody , 118 social organisations were banned , 275 publications were confiscated , and 3 000 members of the legitimate HADEP party were arrested after the Ocalan affair ! Well !
While all this is going on , the European Council , the Commission , the Council and some of the Union 's more powerful countries are looking for ways to include Turkey in the pre-accession dialogue procedure as the twelfth candidate for accession .
Clearly , when economic and geopolitical interests are involved , human rights can wait .
Mr President , when we talk about human rights abuses around the world we have to look to ourselves and see what we are responsible for .
We have to look at how the European Union Member States fuel conflicts around the world and human rights abuses .
For example , we need a code of conduct on arms exports .
I want to mention the following : French training of security forces and death squads in Rwanda ; the sale of arms by Belgians to Rwanda ; the training of Indonesian troops by the British ; German submachine-guns used in a prison massacre in Brazil ; Hawk jets sent to the Indonesians so they can persecute the people of East Timor ; UK arms sales to places such as Turkey and Saudi Arabia ; torture weapons being sold to countries so that they can inflict human rights abuses on people around the world .
We have to look at this and ask ourselves if it is morally correct .
Can we take the moral high ground , when the European Union , in the interests of profit - and profit alone - is selling weapons and instruments around the world with which to inflict punishment and death on people We have to look to ourselves first and see what we are doing to fuel human rights abuses in the world .
Mr President , I should firstly like to congratulate the rapporteurs of these reports because they contain information and proposals that will be of great use to us . What is more , I believe that they contain practically everything we should say and do , and I say practically here and not absolutely everything as that would be going too far .
However , I would like to comment on a couple of issues .
We have to be much stricter in everything we do within and beyond the European Union , and this is something that I would like to stress in particular .
I do not wish to enter into the debate that will take place later , but there are issues where we need to be extremely vigilant , for example , women 's rights and sex tourism , which , as one speaker reminded us , are closely linked to the attitude of Europeans as well as the way in which we treat citizens from third countries . This is because , as regards this last issue in particular , they have a huge impact on our external credibility .
For example , in my country , the spectacle of immigrants flooding into Ceuta or Melilla does not help us defend human rights as vigorously and as emphatically as we have been doing .
We need to endorse the support programmes for democracy and human rights abroad .
Such programmes need our political support , which Parliament duly gives , but the Commission also needs support to enable it to act effectively and take into account exactly how much these programmes cost from both an economic and administrative point of view . This is important because we are sometimes unaware of these points , or if we are aware , we do not act accordingly .
And thirdly , I should like to insist - as has often been done here , yet I believe it to be important - on the creation of an International Criminal Court and international legitimacy . It is only through such instruments that we will be able to carry out effective operations that do not lead to new problems or to a new ideological or patrimonial feeling in relation to human rights , operations that might spread all over the world .
The Pinochet case , in my opinion , shows that it is only through this international legitimacy , which must be achieved by consensus , that we will be able to progress .
Mr President , in the suffocatingly short time allotted to me for so broad and critical a subject , I can only stress one point in the detailed and pragmatic report by Mr Roubatis .
Article 31 draws attention to the fact that universal principles concerning fundamental rights should not be sacrificed on the altar of the economic , strategic or political interests of the Union or any of its Member States .
It is precisely such priority which is given to all sorts of interests , and that is why , whilst we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the historic international declaration and agreement , we close our eyes to the flagrant and continual violations of that declaration even in our own back yard .
But our continued tolerance not only does nothing to teach respect for human rights to countries that are historically distanced from democratic models , but allows those countries to accuse us of hypocrisy and discriminatory political treatment .
The European Union can and must become a protagonist in the worldwide imposition of respect for these existentialist values . A prerequisite for this , however , is that it must cease adulterating them with other short-sighted and selfish criteria .
Mr Lambrias , I will take this opportunity to repeat a recommendation which I am always making to the political groups , namely not to allocate less than two minutes to very worthy speakers who wish to put their views to the House .
It is impossible , and I consider it an affront to the dignity of MEPs , to give them less than two minutes .
And personally , I have stated that I am not disposed to cut off speakers after one minute , because I consider that both harsh and offensive to their dignity .
Mr President , when a state puts one of its citizens to death , most of us in this House view that act as a serious violation of human rights .
We therefore welcome Bulgaria 's recent decision to abolish capital punishment .
Looking at the countries seeking membership of the EU , only Latvia , Lithuania and Turkey now retain this deeply unjust penalty in their legislation .
As President Gil-Robles said earlier today , it is of particular importance that countries wishing to join the European Union demonstrate a commitment to human rights .
Let us launch a joint appeal to those applicant countries genuinely wishing to accede to the Union , rallying them behind our shared effort to consign the death penalty to the annals of history - as an ugly , but ever paler and more distant memory .
Mr President , we are talking about human rights today , and it behoves us to consider the following facts .
The three richest people in the world have fortunes which surpass the combined GNP of the 48 poorest countries .
The past two decades of neo-liberalism have led to a spectacular increase in unfairness and inequality around the planet .
The average income in more than 70 countries is lower than it was 20 years ago .
One third of the 4.5 billion people living in developing countries have no access to drinking water .
Is this a matter of fate ?
Of course not .
UN calculations show that the basic food , water and health needs of everyone on this earth could be satisfied if a wealth tax of just 4 % were to be levied on the 225 biggest fortunes .
It would cost 13 billion dollars - the amount spent every year on perfume in the USA - to provide food and health care for the world 's most needy .
Thirty million individuals die of starvation and 800 million struggle on in a permanent state of malnutrition - not as a result of natural disasters , but because hunger is wielded as a headline-catching political weapon .
In Somalia , Liberia , Sudan , North Korea , Burma and Afghanistan , we have seen governments and local warlords use the innocent as hostages .
Climatic conditions and natural disasters play but a marginal part in mass starvation .
The truth is that human beings starve out their fellows .
Today 's human rights violations contain the seeds of tomorrow 's conflicts . UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan has said that this vicious circle of violation and conflict can and must be broken .
Fifty years on from the Universal Declaration , human rights are now firmly enshrined .
It is high time we took the next step ; so let us make the next ten decades the century of prevention .
We can no longer claim that a shortage of resources keeps us from acting .
This vicious circle of violation and conflict can and must be broken .
Human rights thrive on peace and security , on economic development and social justice . The EU is ideally placed to provide leadership in the phase of consolidation that must follow .
Mr President , today we are celebrating 50 years of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
We are also celebrating ten years of the Sakharov prize .
I should add that celebrating is a misnomer , because since 1948 human rights have been seriously violated on innumerable occasions .
And it is a good thing that the Sakharov prize today has gone to Mr Rugova , because this focuses attention on the unjust situation obtaining in Kosovo and on the people brave enough to denounce it .
The Sakharov prize does not always mean that things actually get better , as is apparent from the position of Aung San Suu Kyi , still held under house arrest in Burma .
It is also apparent from the position of Taslima Nasreen who is still under threat in Bangladesh , Leyla Zana who is still in prison in Turkey , and Salima Ghezali who still cannot return to Algeria because of the killings there .
The situation worldwide is still extremely serious .
One of the reasons why we in the European Union can do so little about it is really that decisions on human rights in the European Union still require unanimity - action on human rights , at any rate .
In this context , I have once again tabled an amendment to these reports urging the Council of Ministers to abolish that unanimity rule .
I think that might be one of the best anniversary presents we could give to the United Nations and the Sakharov prize .
Mr President , I think that after 50 years we can take stock with a critical eye .
Looking back into the past , we can say that progress has in fact been made in the world : communism has disappeared from Eastern Europe , apartheid from South Africa and dictatorships from South America .
However , if we look around us our disappointment is considerable , because we realise that human rights are still being infringed on a daily basis in a large number of countries .
Much still remains to be done , therefore , as is stated very clearly in our reports and documents .
Yet I do believe that we can take some comfort from the recent extraordinary arrest of General Pinochet , for which the initiative came from a Spanish judge and which was carried out by the UK authorities , in our European area of freedom .
This could mean that , in future , tyrants and dictators can no longer consider themselves safe as long as they remain at home .
Perhaps , from now on , justice will be able to cross borders without hindrance , unlike in the past .
This does not of course mean that the task is almost complete ; much still remains to be done .
I believe that the key to overcoming the enormous gulf between words and deeds must be for human rights , originally a solemn universal declaration , to become a political programme .
National governments , our European Union and governments around the world should incorporate respect for human rights into their political programmes .
In this way , perhaps , optimism really might develop into well-founded confidence in our future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every human life is unique and irreplaceable .
All human beings are born free , with equal dignity and equal rights .
There can be no doubt that respect for human rights and the duty to perform humanitarian deeds constitute the fundamental values of a society which naturally considers itself free , civil , democratic and just .
Every individual enjoys so-called basic rights , which guarantee the fundamental elements of life and personal development .
Apart from being fundamental , these rights are described as inviolable , in that nothing and no one may infringe or jeopardise them , in other words harm , restrict or remove them .
The European Union strives to place the protection of human rights at the heart of its policies , but still has a good deal of ground to cover .
Coordination of prevention and monitoring activities is still vital and should be implemented through an effective common foreign and security policy . This - partly through preventive diplomacy - should make it possible to avert conflicts caused by serious political crises , which lead to instability , xenophobia , genocide , ethnic cleansing , reprisals , torture , abuse of power , social tension and the infringement of fundamental human rights .
Appropriate institutional structures must be established and endowed with sufficient powers and financial resources to guarantee respect for the rights of men , women and children . I would refer in particular to the human rights of children , the protection of minors and human dignity in audiovisual and information services including the Internet , the fight against child sex tourism , the creation of a permanent international criminal tribunal and the implementation of the social clause .
Respect for human rights must , however , begin here at home .
Mr President , I wish to express my congratulations to the three rapporteurs whose reports are before us today and to say that we should not be too pessimistic that so much remains to be done fifty years after the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Despite the fact that huge violations of human rights have continued to occur , there are now accepted world standards of human rights , infringement of which is internationally condemned .
While it is tragic that discrimination , imprisonment , ill-treatment , torture , injury and death in flagrant contempt of fundamental human rights still occur , such acts are now widely regarded as criminal and many tyrannical regimes have in fact fallen .
The proceedings against individuals for their actions in the former Yugoslavia and against General Pinochet of Chile demonstrate that accountability for human rights violations is now seen as transcending national frontiers .
The Universal Declaration states that the rights to an adequate standard of life , housing , medical care , social security , education and employment are also human rights .
A recent development report of the United Nations detailed the prevalence of world poverty and stated that 358 billionaires owned capital equivalent to the annual income of nearly half the world 's population .
This illustrates how great the challenge still is to us if we are to achieve basic human rights for the world 's poor and deprived .
Despite all the shortcomings , the European Union and Parliament have made a most valuable contribution to the promotion of human rights .
The consideration of these , engendered by human rights clauses in agreements , reports , urgency motions and other means in countries across the world is of great importance and , as I well know , is welcomed by democrats in those countries .
In supporting the reports before us now , I hope that we shall all pledge ourselves to continue and further enhance our work on human rights , which is in the interests of all humanity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by echoing the many words of appreciation which have been addressed to the three rapporteurs for their very thorough reports .
I think we all agree that the drafting of a report of this kind is an extremely complicated affair , because we are talking about a subject which is virtually limitless .
That is the very nature of the human rights issue .
It has very many facets , and discussion of it has to be very broadly based when we are trying to find and shape a policy which we can constantly adjust to take account of results .
The Commission too thinks that this dialogue , which is in effect a continuation of the discussion we had with Parliament at the last part-session in Strasbourg , is a very timely one , certainly coming as it does immediately after the commemoration of 50 years of the Universal Declaration and on the same day that the Sakharov prize was awarded in a ceremony this morning to Ibrahim Rugova , a man who must try to lead his people towards apeaceful political solution and a better future .
That is no mean task , and the Commission is very pleased that Parliament has awarded the prize to this man .
Last week in Austria , in Vienna , your President Mr Gil-Robles delivered an impressive speech and you are familiar with what he said .
May I in any event take this opportunity of endorsing , on behalf of the Commission too , his call on that occasion for prisoners of conscience , political prisoners , to be set free before the millennium .
I think that was a particularly appropriate call , certainly a fitting one at present as we move towards the new millennium and thus round off a period in which the efforts made by Parliament to secure the release of these people certainly entitle the House to make a call of this kind .
And it is against this rather broader backdrop that I wish to consider the proposals in the European Parliament 's four reports .

We are now going to look at those of Mr Roubatis , Mr Barros Moura and Mr Torres Couto and afterwards the report by Mrs Schaffner , but we regard these reports as a single whole , each one highlighting different facets of human rights policy .
A few comments first , if I may , on the two reports on the strategic aspects of human rights , then on Mr Torres Couto 's report on instruments for that strategy and after that , as I said , we shall look at Mrs Schaffner 's report .
The Commission is very happy with most of the recommendations and shared ideas expressed in the first two reports .
To start with , I agree with Mr Barros Moura that the European Union has made the greatest progress on human rights when there was consensus between Parliament and the other institutions .
Thanks to Parliament , the Council , the Commission and the Court of Justice all pulling together , it was possible to formulate and implement a pro-active policy on human rights and fundamental freedoms .
And I willingly stress and acknowledge that Parliament has played a pioneering role here by constantly denouncing gross violations of human rights .
Hardly one part-session of Parliament goes by at which the subject of human rights is not raised on one agenda or other , either in the plenary or in one of the committees .
Thanks to initiatives taken by the institutions , the Union 's human rights policy has taken on a more profound dimension over the years .
Human rights are now a priority objective in our external relations and our development cooperation .
And most importantly , without doubt , they are also a prime precondition for Union membership , so human rights play their part in the enlargement process too .
I have , moreover , heard one or two honourable Members say that ideally our agreements with third countries ought to include a human rights clause .
You will doubtless be aware that for a number of years now , every new agreement concluded with a third country has indeed included a clause of this kind .
The Union 's partners in carrying out all these initiatives are of course above all the Member States themselves , which bear prime responsibility for the upholding of human rights .
Other partners include the international organisations .
I am thinking of the Council of Europe , with which we are working more and more closely in this field .
I am also thinking of the OSCE and the United Nations .
The Union supports the International Criminal Court and the special tribunals on the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda .
The Union has helped to ensure the active participation of developing countries and non-governmental organisations in the diplomatic conference which led to the establishment of the International Criminal Court .
A very important and parallel area of the Union 's human rights activities is the giving of aid to non-governmental organisations which seek to uphold human rights in third countries and also provide practical assistance to the victims of human rights violations .
These victims naturally include minorities , children , and women .
Violation of their rights in many instances leads to violent conflict , as witness the tragic events we are now seeing in Kosovo .
Concerning the proposals made in the Barros Moura and Roubatis reports , which are specifically addressed to the Commission , I would comment as follows .
In line with the rapporteur 's suggestion , the Commission has promised in its 1999 programme to provide the Council and Parliament with a communication on a general strategy for human rights and democratisation .
That strategy will obviously have to dovetail with the proposed approach in the draft regulations for our human rights programmes which , as you know , are currently under discussion .
The Commission will also be giving the Council and Parliament a review of the use made of Chapter B7 , Article 70 of the budget , better known as the European initiative for democracy and the protection of human rights , together with a review of activities in the period 1996-1998 .
This review will be compiled in accordance with the guidelines adopted in the report by your Vice-President Mr Imbeni .
The Commission is also being asked to prepare a general Union report on human rights worldwide .
The possibility of a report of this kind is allowed for in the Vienna declaration and will be studied by the Commission .
I should like to take this opportunity , Mr President , of saying that care must be taken to ensure that the facts of human rights situations are of course constantly updated .
So constant follow-up work is needed .
On this too we are ready to debate with Parliament at any time , on any country .
We already do this in fact in the plenary and the urgent debates , and in our replies to your written and oral questions .
And we must also bear in mind that there are other sources of information which already include data of this kind .
So we will also endeavour , given our limited human and financial resources , to avoid any duplication of work here .
I am thinking of the wealth of material available here in reports of Amnesty International , for example , or Human Rights Watch .
And we know that the US Administration publishes an annual human rights report covering virtually the whole world , but of course they have the huge resources to do that .
We are also asked to prepare a review of measures in support of democracy .
We shall do that as well .
In addition to providing a general report on actions taken to promote human rights in the period 1996-1998 , the document will include details of Union activities concerned with the monitoring of elections , and of course other aspects of human rights policy as well .
Then there are the suggestions which the reports make concerning logistics and management .
I refer here to Mr Roubatis 's report , and I already made a number of comments about this at last month 's part-session .
I said then which measures had been taken to ensure sound management or secure better management .
I thought I also said that Mr Santer , the President of the Commission , intended to draw up an account next year of how the Commission would be organised from the year 2000 onwards with regard to external relations .
Then , as now , it was suggested that a proposal should be made to appoint a vice-president with responsibility for external policy .
I can well imagine , and Mr Roubatis 's report suggests this too , that there might also be a separate Commissioner horizontally responsible for human rights .
As Mr Roubatis will be aware , this is already the case , since the Commission President is the Commissioner with responsibility for human rights , and your humble servant here is responsible for day-to-day implementation , although I admit that , with our present internal structure , horizontal coordination is not always easy .
The next Commission will certainly need to try to improve matters there .
Last month , I also pointed to the need for the relevant 1999 budget lines to have a budgetary remark which would enable the Commission to draw on outside assistance in carrying out its programmes .
It looks as if that will be done for 1999 , but I think provision should be made for this too in the legal base , that is to say in the draft regulations currently being processed .

That brings me to Mr Torres Couto 's report and the proposed amendments to the proposal for a regulation based on Article 130b , perhaps starting with the question of this outside assistance which is dealt with in Amendment No 16 to Article 3 .
The Commission believes that the proposed ceiling on expenditure to be set annually should refer solely to the activities listed in Article 3 ( 4 ) , with the understanding that this includes an explicit reference to assistance to the Commission in administering its programmes , as well as to the Commission and beneficiaries together .
The Commission is happy to accept many of the other proposals , but cannot of course agree to amendments which challenge the powers of the various institutions , and here of course I am talking of existing powers .
The Commission is happy with the amendments which are consistent with the original proposal , for example concerning the creation of an advisory committee , the removal of the time limit on the regulation 's applicability and the deletion of the financial reference amount .
The Commission notes Parliament 's wish to be briefed on the committee 's work but as far as following up on this amendment is concerned , we would refer to the institutional practice adopted in other cases .
That consists of oral briefings to Parliament , since the Commission is cautious about making that committee 's discussions public because this would jeopardise the confidentiality of project selection .
The Commission is not opposed to the amendments relating to the programming or annual assessment of measures and relaxing the criterion of experience for potential beneficiaries , but would like to have a number of points clarified .
The reference to an interinstitutional working party , something we have previously discussed , is problematic .
If these proposals were acted upon , it would mean an infringement of the powers of management and implementation and could lead to a breach of the regulation or to it being impossible to apply .
This working party , which is also mentioned in the Barros Moura report , cannot be a new interinstitutional structure charged with investigating the Commission 's activities in identifying projects either before or after the event .
What I am more than willing to do , and we have made this offer before , is to hold a debate with Parliament or its committees twice a year on human rights policy , the topics , the approach and the situations in different countries in a more general way .
I also talked at an earlier stage with the chairman of the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs about an informal structure .
I think it was Mrs Lenz to whom I spoke , and the offer I made just now was made on that occasion too .
Lastly , I should say as regards the three reports that interinstitutional cooperation and dialogue has enabled the Commission over the past year to develop its policy for promoting and protecting human rights further .
It is a long-term undertaking which demands a solid legal , administrative and budgetary foundation .
I think the Vienna declaration gave us a number of guidelines here , but your suggestions too are a valuable contribution . And we must take account of the expectations of Europe 's citizens .
Dialogue and institutional cooperation are necessary if we really want results .
The Commission is hopeful of the European Parliament 's support in framing a Union policy on human rights .
We maintain , and we shall work to ensure , that human rights are central both to the internal policy and the foreign policy of the Union .
To that end , we look forward with pleasure to an ongoing and close dialogue with the European Parliament on policy for the protection of human rights .
Mr van den Broek has tried really hard to answer the points raised by many speakers and in three reports , and we must recognise that .
I cannot in all honesty complain because he spoke for some considerable time .
The joint debate is closed .
The votes will be taken tomorrow , at 9.30 a.m.
Human rights in the Union
The next item is the report ( A4-0468 / 98 ) by Mrs Schaffner , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on respect for human rights in the European Union ( 1997 ) .
Mr President , at the end of 1998 , the free world is celebrating the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in splendour .
Although in almost all countries around the world the concept of human rights has been written into constitutions , international treaties or political discourse , the day-to-day reality proves that such virtuous proclamations are far from the facts .
Parliament never fails to point out such shortfalls , sometimes displaying certain heavy and recurrent leanings , but also some worrying short-sightedness .
Could this be seen as a lack of objectivity for the sake of political correctness ?
Our credibility is at stake here .
In the same way , if Parliament does not want to fall into the trap of appearing to be a mere preacher , then the Member States of the Union have a duty to be beyond reproach and we cannot turn a blind eye to the failings we see there .
But in this report , it is our duty to highlight the progress that has been made in certain countries .
We were keen to criticise so we must also acknowledge their efforts .
Did we have anything to do with it ?
I do not know whether we did or not .
I simply welcome the result .
We cannot fail to be pleased that the draft Treaty of Amsterdam has now added greater weight to respect for human rights as the ethical and political basis of all action taken by the Union , both at home and abroad .
This European approach to human rights should lead to progress in a number of areas .
The first of these rights is the right to life .
All Member States of the Union have abolished the death penalty and we must welcome this .
But this right also involves the right not to be subjected to inhumane treatment , the right to have access to care and the right to a dignified death .
The problem of euthanasia is more than a social debate .
We cannot contemplate authorising active euthanasia without considering all the possible problems . However , we must allow people to end their days with dignity and peace , through the establishment of palliative care units , through the latest methods for relieving suffering and without medical treatment .
The right to life also leads to the right to security and therefore to the condemnation of terrorism .
The Member States must collaborate closely in this field , but this unending struggle must go hand-in-hand with respect for the rule of law .
Whether it be for terrorism or crime in general , respect for the rule of law involves the presumption of innocence , the right to a fair and just trial , respect for the rights of the defendant and , if a prison sentence is handed down , respect for the rights of the prisoner .
In this area , a number of Member States are far from having a spotless record , be it in the field of pre-trial detention , the length of trials or the accusatory procedure , or the detention conditions in overcrowded prisons .
This last point will also be discussed later by my colleague , Mr Pradier .
Privacy , and freedom of expression , of religion and of conscience must be scrupulously respected and protected , as these are fragile values and the balance of power among them is often very delicate .
Although there may still be a few problems , we must applaud the fact that Greece has adopted a law recognising the right to conscientious objection .
As regards economic and social rights , there is one success and one regret to note .
The success comes from the United Kingdom signing the 1989 Charter on Fundamental Social Rights .
The regret is that the Council has not adopted the programme of measures to combat poverty .
Despite the fact that the Member States agreed to include provisions for combating all forms of discrimination in the draft Treaty of Amsterdam , the reality of the situation is that we still see a number of distortions occurring between the principles and the facts , for example , in terms of women 's rights , the rights of the child , protecting the family , as well as in the fight against racism and xenophobia .
Such violations of essential rights are even more intolerable when carried out by state or local authority personnel : administrative agents , teachers , police force representatives , legal or prison staff and sometimes even social workers .
That is why there is a call for training programmes .
In this report and in some amendments that have been tabled , there are a few sticking points on asylum and immigration problems .
For my part , I would like everyone to avoid extreme , not to mention provocative , views .
I think , in particular , that the proposal to give immigrants the right to vote in local elections is premature , even for those with legal status or who have lived in a Member State for more than five years .
Although it is true that this decision could help integration , we must also be aware of the danger of provoking clearer demonstrations of racism and xenophobia against these foreigners .
I am now convinced that this subject must be addressed by each Member State , at its own pace and depending on the political situation and on the influence of extremist parties .
If Parliament approves our annual report by a wide majority , if it avoids both the hazards of some past reports and a rather cautious vision of the universal nature of human rights , then it will be able to hold its head high .
Mr President , the report we are discussing today is of extreme symbolic importance .
The specific context of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights will refresh the memories of our fellow citizens and political leaders on the content of this Declaration , which our Member States are committed to respecting .
In the light of its 30 articles , we can assess the list drawn up today by Mrs Schaffner , with the balance between civil and political rights on the one hand , and economic , social and cultural rights on the other .
Like the Universal Declaration , a large part of the Schaffner report is given over to the latter : it states that poverty and exclusion have no place in wealthy and democratic societies and calls on the European institutions to rectify such anomalies .
Nonetheless , the report does not give us reason to believe that all is well as regards so-called fundamental rights .
This phrasing is unsatisfactory as there is no hierarchy in terms of human rights .
Due to a lack of time , I will only give one example , but a highly significant one , which is also taken from the Amnesty International report . It involves police brutality , serious cruelty and degrading treatment inflicted by members of the public police forces , during arrests or detention in custody , which , more often than not , are inflicted upon foreigners or people of a different skin colour .
However , I should first like to point out that there should be no generalisations .
The mistakes of a small minority must not cast suspicion on law and order forces as a whole , who do an increasingly difficult job .
In France , some police trade union members are also alarmed by the growing number of incidences of brutal and undemocratic conduct , conduct that tramples both laws and the Declaration of Human Rights underfoot , even though it is displayed in all French police stations .
It is therefore vital for every country to show its unequivocal rejection of all cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment .
Those who have not yet ratified the UN Convention against Torture must do so and must recognise the powers of the Committee against Torture while ensuring that all abuse is punished effectively , which is rarely the case at present .
It must also be said that such actions , which bring shame upon the police forces of democratic countries , are encouraged , supported and pardoned by the totalitarian and racist ideologies held by movements of the extreme right .
It is not by chance that certain French police stations display Le Pen 's photo rather than the Declaration of Human Rights .
In a recent interview , Mr Le Pen stubbornly refused to acknowledge any form of obligation to the Declaration of Human Rights of 1789 , even though it is included in the preamble to the French constitution . This gives us an insight into the regime he dreams of imposing .
The discourse of the extreme right , which is widely disseminated by the press , promotes discrimination , exclusion , intolerance and a fundamentalist moral order that encourages racism and anti-Semitism .
This can naturally only lead to violence and the reintroduction of the brutal use of force .
However , due to the right to freedom of expression , democratic societies experience problems in opposing it , and in this respect it is interesting to follow Belgium 's current attempts along these lines .
Such is the freedom of expression .
But this is at least one human right fiercely claimed by extreme right-wing parties .
Using our principles , they demand the same advantages that , on the basis of their principles , they would refuse us , preferring to ignore the limits included in the various declarations , limits that represent legal measures , the rights of others and the general interest .
To conclude , I should like to explain the position of the Socialist Group on the amendments tabled in the House .
I believe it is essential that this report be voted through .
It would be a disgrace if , only a few days after 10 December , we could not agree on this .
Mrs Schaffner 's report , in its current state , seems to me to be entirely positive and balanced .
It is probably not what we would have done , but what does that matter ?
This type of text should not come from one group , from one political persuasion , but should be a strong message , addressed to the Member States so that they become aware of an unsatisfactory situation and pay more attention to making the major principles they have adopted a reality .
This message will be even more effective if the report is voted through with a wide majority , which is possible if each group is willing to take the other groups ' reservations into account .
For our part , we will reject many amendments that we do basically agree with but that would make it difficult to adopt the final text .
I hope I can count on a similar effort from the other groups so that , tomorrow , we can send a very clear message to the Council , to the Commission and to the Member States , a message that reflects the symbolic anniversary we celebrated last week .
Mr President , I am going to speak on behalf of my friend and colleague Laura de Esteban who has had to leave .
I should firstly like to congratulate Mrs Schaffner as rapporteur for this report .
Once again , we are dealing with an annual report on respect for human rights in the European Union , which , in its original version , contains an excellent and well structured explanatory statement with reliable data from the European institutions , and which focuses on the legal and real aspects of the respect for human rights in the Union .
The motion for a resolution is also consistent with the explanatory statement and contains 62 paragraphs whose legal basis is the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights , a fundamental guide for the respect of human rights in the Union , as established in our Treaty .
However , the final report , following the vote in committee , has distorted part of its structure and coherence . This is because , as in previous years , it responds to the introduction of amendments that include other aspects that are not related to the traditional concept of fundamental rights , and these amendments are probably a response to political motivations that are different from those that should govern the objectives of this document .
Our duty as Members of this House is to ensure that European Parliament resolutions rigorously respect ideological impartiality and the law in its broadest sense .
And this is all the more important this year since the adoption of this report coincides with the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights .
Those of us in the Group of the European People 's Party would like to reaffirm our tradition of being at the forefront in defending human rights .
We should like to reiterate our absolute respect for the dignity and value of human beings and equal rights for men and women , as well as reasserting that all human rights are universal , indivisible and independent .
That is why we shall be voting in favour of those paragraphs in the report that truly reflect the problems relating to human rights .
These include issues such as individual freedoms , the rights of defendants , the right to life and the dignity of individuals , and the right to have our private and family lives respected along with our home and correspondence . We also support respect for the protection of personal data , the freedom of expression or limitations in respect of the law and the freedom of thought and association - with the exception in this last case of sects or dangerous movements - in the strict defence of victims .
We share concern for the promotion and protection of the rights of children and wish to guarantee protection for the rights of those who are particularly vulnerable to ill treatment or abandonment , including the young , the disabled and the elderly .
We are in favour of absolute respect for the rights of prisoners and should like to stress the importance of rehabilitation and reintegration measures .
We should also like to reaffirm our condemnation of racism , xenophobia and all forms of discrimination .
Moreover , we are in favour of restoring the rights of citizens unfairly dealt with by the judicial system , especially in cases - which are all too frequent in Member States - where legal proceedings are slow . We also uphold the general principles of law that underpin the Member States ' legal systems , such as the principle of non bis in idem or the presumption of innocence .
However , we are obliged to vote against those paragraphs in the report that do not respect the concept of human rights , those that go beyond our competences or those that contravene Community law .
I am referring here to paragraphs that advocate the introduction of civil rights into Member States ' national legislation - this is not part of the Union 's competence - and those relating to nationality .
In this connection , my group is tabling an amendment that reminds us of a fundamental principle , namely , the principle stating that Member States are competent to recognise and regulate nationality and that exercising civil rights is linked to having that nationality .
I hope that with sufficient support from Parliament we can finally adopt a resolution that is worthy of this institution on the important occasion of the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I should like to congratulate Mrs Schaffner on her report , in which she has worked hard on a very sensitive subject .
This report is one of the annual exercises that remind us of the best possible way of ensuring respect for human rights within the European Union .
The rapporteur presents us with a detailed study .
In my brief speech , I will only be able to mention the general points and would firstly point out that human rights are an end , not a means .
Therefore , if we share this opinion , it is important to do all we can to prevent not only the most flagrant and direct violations , but also the more underhand threats that risk undermining human rights .
It would be deceptive to believe that democracy alone could guarantee respect for human rights .
Democracy is a means , which can lead to the best practices , but which can also trigger the worst practices .
By way of example , I should like to point out that Hitler came to power by means of an electoral , and therefore democratic , process .
So , as human rights are an end , their application should be as far removed from realpolitik as possible , which , here , represents the area of compromise , pragmatism , concessions , the balance of power , give and take , cunning , constraints and even complicity .
Our political action must mean that we question what measures need to be implemented to ensure that human rights are respected . And , in addition to the many tools already available , we should question how well our societies , which are anxious to protect human rights , can withstand economic shocks , social disturbances or ideological poison that promotes exclusion , racial hatred or anti-Semitism .
This is the fundamental question that politicians must be concerned with and their actions cannot afford to be seen as indifferent or passive by millions of European citizens who feel abandoned or betrayed by their company , their social environment , their party or their trade union . In short , they cannot be seen in this way by those who feel excluded and who , as a result , are extremely receptive to false prophets , who are always willing to ask a society teetering on the brink to take a decisive step forward .
Of course , we have not yet reached that point , but history and the past are there to highlight the fact that turbulent stock exchanges and millions of people whose lives no longer have any meaning are not necessarily the best way of ensuring that human rights prevail and making them the priority above all others .
Mr President , I must begin by complimenting Mrs Schaffner on her major efforts and excellent work , for which we thank her .
But we must also acknowledge that , regrettably , we have been obliged yet again this year to confront the usual high-profile issue of human rights and their role in all the serious problems which bedevil these European countries of ours . We have likewise been obliged this year , as in the past , to witness the usual politicisation of human rights , based on ideological divisions and on the fact that responses to infringements of these rights can change according to political positions .
This is most regrettable .
I am not very enthusiastic about this debate , but I am of the opinion that the indivisibility of human rights - the Universal Declaration - should apply within as well as outside of the European Union , and should also cover social , economic and cultural rights .
Clearly , however , we need to agree what all of this means .
It is unthinkable that the fight against poverty or even unemployment could trigger sanctions , in that a right exists if a sanction exists .
So I wonder what can be done with those Member States which currently have 12 , 13 or 14 % unemployment ?
What should we do ?
Haul them before the Court of Human Rights ?
I see no point in discussing this matter any further .
In my opinion , human rights really are being infringed within our own countries ; this raises the question of justice - we claim to teach non-European countries about the rule of law - and of the withholding of the right to proper defence , individual guarantees and prison conditions . Nothing is being done to rehabilitate prisoners , which obviously increases the social burden on all the EU countries .
This is what we should be focusing on , and we should apply sanctions to infringements occurring in our countries - and there are many of them .
Mr President , if only one picture from the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights sticks in my mind , it will be that of the Place du Trocadero in Paris on Thursday , 10 December .
It was an empty square , devoid of all human presence , surrounded by metal barriers and the French riot police , the CRS , to stop illegal immigrants , the jobless and the homeless , along with lawyers and elected representatives , approaching the Palais de Chaillot , where the commemoration ceremony was taking place and where grandiose resolutions were followed by speeches .
I am worried that this one sinister image of the 50th anniversary will stick in my mind : a few showy speeches and a great deal of cynicism from our governments .
Lionel Jospin could have used this commemoration to begin regulating the situation of illegal immigrants .
He did not take this long-awaited step , which is needed to break the current deadlock .
I support what Robert Badinter said in an interview in the newspaper l 'Humanité , that we have enough speeches on Sunday , and then realpolitik on Monday .
This comment refers to all our governments as shown once again by the report by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , which condemns the all too frequent violations of human rights in the European Union .
To commemorate is not only to declaim , but also to assess .
We simply have to read a few articles from the 1948 Declaration and compare them with the reality in our countries to realise that the situation here is dire .
Article 1 states that ' All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights ' .
Illegal immigrants , the jobless and the homeless do not have any rights .
But , in their struggle , they teach us about dignity .
Article 13 states that ' Everyone has the right to leave any country , including his own , and to return to his country ' .
War and poverty force some people to leave their countries .
All too often , the host countries become countries full of obstacles .
People are forced to return with no rights , and they are crammed into aeroplanes where they suffocate or die .
Article 22 states that ' Everyone ... has the right to social security ' .
Yet illegal immigrants and those with no residency permits are excluded from this right .
Article 23 states that ' Everyone has the right to work , to free choice of employment ... ' .
There are 17 million unemployed in the European Union .
And Article 25 states that ' Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate ... for himself ' .
There are 57 million poor people in the European Union .
I will obviously not list all the articles .
There would be a great deal to say , but what we really need is a greater political will on the part of our governments to put their own house in order and rid themselves of all the inhuman dregs that cause many citizens to turn their backs on politics .
And this is a very real threat to our democracies .
It is for all these reasons that I am still outraged and why I continue campaigning for human rights , for the regulation of the situation of illegal immigrants , for women 's rights , but also for an increase in social rights and the introduction of the 35-hour week , without , of course , making it synonymous with flexibility .
How strongly I agree with and try to make others agree with Albert Camus ' beautiful words , how strongly I believe in the words ' I rebel , therefore we are ' .
The debate on the report ( A4-0468 / 98 ) by Mrs Schaffner is now suspended so that we can move on to Question Time .
It will be resumed at 9.00 p.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0713 / 98 ) .
I would like to apologise to you all , and particularly Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , because we are beginning Question Time seven minutes later than planned .
Ladies and gentlemen , in today 's questions to the Council there are several groups of questions .
I am giving you prior warning of this so that when we come to those particular questions , in order to make our job slightly easier and prevent them from becoming the sole topic of debate , I shall first give the floor accordingly to the President-in-Office and then - only if there are supplementary questions - to the authors of the questions . If a substitute has been appointed in line with the Rules of Procedure , the floor will be given to the substitute .
I am giving you advance notice of this , ladies and gentlemen , because if we were not aware of it we might spend the whole period set aside for Question Time on one question .
Question No 1 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-1051 / 98 )
Subject : Possible replacement of insulating materials in passenger planes
In view of the accidents which have occurred recently , does the Council intend to take any specific action to ensure that metallised insulating materials such as Mylar or Tedlar are replaced in passenger planes ?
I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to answer Mr Camisón Asensio 's question .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the first question , the Council attaches great importance to air safety and , as regards the air transport sector , I would refer you in particular to the very recent Community proposal on safety checks of third-country aircraft , to the proposal to create a new European authority responsible for passenger flight safety , and to the current activities in relation to reducing aircraft emissions and noise .
But let me point out that air safety in the Community depends on cooperation between the national authorities , international organisations and the industry .
It is also self-evident that both the aviation industry and the national authorities must very carefully investigate all accidents and incidents in order further to improve air safety by means of their own controls and binding official measures .
On the subject of insulating materials in passenger planes raised by the questioner , I can add the following comments . As far as is known at present , metallised insulating materials such as Mylar have recently been investigated as one of several possible causes of aircraft accidents .
Amongst others , Canadian and US aviation officials , and also the aircraft manufacturers themselves , have been examining the question .
Should it turn out that this material can represent a risk , it is primarily up to the responsible national aviation authorities to issue the necessary directives and instructions in order to deal with this situation .
But at present , although the investigations are at a very advanced stage , no evidence has actually emerged to indicate that the insulating material used was the cause or catalyst of an accident .
We are not expecting further findings until the near future .
Only then can and should we take the appropriate measures .
The Council will be aware that there are some 12 000 commercial aircraft operating worldwide , the majority of which have been fitted out with ' mylar ' or ' tedlar ' insulation which , as recent events have shown , burns far more easily than had been predicted .
This appears to have been corroborated by the recent Swissair accident in Canada , which brought to light a problem that had already been suspected .
As the Council knows , this issue has given rise to calls from throughout the world for urgent modifications to be made to this system of insulation that tends to ignite at high temperatures .
I notice that the Council is aware of the issue , but the FAA , the United States Federal Aviation Administration , is leading the way in this matter , and my particular question relates to whether or not research is continuing in this respect in Europe as it is in the United States .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , you have just given us some very interesting information .
So let me return to one of my ancient hobby-horses , which is the danger of too much hand luggage in the aircraft .
I know you are preparing certain measures to finally make flying really safe throughout Europe .
We kept hearing that this required national or airline company decisions .
But these do not address the fact that too much hand luggage represents the greatest danger to passengers in the event of a crisis .
So it would be important finally to implement the provisions that were once discussed in IATA , and to restrict hand luggage to one piece .
Mr President , Mr von Habsburg , let me reply as follows .
Of course all of us frequent fliers know that you are quite right here , because excess luggage can naturally be a great risk .
But I can in fact tell you that both the airlines themselves and the various international organisations concerned with flight safety are devoting constant attention to this particular issue , which means that it is still being examined and in future things will no doubt go in the direction you are advocating , although of course for all us frequent fliers that could make life more difficult .
Question No 2 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-1053 / 98 )
Subject : Further violation of human rights in occupied Cyprus
The Turkish Cypriot ' authorities ' plan to privatise one of the two Greek Cypriot schools - attended by 30 Greek pupils - which have continued to operate throughout occupied Cyprus .
Having regard to : -the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the Loizidou case , -Parliament 's resolution No B4-0286 / 97 which ' condemns once again , and in the strongest terms , the serious and persistent violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms suffered by the persons in the enclave which have been committed by the illegal occupying regime , and the intransigence on the part of the latter ' , -the Council 's answer to question E-0233 / 97 ( 4.7.1997 ) to the effect that ' The Council has taken due note of the European Parliament 's resolution No B4-0286 / 97 and follows with the utmost intention the efforts made by the UN to ameliorate the living conditions of the enclaved persons and to restore their fundamental rights ' .
What measures will the Council take to prevent further violation of human rights in occupied Cyprus ? I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to answer Mr Alavanos 's question .
Mr President , I thank the Minister .
Her answer was very extensive and covered all the necessary points , and perhaps that is why it is difficult for me to put a second question .
Nevertheless , I will insist on the political issue .
Can the Council tell us whether it agrees with what Mr van den Broek and the Commission as a whole have said , namely that the government of Cyprus has made all the constructive proposals that it could concerning the participation of the Turkish Cypriot community in the accession negotiations , that responsibility unfortunately rests with the Turkish Cypriot community and Turkey , and that the procedures and talks on the accession of the Republic of Cyprus cannot ultimately become hostage to an intransigent attitude by Turkey .
Mr President , let me say to Mr Alavanos that in principle we are glad that the Greek-Cypriot Government made constructive proposals regarding participation by the Northern Cypriot delegation in the accession negotiations .
It is of course regrettable that this failed .
Our aim , let me repeat , is membership of an undivided island .
To be an EU Member State , we want a Cyprus that has achieved a lasting political solution .
Any other option would be less good .
Question No 3 by Anne McIntosh ( H-1060 / 98 )
Subject : Accession of Cyprus
Can the President-in-Office of the Council please indicate the proposed timetable for the accession of Cyprus to the European Union ?
I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to answer Mrs McIntosh 's question .
Mr President , as the honourable Member knows , the European Council decided at its meeting of December 1997 in Luxembourg to open accession negotiations with Cyprus .
That is a component of the accession process , based on a global , inclusive and developing approach embracing all the countries that are seeking accession and which includes Cyprus and the ten Central and Eastern European countries .
The applicant countries are judged by the same criteria .
The speed at which this process advances is of course determined in each case by the level of preparation of the applicant state .
The accession negotiations with Cyprus and the other applicant states began on 31 March 1998 .
At the second ministerial meeting of the Accession Conference , on 10 November 1998 , substantive negotiations began , with Cyprus as with the other five applicants , on the first seven chapters of the European Union 's acquis on which the screening was completed .
They were science and research , telecommunications and information technology , education and training , culture and audiovisual policy , industrial policy , small and medium-sized enterprises and the common foreign and security policy .
It was found at the conference that no further negotiations are needed with Cyprus on five of these chapters , although they will certainly have to be looked at afresh at a later stage .
But two chapters , telecommunications and the CFSP , remain on the table and will still have to be discussed in due course by the conference .
Since acquis screening is still going on with regard to all 31 negotiating chapters , and the European Union cannot therefore formulate any common positions regarding the negotiations at this stage , it is not possible to set a timetable for the conclusion of the negotiations , and certainly not for accession .
That applies to Cyprus as it does to all the other applicant countries .
I welcome the President-in-Office 's reply .
However , in answer to the previous Member 's reply she herself said that the Council hoped to bring about membership of an undivided island .
Clearly it is in the Union 's interests that the accession should be of an undivided island .
If that is not possible , is the President-in-Office of the Council admitting today that , for this reason , there may be a delay to the accession of Cyprus ?
Would that prevent Cyprus from being one of the first wave of new members ?
This has important implications for the citizens of Cyprus and also for those of our citizens who wish to do business or possibly to live in Cyprus .
I wonder whether she can confirm that lack of an internal settlement will not be a barrier to Cyprus 's membership in the next wave and that they will keep to the original timetable ?
Mr President , Mrs McIntosh , my positive words still stand .
Our objective is indeed the accession of an undivided island .
At the same time , it must of course be clear that no third country can have a veto in the EU enlargement process .
If no political settlement can be reached , we will probably have to ask ourselves who is mainly responsible for that .
At present that is all I can say in reply to your question whether there may be a delay .
At the same time , at present there is still some hope of working towards a solution based on a political settlement - and we encourage both sides to do so - under the United Nations process .
Mr President , in essence I wish to return to the supplementary by Mrs McIntosh .
The Minister answered - the fact she mentioned is interesting and I would like her perhaps to repeat it - that account will be taken of who is responsible in the event that the island as a whole , or more specifically the Turkish Cypriot community , does not take part in the accession procedures .
I think this is important , and I should like to ask the Minister : if a political solution is set as a condition for accession , then would that not constitute an incentive for Turkey - which does not want accession - to do nothing towards finding a political solution for the Cyprus problem , which it might have done under other conditions ?
Mr President , Mr Alavanos , I can only repeat what I have just emphasised , that of course no third country - which means not Turkey either - can have a veto in this EU enlargement process .
We have always regretted that it did not prove possible to find a positive political solution to the division of Cyprus in time for the beginning of the accession negotiations .
The General Affairs Council of 5 October 1998 pointed out again that the European Union 's objective must remain the establishment of a federation of two communities and two zones based on a comprehensive political solution in compliance with the United Nations resolutions .
That political solution would then make it possible to implement the provisions of the accession agreement throughout the island .
As I said in my initial reply , progress towards accession and a just and sustainable solution to the Cyprus problem would , of course , be mutually reinforcing .
At the same time , we have always confirmed that the European Union unreservedly supports the efforts to find a solution under the auspices of the United Nations .
The European Council also confirmed its support for the UN Secretary-General 's efforts to bring about a comprehensive settlement in Cyprus , and particularly the endeavours of his special emissary to ease the tensions and bring about progress towards a just and lasting settlement .
Question No 4 by Patricia McKenna ( H-1066 / 98 )
Subject : Electronic and electromagnetic security of EU institutions
Does the Council receive ongoing information on the state of development of electromagnetic weaponry , as used for example against the US Embassy in Moscow in the Soviet era , technologies which are by now much more highly developed and more widely dispersed ?
Does the Council carry out checks or permanent monitoring to ensure that such weapons are not used against any of the Institutions of the EU or against Members of Parliament , Commission , Council , Court of Justice and Court of Auditors or key officials in their private lives ?
If this does not already exist , will the Council agree to a general security consultation process with the Commission , European Parliament , European Court of Justice and other institutions on this matter , which should also include the electronic surveillance problem recently highlighted by revelations about the ECHELON system , to inform the institutions of the level of all such security risks , to establish various forms of permanent monitoring as required , and to consider issuing key personnel , including those dealing with such matters , with some form of personal monitoring devices to guarantee their safety against electromagnetic radiation from any such weapon systems , in the admittedly unlikely event that they are used ?
I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to answer Mrs McKenna 's question .
Mr President , Mrs McKenna , on this most interesting question let me point out that of course the Council is aware of the need for extreme vigilance and constant checks to ensure a very high level of security for the personnel , property and buildings of the European institutions .
The Council is also aware of the existence of a considerable number of electromagnetic and other hi-tech devices that can , either by design or as a side-effect , cause people physical or psychological damage .
But nobody should think that the use on a large scale of systems of this kind could go unnoticed .
They are technically complex and very expensive , and many of the results that could be achieved by using them could also be achieved more simply and cheaply .
There is no evidence of such systems being used comprehensively against administrative structures .
And to my knowledge , systems of this kind , although of course they must certainly not be underestimated , have not led to any incidents hitherto .
Naturally , the Council attaches the utmost importance to increasing the security and safety of its communications networks and of all its staff .
It will consider all proposals to that end .
But I would also ask you to understand that this is a field in which the first effective counter-measures also call for a certain amount of discretion .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her answer .
It is quite interesting that you recognise such potential actually exists .
When you talk about such things it is difficult to believe that they can happen but without monitoring or checks you cannot be quite sure that they do .
It happened as far back as 1976 .
This is confirmed by Henry Kissinger himself in correspondence to the US embassy in Moscow , where he confirmed the permanent ill effects of these weapons on staff at the embassy .
I believe it is possible .
I believe it is difficult to say that there is no danger or threat there , without some sort of monitoring and assessment of the situation .
Mr President , Mrs McKenna , as I indicated earlier , these are of course very technically complex and expensive systems .
However , I think there is a great difference between what happened when Mr Kissinger was tackling this problem and the present situation .
That case was concerned with what was happening in a building inside the Soviet Union , surrounded by many other buildings , where it was certainly easier to install devices of this kind .
Now we are concerned mainly with European buildings in European countries , and the situation is quite different .
That is why we must take account of this different situation , which I would certainly describe as less dangerous .
I want to clarify what you just said in terms of the way you were going to deal with this .
You said you would accept supplementaries from questioners who are present .
I take it , however , that the Rule enables those of us who are not actually the questioners to ask supplementaries anyway .
Otherwise we would not have come here today .
The point of coming here is to ask supplementaries on the questions that have been tabled .
I assume , therefore , that you will allow us to do that .
I have already explained - and you were not present at the start of Question Time - that purely because of the time constraints , I am only going to give the floor to the questioners themselves should they wish to ask supplementary questions .
If for every ten questions we allow 20 supplementaries to be asked , we will not be able to make any progress .
The Chair has taken this decision owing to the special circumstances that have arisen in this debate .
I am therefore telling you that , under my responsibility , with the authority the present situation gives me to interpret the Rules of Procedure , I am only going to give the floor to the questioners if they are present and if they specifically request it .
Mr Smith wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , you have said that you have made a decision using your own discretion rather than applying the Rules to the letter .
Whilst I appreciate that grouping these questions together is sensible in terms of efficiency and quite a number of the questioners themselves are not here , I see no reason to rule out supplementary questions by Members who have an interest .
Think about the precedent you are setting .
Instead of 14 questions being tabled tonight , you would have 24 because we know we will not get a supplementary unless we put a question .
If that really an efficient precedent to be setting ?
I ask you to reconsider , at your discretion , the right to give supplementary questions to those of us who have not tabled questions but have an interest in this subject and want to raise supplementary questions based on the answers we will receive from the Council .
Mr Smith , I am no longer going to give people the floor for points of order .
All those who disagree with the decision taken by the Chair are perfectly within their rights to refer the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure for consideration .
But I do not wish to continue the debate here and now , precisely so that I can hear the questions put by the eight Members present who have the right to ask a supplementary question .
If you cared to do a simple calculation , you would realise that we could not progress any further in this Question Time , which is the last one in which we shall have the opportunity to hear Mrs Ferrero-Waldner 's opinion on other issues .
I therefore give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , and while I fully understand the reasons you are giving - reasons that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure may possibly agree with - at the present moment in time I accept my full responsibility in this matter and I would ask Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to respond jointly to the eight questions put by the Members present .
The large number of questions on Western Sahara reveals the importance Members of the European Parliament attach to this subject , while at the same time showing that it is an enormously complex subject , involving a great number of historical , political and humanitarian aspects .
I am happy to respond to these questions with all due brevity .
Of course the Council is carefully monitoring developments in the region and is endeavouring to contribute towards finding a peaceful , comprehensive solution to this long-standing issue .
The Council fully endorses the peace plan accepted by both parties and approved by the Security Council , which involves the holding of a free , just and impartial referendum on self-determination for the people of Western Sahara .
At the recent 53rd meeting of the United Nations General Assembly on 13 October 1998 , the European Union reaffirmed its full support for the United Nations plan .
It noted the progress made , for example the identification of more than 147 000 people in the identification process for participation in the referendum , while at the same time expressing its concern that the question of the three tribal groups has not yet been resolved .
The Council also shares the concern expressed by the United Nations General Assembly about the delay in implementing the plan , which is largely due to poor cooperation by the parties concerned with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees - the UNHCR - but also to the delay in signing the agreement on the legal status of the troops , known as SOFA .
The European Union has also advised the parties concerned to work closely together with the High Commissioner for Refugees , and in particular to enable him to carry out all the necessary preliminary work for the return of the Sahrawi refugees .
Furthermore , the Union has paid tribute to the work of the United Nations mission for the referendum in Western Sahara , MINURSO , which will continue to play a decisive role in the peace process .
It should be noted that the EU Member States have made their contribution by visiting the region several times during the identification process , as an expression of international support for the peace plan .
Meanwhile , the Council presidency is in close contact with the UN Secretary-General , Kofi Annan , with a view in particular to considering possible EU support measures , which , so far at least , have not been determined in any detail .
I thank the presidency for its reply , but I think that it has focused too much on the time when the referendum takes place .
The question that my colleague , Mrs Sauquillo , is asking relates to a different issue , namely , that once the referendum has taken place , whatever the outcome , a substantial development and cooperation plan with the Sahara will be needed .
In my opinion , the presidency has been too vague and I would like to know whether it really does intend to introduce such cooperation and , as a consequence , complete the overall plan being developed by the Humanitarian Aid Office .
Therefore , what future additional plans exist for after the referendum ?
Mr Izquierdo Collado , let me answer as follows . It does seem a little early at this stage to discuss future measures when we all know how difficult it will be even to hold the referendum and when we are all , at this moment , struggling to ensure that a referendum is held at all .
It is quite clear that of course there will be a range of aid projects and measures following the referendum , and indeed a range of such projects already exists . I myself am Minister for Development Cooperation , and all I can say is that apart from the European Union 's official programmes there are of course also the ECHO bilateral programmes .
But it really is too soon to speculate on what will happen later .
Let us wait for the results of the referendum , and here we must support the United Nations by doing all we can to ensure that the referendum takes place at all .
We all know that there are still some obstacles in its way ; once they have been overcome , we will gladly consider and also be in a position to propose a practical programme .
Very briefly and without wishing to take sides apart from expressing my support for the United Nations resolutions , I should like to ask the Council if it is aware that there are omissions , negligent actions and absences in international policy which , on occasions , hide undisclosed political positions and give the impression that the absence of the European Union as such in terms of breaking deadlocks and in the process of negotiating conflict resolution forms a part of such negligence .
Is the Council aware that maintaining the status quo is tantamount to favouring one side , that , due to the lack of sufficient pressure to resolve the impasse , it is condemning a population to continue living in exile , deprived of its rights , and that , out of all the potential voters , this situation only affects those who are in favour of independence ?
Mr President , Mr Mendiluce Pereiro , let me respond as follows .
It is certainly not the case that the European Union is absent here .
I am intentionally highlighting this point , because it allows me to say something in the debate .
During the last General Assembly , I myself addressed this question in talks with the UN Secretary-General , whom I in fact know very well from my earlier post at the United Nations , and I also urged that the United Nations , the Secretary-General and , where appropriate , the special envoy James Baker should take joint action .
Unfortunately , I have to say that the time was not yet ripe .
But you know that the Secretary-General himself has recently visited the region - at the time he considered that more useful , and we were happy to endorse his view , since after all we want to see some positive developments in the situation - and held detailed talks with the conflicting parties .
His report on that visit is now available and yesterday , on 15 December , it was debated in the Security Council .
This procedure was entirely expected , given that of course the United Nations has overall responsibility for the proposed referendum ; now the European Union will contact Kofi Annan again in order to discuss this question in depth with him .
On that occasion , questions such as the usefulness of an EU declaration on the Western Sahara issue and the best possible time for making it will also be discussed .
Let me also say that after the identification process had come to a standstill some time ago because of the Moroccan-Sahrawi disagreement on the identification of tribes H41 , H61 and J51 and J52 - who make up about 65 000 individuals - the UN Secretary-General put forward a compromise proposal , a kind of package .
The Polisario , Algeria and Mauritania accepted the package , while Morocco initially questioned it .
In a letter and a memorandum addressed to the UN Secretary-General on 20 November this year , Morocco raised a number of questions on which it asked for clarification .
In a further letter of 15 December this year , Morocco expressed its opposition to regarding these 65 000 candidates as candidates in a second list .
But Morocco has not yet formally replied to the UN Secretary-General 's compromise proposal .
The extension of the MINURSO mandate to the end of January 1999 which the Secretary-General has now proposed is to be used for UN consultations with Morocco .
However , the prospects of success seem fairly slight , and let me quote verbatim from a United Nations report we have just received : ' ... unless Morocco gets what it wants ' .
There is no sensible reason to wait until end of January for the personal envoy , James Baker , and the Secretary-General to intervene again .
And I believe that James Baker must clearly intervene on this issue again .
That is my answer , Mr President .
The Austrian Presidency 's answer naturally fails to make reference to the recommendation adopted by this very Parliament .
Bearing in mind that this recommendation is so old , it is all the more ' striking ' that neither the conclusions of the recent Vienna European Council nor the strategy on external action it adopted made any reference whatsoever to the situation in Western Sahara .
I should like the President-in-Office to answer three questions .
First , will the Austrian Presidency pass on to the next Presidency of the Council of the Union , namely , the German Presidency , the concerns being voiced by the European Parliament in relation to the conflict in Western Sahara ?
Second , does the presidency not think that the European Union should hold talks and meetings with both sides , that is , with Morocco and the Polisario Front ?
And third , could the presidency confirm whether or not the country responsible as the former colonial power , in other words , Spain , has ever raised the issue of the Sahara within the Council ?
Mr President , Mr Carnero González , on the first question , it is quite clear that of course the Austrian Presidency is not the only one to discuss this important issue and , as I said , things do not always have to be done in public .
So here we have determined on a confidential basis and in continuous contacts with the United Nations where we can take supportive action .
I am sure I can say the same for the German Presidency , because this is indeed a question that concerns us all very much and where we must finally see some progress .
In reply to the other questions , all I can really do is repeat the following : the reason why this issue did not feature in the Vienna conclusions is that it was quite deliberately decided not to list every political issue where there is a conflict , a problem , in the conclusions .
In Vienna we were concerned with efficiency , and please note that this was also true of the Spanish member of the Council .
Mr President , I hope that answers the question .
Thank you !
Madam President-in-Office , you have given a very detailed answer , which is proof of your personal interest and that of your country in this particular matter .
We only wish that such interest could be passed on to the German Presidency . But as this is the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the United Nations , and in the face of the last pending decolonisation in the African continent , it is difficult to forget about the generation lost in terms of development , that is to say , the Sahrawis currently in exile and living in the territories occupied by the Moroccan authorities .
I also want to voice my concern , Madam President-in-Office , because there have already been too many occasions when we have come across American mediators : in Bosnia , the Middle East , Kosovo , and now in the Sahara .
We are talking about 15 countries here and you must all endeavour to further your commitment and participate more seriously in this process .
Mr President , Mrs García Arias , may I say that we certainly are concerning ourselves with this conflict .
I would like to read out the figures on the humanitarian aid that has already been provided for the Sahrawi refugees , because that needs saying too : on 1 March 1998 , ECHO released another ECU 7.2 million , and on 2 October of the same year ECU 10 million .
These two sums are earmarked primarily for food aid , medical and health care and for improving the water supply in the refugee camps in the Tindof region of Algeria .
There , a total of 150 000 refugees are entirely dependent on international aid .
Because the planned referendum was postponed , ECHO has not taken any decisions yet on support for the efforts to secure the return of the refugees , although of course plans to that effect have long since been prepared and ECHO has also contacted the UNHCR on the subject , through its representative on the ground , with a view to coordinating further measures .
As I have said , we ourselves have a number of bilateral projects that we have been carrying out there for many years .
The second point I wished to make is that my country , the country holding the presidency , now has a force of 260 soldiers standing by for deployment in the Tindof region in the run-up to the referendum , in order to prepare for the referendum there and then , of course , ensure a smooth transition .
So we have these troops waiting - which of course costs a fortune - and we will have to keep them on stand-by .
However , and I come now to the third point you addressed , we already have an American mediator , appointed by the United Nations , and I must say that James Baker has achieved something positive in managing to create the preconditions for Morocco 's agreement to this referendum .
So however much I am in favour of us Europeans playing a global political role , something we always advocate , I do not believe it is useful for us to intervene in questions where good mediators already exist , because any duplication here would mean different personalities being involved .
I do not think that is very useful in terms of resolving the issue in question .
That is what I wanted to say . One final comment : I am of course responsible for development cooperation , and at the most recent Development Cooperation Council I myself raised for the first time the question of conflict-prevention in general as also being a development issue , and at that Council we were able to adopt conclusions to that effect for the first time .
I believe that the initial development aid which we give , the many years of work , can be brought to nothing the moment a conflict breaks out .
So in principle I quite agree with you , but in cases where good mediators already exist - and I believe that James Baker was a good choice of personality and has achieved a great deal , which is also appreciated by the conflicting parties - we should primarily play a supportive role , which is what we are doing .
I am sorry you have had to get up so many times , but I just wanted to ask very briefly for greater clarification as to which specific political and humanitarian measures the Council is taking to ensure that the referendum on self-determination in the Sahara is free , transparent and democratic and to ensure that it is not postponed indefinitely , which would only be detrimental for one of the sides in the conflict .
Mr President , Mrs Sierra González , I have in fact just discussed the humanitarian aid that is being allocated through ECHO and also by many countries on a bilateral basis .
But let me point out once again that the overall process for creating peace in the Sahara is taking place under the auspices of the United Nations and that at present it is within that framework that the Member States make their material as well as their political contribution to overcoming these difficult problems .
In any case , I can assure you that the European Union continues to be present in this part of the African continent , which has of course had special relations with Europe for centuries and which is of the greatest strategic importance to this continent .
That is what I have to say in reply .
The President-in-Office should be aware that when there is a barrage of questions like that , some of us feel bad about asking further questions , but I am sure that the President-in-Office will not have failed to notice that it is precisely through such questions that we were attempting to have a debate on the Sahara .
Such a debate is , I feel , absent from the European Union , so that is why we are being particularly insistent in this case . Instead of asking you a question , since you have already answered several , including some that focus on what will happen ' after ' the referendum , I am more concerned about what happens ' before ' .
That is because some of us , since 1992 - the year in which the referendum was supposed to have taken place - , have followed the fate of the Sahrawi people and visited the camps where we saw the difficulties this race is experiencing in trying to survive and educate their children . And their children are educated , since they leave school at the age of 16 with a high level of education so that they might continue with their studies .
We also witnessed there the efforts needed to feed themselves and survive , so we wonder whether or not the European Union can continue to tolerate the obstacles erected by Morocco .
Morocco has always tried to prevent this referendum from taking place because what it really wants is to annex the Sahara .
Let us be perfectly clear about this .
What we would like - and this is my last point - is to see a united and energetic stance taken by the European Union , which says to Morocco , because it is in a position to : ' look here , the referendum should take place now and it is not only the United Nations that is calling for this , but also the European Union , which historically has close links with the Sahara . '
Mrs González Álvarez , let me say that I too consider this question at least as important before the referendum as after the referendum .
I said that a moment ago , for the difficulties will remain so long as we have not had a referendum at all .
As I have just tried to explain , we are of course fully aware of Morocco 's attempts to delay matters here by constantly raising new questions .
But I believe that nevertheless at this point we must continue along that road .
On the basis of the identification lists that already exist , it is most likely that the outcome of the referendum will favour the Polisario .
There is , of course , the risk that Morocco will not accept that .
That means that if this whole process does not move forward by the end of January then , as the UN Secretary-General proposes in his latest report : ' Should the prospects for completing the identification process remain uncertain by that time , it would be my intention to revert to the Security Council and to ask my personal envoy - James Baker - to reassess the situation and the viability of the mandate of MINURSO ' .
So if there is no success by the end of January , the question will also arise of whether the international community is interested in extending MINURSO 's mandate .
Members of the American Congress will also ask whether this venture is of any use .
So other political considerations will perhaps also have to be taken into account at that point , although it is too soon to do so today .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the numerous detailed replies and appreciate both the close contact maintained with the United Nations and the crucial role of James Baker .
However , while recognising the need to avoid duplication of effort , is the Council maintaining close and continuous contact with both the Moroccan authorities and the Polisario in order to press for the resolution of any difficulties which arise ?
As we have a particular interest it may be that , by maintaining that contact , we can support the process in a very constructive way .
Would the President-in-Office comment on our contacts with both parties ?
Mr President , Mr Newens , of course the presidency is in full contact with the conflicting parties , but , as I said , on an extremely confidential basis .
I myself , as I said at the outset , told the UN Secretary-General that we were prepared at any time to conduct a joint mission either with him or with James Baker .
At the beginning of our presidency I thought perhaps the moment had come for that , but in view of these identification difficulties it was not feasible at that stage .
But let me say that the UN Security Council deliberately only extends the mandate of the MINURSO operation on a very short-term basis , normally by only six to eight weeks , so that it can monitor the progress made in the peace process at regular intervals and thus exert a certain amount of pressure on Morocco and put it on the spot .
That forces the conflicting parties to continue their efforts to resolve the peace process and keeps them on their toes .
So I really do still believe that we must continue along this road and , as the UN Secretary-General says himself , if it turns out not to be viable by the end of January , then we will probably have to seek other political solutions , which will have to be put up for discussion again and would of course also have to be discussed in the Council .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , I am disappointed at your answer to my question .
You said the presidency will support the measures and initiatives taken by Kofi Annan of the UN .
I had asked whether the troika is prepared to give active support to the UN 's proposal that a referendum should be held .
You said that no measures had been taken and nor were any in prospect for the future .
I think we must plan for the referendum now - one year is not a very long time - and I hoped you would say that you had made provision for peace observers in the form of an EU contingent of 2 000 or 3 000 troops or of an infrastructure .
I think the people deserve that .
They have been living in refugee camps for years .
This area has been occupied !
After the Spaniards left , the EU - Mr President , do not look at the clock yet , because this concerns my question , which was not answered .
My supplementary question is as follows : next year a new fisheries agreement is to be signed with Morocco .
Is the presidency prepared to lay down conditions here , for example that if Morocco does not allow the referendum to be held , there will not be a new fisheries agreement either ?
Where is the frontier , at which degree of latitude does the coastal region belong to Morocco and at which to Western Sahara ?
That is my supplementary question .
Mr President , Mr Telkämper , I fear you were not here earlier , when I explained that in fact Austria , which currently holds the presidency , has had a contingent of 260 troops on stand-by for the past year , with the approval indeed of Parliament , so that they could be deployed as quickly as possible - in fact six months before the referendum - and make optimum preparations for that referendum .
Unfortunately , that did not prove possible because of the poor progress made with the identification process .
But I have already said all that .
Why was there no troika mission ?
As I said in my first statement , I myself have had extremely close contacts with the UN Secretary-General on this question since the last General Assembly .
After all , the UN is an institution that is recognised worldwide and which , moreover , really has done good work on this particular issue - I am thinking here of the special envoy , James Baker , whom I also referred to earlier .
We considered whether we should conduct a joint mission with the United Nations and with James Baker .
At the time , the UN considered the time was not ripe .
I said we do not want to duplicate our activity , because that would achieve nothing , but wish to make a real contribution to resolving the question .
As regards the fisheries agreement , I must say that the next presidency will probably have to decide that .
It is too early to answer that question .
Thank you , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
I shall now close the discussion of this group of ten questions which have occupied 40 minutes of our Question Time .
As the author is not present , Question No 15 lapses .
Question No 16 by José Valverde López ( H-1090 / 98 )
Subject : Action by the Council to promote the use of permanent paper and protect consumer rights
The Council resolution of May 1989 on the promotion of books and reading stressed the importance of using permanent paper to prevent the continued publication of millions of books carrying within them the seeds of their self-destruction .
In November 1991 the Council and the culture ministers examined a report on the conservation of books using acid paper and the use of permanent paper .
What action has the Council taken to initiate the use of permanent paper in its sphere of competence and to promote it among the Member States and in the interests of consumer protection ?
I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to answer Mr Valverde Lopez 's question .
Mr President , Mr Valverde López , let me reply as follows . Community measures in the cultural field come under Article 128 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
That means the cultural sphere is no exception to the rule that the Council can only act on a proposal from the Commission .
To date , the Council has received no proposals on the matter raised by the honourable Member in his question .
I thank the Council for its answer , but the issue of paper , the use of permanent paper and the creation of a European standard for the manufacture of permanent paper , its use in books and consumer protection are not cultural issues .
Rather , they relate to internal trade , raw materials and book marketing , which , then have a direct influence on cultural programmes .
For 12 years I have been trying to make the Council and the Commission aware of this issue .
I managed to have it placed on the agenda of the 1989 Culture Council and again in 1991 , but it relates to the internal market .
The Council could also take measures on its own initiative regarding the use of this paper , for example , for its records .
For history to preserve them , these measures must be taken and we here at Parliament should do likewise .
Can you do anything to ensure that our concern for these issues is passed on to your successors , so that maybe we can do something about it within 10 years ?
Thank you very much , Mr Valverde .
I hope that future election results will enable you to follow this matter as closely as before for a further five years , or at least allow you to see that it is successfully achieved .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , you have the floor .

Mr President , Mr Valverde López , of course the Council is aware of the importance of the conservation of books , which have until now been the primary medium for the transmission and dissemination of cultural matter .
That is all the more true in that today 's books will of course become the collective memory of the next generation .
In the light of that , I am sure you will allow me to refer you to one of the basic principles of European Union action .
On the basis of the distribution of responsibilities among the various Community institutions laid down in the Treaty , it is for the Commission to make proposals which it believes could usefully be implemented .
We , that is the Council , take the view that it should be left to each institution to fulfil its obligations in the way it considers best , with a view to achieving the objectives it has set itself in the framework of a particular task .
Nonetheless , Mr Valverde López , I am happy to take up your suggestion and at least to pass it on to the Commission , since after hearing that you first raised the matter in 1989 , I do of course appreciate your concern .
Question No 17 by Karl Habsburg-Lothringen ( H-1094 / 98 )
Subject : Implementation of the Dayton Agreement
How does the Council assess the implementation of the Dayton Agreement hitherto ?
I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to answer Mr Habsburg-Lothringen 's question .
Mr President , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , in the past year Bosnia-Herzegovina has taken great strides forward .
The essential political and economic institutions are now assuming concrete form .
Important laws have also been adopted on foreign investment and on privatisation .
There have been substantial improvements in freedom of movement within the country .
The basic reform of the media is now under way , and that is helping to build up a democratic society .
At the most recent elections in September , a trend towards increasing pluralism and tolerance emerged .
The international community as a whole and the European Union in particular must , however , continue their efforts to bring about a genuinely lasting peace .
Much remains to be done .
Peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina still has feet of clay and would , unfortunately , not hold fast without the current international support .
There are three main risk factors that need to be addressed : the lack of integration between the ethnic groups , the need for a full and exact demarcation of the responsibilities of the state and of the regional entities , and the existence of party monopolies on the means of production .
When the phase of consolidation comes to an end , the next few years will be crucial for the strengthening of democracy .
At present , Bosnia-Herzegovina is one of the most heavily supported countries in the world .
The international aid , of which the EU continues to provide the lion 's share , has reached its peak and will inevitably have to be reduced very soon .
Bosnia-Herzegovina must therefore use the remaining time to prepare itself to survive without foreign aid and to meet the challenge of transforming the economy in such a way as to create jobs and raise the standard of living .
At the same time , the local authorities will have to assume ever more responsibility .
The Peace Implementation Conference is being held in Madrid on 15 and 16 of this month and will examine the progress made in implementing the peace agreement .
It will have determined what still needs to be done to ensure that peace is maintained without outside assistance .
The Peace Implementation Conference , the PIC , will no doubt use the next , decisive phase to encourage the return of refugees and exiles , to strengthen Bosnia-Herzegovina from within and without , and to establish solid relations between the institutions of Bosnia-Herzegovina and of Europe .
For the rest , the High Representative helped ensure that substantial progress was made in the Dayton peace process .
We must also highlight the positive role he plays as the final authority for interpreting the civil aspects of the agreement and as coordinator of the civil implementing measures .
Without his efforts and his authority over the past 12 months , we would have achieved much less progress .
Madam President-in-Office , thank you for your account of the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
I would like to put two brief questions .
The first concerns the refugee problem to which you referred briefly at the end .
Of course the refugee problem is also closely bound up with the corresponding legislation , not just in Bosnia-Herzegovina but also in the neighbouring countries .
For instance , I know that Croatia has already revoked certain laws relating to housing that was allocated to refugees for the long term but to which other refugees now want to return , and I do hope that there will soon be legislation in place in Bosnia-Herzegovina that allows them to do so .
Do you know whether there are any indications that the legal situation will be adjusted accordingly ?
With reference to the countries that are co-signatories to the Dayton Accord - which also include Croatia - my second question is this : what do you think the situation in Croatia is at present , and what must Croatia do so that the PHARE programme can be fully implemented there again and so that Croatia is able to follow an orderly European course ?
Mr President , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , on your question about the legal situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina , I have to say that unfortunately not everything was done that should have been done .
That is why , in particular at the Peace Implementation Conference , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Schüssel , criticised the poor cooperation by the Bosnian authorities on this question as well as on the question of the return of refugees .
He said that the return home of Bosnian citizens , especially of course those from minority groups , is still being hampered by a lack of willingness to cooperate at all administrative levels and in particular by the generally poor security situation .
He also expressed disappointment at the lack of progress in this area and hoped to see substantial improvements in 1999 .
We must manage to ensure that a critical mass of minority-group refugees return , so that this becomes an irreversible process .
That is the heart of the matter .
On the question of Croatia and the PHARE programme , let me tell you that Croatia must fulfil the conditions laid down under the regional concept if it is to be fully eligible for the PHARE programme and if it is to be included in the negotiations on a trade and cooperation agreement as a preliminary step towards a Europe agreement .
As I am sure you are aware , as early as April 1997 the Council adopted an overall strategy , what is known as the regional concept , for relations with the western Balkans , namely Croatia , Bosnia-Herzegovina , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania .
In an endeavour to consolidate peace and stability in the region , to contribute to its reconstruction and in particular to support its European aspirations , it was decided that the EU would progressively build up its relations with these countries too .
To that end , as you will know , the European Union laid down political and economic conditions that must be fulfilled with a view to the attainment firstly of autonomous trade preferences , then of membership of PHARE , and finally of treaty relations .
The Council is monitoring the progress on fulfilment of these conditions on a regular basis , and adopted its most recent conclusions on the subject on 9 November .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , many thanks for the expertise with which you have answered not just this question but all our questions over the past six months .
Nevertheless , let me make one critical observation , addressed not to you personally but to the Council .
I regard the term ' western Balkans ' as a most unfortunate one .
It is a quite artificial concept and refers to something that has never really existed .
Croatia was never Balkan , Macedonia is Balkan .
There never really was a ' western Balkans ' , and it is a totally artificial concept .
I tend to believe that we should develop a kind of democratic , positive domino theory and stabilise one country after another .
If we want to stabilise Bosnia-Herzegovina , we must first stabilise Croatia , and as far as the PHARE programme and the trade and cooperation agreement are concerned we cannot rank it lower than , say , Albania .
There is no objective reason whatsoever for doing so .
I believe that the Council should rethink these criteria and try to break through Croatia 's isolation , since no progress can be achieved through isolation .
Mr President , Mr Posselt , let me answer as follows .
I believe the name western Balkans derives from the idea that we need a regional concept .
Perhaps one can follow your interpretation and say that it never existed historically .
But one can certainly also interpret it positively by saying that we need to create prospects for the entire region , and in that respect this is a positive approach .
At any rate , I can tell you that the European Union is firmly resolved to achieve full implementation of the Dayton Accord , and also to get all the forces concerned to declare their support for its implementation .
Of course , that is also closely bound up with the question of what more can be done in Croatia .
May I also say that the Peace Implementation Conference in particular has continually committed Croatia to creating certain conditions , with a view in particular to promoting the safe return of the refugees .
You will know that since the expiry of the UN transitional administration 's mandate in eastern Slavonia - i.e. Danube and Theiss - violent attacks and bureaucratic harassment against Serbs have unfortunately led to a continuous wave of emigration , mainly to Bosnia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , but also to Western Europe .
Sadly , we have to say that it was only as a result of sustained international pressure that Croatia finally adopted an acceptable and comprehensive plan for the return of the refugees .
Nevertheless , it remains to be seen how that plan is implemented .
A while ago I quoted Foreign Minister Schüssel , who took part in yesterday 's PIC conference in Madrid , and unfortunately I have to say that even a country that has always been very well-disposed towards Croatia , namely my own country Austria , has had to voice criticism , because there was simply not enough headway being made on this issue .
Regrettably , the international community also greeted President Tudjman 's speech at the HDZ Congress of 21 February with strong criticism , deploring both its tone and content as clearly inconsistent with the undertakings under the Dayton Accord .
That is why I do not take the view that certain EU circles are systematically pursuing a policy hostile to Croatia , but believe that Croatia itself has very far to go before it fulfils all the objective criteria which have been laid down , knowing of course that some government members are more open here than a number of others .
Thank you , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
Since we have now come to the end of the time set aside for questions to the Council , Questions Nos 18 to 45 will receive written answers .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the last time Mrs Ferrero-Waldner will be here to answer questions to the Council .
Let me thank her for the attention , rigour and care she has shown during the five part-sessions we have held - we did not manage a sixth - during this half of the year . And on behalf of the presidency , I would like to thank her for her attention , rigour , willingness to communicate and spirit of debate , and for the complementary nature of the institutions that Question Time represents in terms of the relations between the Council and Parliament .
Thank you very much , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
Given the time of year , allow me to wish you a Merry Christmas with your family and a happy New Year on the Mediterranean , as I know how much you love the Mediterranean , that being just one of many things we have in common .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Human rights in the Union ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on human rights in the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Schaffner on a very fine report to which the Green Group can lend their support .
I should also like to draw my colleagues ' attention to Amendment No 58 relating to public access to official records .
Such a principle , when it functions properly and protects the source , is an effective weapon with which to combat fraud , giving the public , as well as politicians and the media , the right to scrutinise , to access information and to exercise democratic control .
Had such an arrangement existed , the Commission 's shortcomings , for instance , would have been discovered much sooner , or might never have arisen .
It is gratifying that the recognition of homosexual partnerships found support in committee .
I hope that this will contribute towards finally putting an end to discrimination against homosexual couples in some Member States and EU institutions .
In the free market era in which we live , the protection of trade union rights , including the right to strike , is very important for people as well as for democracy , and this is also highlighted in the report .
We are also concerned about the large number of databanks which is constantly growing . A source of particular concern is the Echelon system , which we regard as totally unacceptable .
The Swedish members of the Green Group are definitely voting against the amendment relating to the liberalisation of drugs , as well as the one that is critical of the right to free abortions .
Mr President , Commissioner , every year , like a time-honoured ritual , the report on the respect for human rights in the European Union is brought before the House .
As 1998 was the year of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , it was important that the report should be responsible and credible .
Indeed , this is precisely what our colleague Anne-Marie Schaffner aimed to do . And , as occurs every year , a large number of amendments have been tabled , some of which we feel are irrelevant and highly ideological , with no real connection to the issue of human rights .
Our position on this report will therefore depend on whether they are adopted or rejected by the House .
However , I must draw attention to the importance of Amendments Nos 35 , 36 and 37 , tabled by our colleagues Mrs Colombo Svevo and Mrs de Esteban Martin , on behalf of the PPE group .
In general , we support the amendments tabled by that group , as well as those tabled by the rapporteur .
In truth , it is clear that the issue of human rights , which should be a matter that unites us , is seen in different lights depending on the various political persuasions .
Moreover , I find it quite strange , even amusing , that the same people who are hurling abuse at General Pinochet are praising Fidel Castro , who has ten times as many deaths on his conscience .
Those who claim to be driving out alleged right-wing extremism never show any interest in left-wing extremism .
Carlos , who we know was paid by Ceaucescu , was by no means innocent , no more than Bader and his gang .
Yet it is true that some people in this House have been guilty of sympathy towards these terrorists .
They admired Mao during the cultural revolution , which cost the Chinese people the small matter of 10 million lives .
And the readers of a major French evening newspaper found it hysterical to read the front page headline ' Phnom Penh freed ' , when the Communist Pol Pot seized the Khmer capital .
Some defenders of human rights should bring their behaviour into line with their professed passion for human rights .
Mr President , Mrs Schaffner 's report paints a clear picture of the human rights situation in the European Union .

Such rights cannot just remain declarations of principle but must be part of daily reality because , as the report shows , human rights should of course be invoked in extreme circumstances but should also belong to everyday life and become integrated into our consciousness .
Let me give a few examples : women 's rights must be protected by combating sexual abuse and violence , but also by finally ensuring equal access to the world of work and the right to fair pay ; children 's rights should be directed against sexual exploitation , but also against child labour and towards the right to education ; the same applies to the disabled , who need not only proper social and health-care assistance , in order to feel equal and fully integrated into society , but also the right to work .
There is one thing missing , however , when we speak of the right to life .
Reference is rightly made in this context to combating the death penalty , terrorism and euthanasia , but the problem of abortion has been overlooked .
I do not of course want to conduct an anti-abortion crusade here and now , but quite frankly I find it rather too much that the European Parliament goes so far as to deplore the fact that certain Member States forbid or merely limit information concerning voluntary termination of pregnancy , as stated in paragraph 56 of the report .
The right to life and the right to abortion cannot be put on the same footing .
In a report which quite correctly attaches so much importance to protecting the rights of all human beings , especially the most defenceless and disadvantaged , a few words should be devoted to protecting the most defenceless of all human beings : embryos .
I would conclude by saying that many pregnancies would not be terminated if the Member States and the EU as such were to offer women alternatives to abortion , in other words adequate economic and social support and a proper policy of information and prevention .
Mr President , congratulating the rapporteur is a matter of course .
However , I feel that the balancing act undertaken by Mrs Schaffner deserves not only our respect , but also our support .
Moreover , I think that this report will be enthusiastically adopted , because it aims to draw attention to the rights of those who are not generally very well defended , notably foreigners .
It is true that the obligation to respect the Geneva conventions and their additional protocols is extremely important .
The report highlights the need for the right of asylum and the right to temporary protection due to the tragedies that have occurred in our own continent in the last few years , and these issues fully deserve our support .
Drawing up a report on human rights , which enables us to put our own house in order before giving lectures to the other nations of the world , is a valuable exercise .
The problem is that to a certain extent it makes us slaves to reaching a degree of consensus .
I have tabled an amendment ; the Radical group has tabled an amendment , and it is unlikely that they will be adopted .
Prostitutes , both female and male - at the moment , the number of male prostitutes is increasing almost as fast as that of female prostitutes - , deserve to have legislation and regulations put in place to protect their freedom and their dignity .
This does not exist in all countries , but should be seriously considered .
Another issue is that of secularism and respect for religion .
With regard to new religions , it seems that there is a disturbing confusion between the criminal code and obvious infringements of the law , and the witch-hunt that is currently being organised against them .
In my view , homosexuals and drug users , who are currently still considered to be criminals , are also people whose rights should be defended .
Unfortunately , I do not have time to discuss this .
Mr President , I shall try to set out a few thoughts for the benefit of the many Members still in the Chamber .
Traditionally , we publish a report each year on human rights in which we look at the situation elsewhere in the world and a report in which we look at ourselves , in which we ask how human rights are shaping up within the Union .
Traditionally too , Mr President , we always find it easier to agree on the report which looks at the rest of the world than on our view of ourselves .
I hope it will be different tomorrow , and that we can be unanimous tomorrow in supporting Mrs Schaffner 's report , because I think we shall only be taken seriously if we are brave enough to take a critical look at the situation within the Union .
That would be progress compared with other experiences we have had .
But thinking about it , I find there is often something artificial about this division into human rights elsewhere and human rights within the Union .
It is not really good enough any more .
I have the feeling that , very often , the crux of the matter is the confrontation between the prosperous part of the world in which we live and the rest , and that human rights violations are increasingly concentrated around that confrontation .
Mr Pradier has already spoken of these things , of asylum and migration .
It is of course logical that when you live in a part of the world which is so outstandingly prosperous compared to the rest that people will come to you .
That may cause problems , but it is hardly surprising .
When we cannot grant their requests , these people do not all go back but acquire the status of illegals , people who do not actually exist .
Well , if we are looking at human rights violations , then once again we should take a look at this group .
These people are exploited as a result of their illegal situation , and that is wrong .
It also happens , and we have discussed such cases , that people do indeed have to go back and are forcibly returned to their country of origin .
Then too , unfortunate things often happen .
But this difference between rich and poor has other consequences as well .
One need only think of trafficking in human beings , and in women , a specific form of this .
We are fortunate this evening in having with us the Commissioner who has put in a great deal of effort on this subject - and has just done so again , and I congratulate her - which is a very important one to be considered , especially this evening when we are discussing human rights .
Lastly , Mr President , a word of appreciation for all those NGOs which work so hard on these issues - not just Amnesty , the UNHCR as well , and ECRE , and I am no doubt forgetting quite a few more .
It is good that we increasingly pay serious attention to the reports and accounts that emanate from the area of these NGOs .
I think that is a good thing , and once again I must thank all the people who keep these NGOs going , often at no personal benefit to themselves .
I think our policy , our greater effectiveness , is thanks to them .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to begin by thanking Mrs Schaffner for making a serious attempt to get to grips with respect for human rights in the European Union .
I would not like to thank or give recognition to those who , as in previous years , have used the pretext of human rights to formulate every conceivable political idea and ideological wish and introduce them as amendments .
Unfortunately , in doing so they have distorted Mrs Schaffner 's report .
There are other amendments to come which are in my opinion unacceptable , at least in the context of a discussion on human rights .
I would like to single out a few points here , such as the call for the legalisation of drug-taking , on which there are totally different views , or the demand for immigrant workers to be given the right to vote and to stand as a candidate in local elections . Another point concerns granting homosexual couples equal status to that of the conventional family , which implies the recognition of homosexual couples as a family and even their right to establish a family .
What I find serious is the fact that calls are being made to remove the regulations protecting young people from homosexual approaches and to lower the age of consent .
I am against all forms of discrimination , but the demands made here are in my opinion absolutely unacceptable .
Protecting the young , protecting children should always be given priority over the desire to give expression to individual sexual orientation .
The protection of the young , ladies and gentlemen - those of you who call for it - is in my view a human right . Human rights are too valuable to be used , and abused , as a vehicle for ideologies .
Mr President , once again we are dealing with the annual European Parliament report on the respect for human rights in the Union , and I first of all welcome the fact that the report continues to consolidate social and economic rights , as well as cultural rights , as an integral part of fundamental rights .
With this in mind , I would like to draw attention to a contribution that our group made to the report in requesting that regional languages be recognised and promoted , and that the Member States ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .
We cannot forget that we are debating this annual report on the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which is the indisputable framework of reference within which all national and international institutions and bodies should conduct their public action .
Nor do I want to forget the commendable work undertaken by the various non-governmental organisations - to which my colleague referred in the previous speech - in fighting for human rights to be established and respected in our societies .
The constant work of these organisations in criticising and making demands has contributed greatly to ensuring that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is better applied .
Finally , I would like to discuss a point that was included in the report on the initiative of our group , that is , the need to set up a high authority , which is independent from public authorities and which citizens can approach directly , that is responsible for ensuring that all of the security forces respect codes of ethics .
The existence of this high authority would mean that , in cases such as those that took place a few weeks ago in Melilla , where two local policemen were arrested , accused of raping a Moroccan woman , or in Toulouse , where a Maghrebi citizen was killed by the local police , the responsibility of the security forces could be better determined .
Mr President , when we talk about human rights we have to talk about the right for everybody to be treated equally , both before the law and in society itself .
This is an extremely important report because the European Union has to look at its own faults and problems before it can actually point the finger at other parts of the world .
Each year we have reports in Parliament on this issue but the rights of certain sections of society continue to be ignored .
For example , gays and lesbians are still discriminated against in many European countries because of their sexual orientation .
Women , despite the fact that they make up over 50 % of the population , are still discriminated against .
When we look at the legal systems in many countries , we find the actual application of law is unacceptable .
In my own country , Ireland , we have special criminal courts which have been condemned by the UN Human Rights Committee .
They are still being used , not only for what was justified as terrorist offences but also for ordinary offences .
We have the situation in some European Union Member States where people can be detained for very long periods of time without being charged .
This goes against the European Convention on Human Rights .
We have to look at these issues and decide that these countries should not be allowed to operate in this way .
Everyone should respect international covenants on human rights and each Member State in the European Union has serious questions to answer as regards the application of law .
Mr President , human rights are without doubt the pride of our century , as emerges clearly if we revisit certain questions which punctuate human history , from the one over which Socrates pondered during the night preceding his execution : ' What is just ?
To respect the law ? ' , to that of St Augustine : ' What distinguishes the State from a well-organised criminal association ? ' , to the one arising from the Nuremberg Trials in the middle of this century , when the Nazi criminals defended themselves by saying ' We were applying the law ' . ' That is precisely why we are sentencing you , ' replied the judges .
So what is just ?
Half-way through our century , the Declaration of 1948 gave an answer , not so much in its articles as in the preamble : ' recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom , justice and peace in the world ' .
The European Union has a link with human rights ; its true source of pride is neither the euro nor the market , but human dignity .
But it is precisely when re-reading the preamble to the 1948 Declaration that we realise that a turning-point with tragic consequences has been reached : the entire theory of human rights is liable to collapse like a sandcastle if we do not know who is the holder of these rights .
In other words , here at the very heart of the Union , the ultimate question needs to be asked , one which is more worrying than those of Socrates , St Augustine and Nuremberg .
The ultimate question is this : who is man , who is a member of the human family , and in what does dignity consist ?
Surely humanity 's most desperate moments - marginalisation , handicap , birth , death , moments when we have been embryos or on our deathbeds - are those when the fundamental question arises : who is man , who is the holder of human rights ?
It is therefore regrettable that the report , admirable in other respects , refers to the death penalty but not to the death sentence imposed on those who can only be presumed innocent ; it refers to children but not to the youngest of them all .
We shall therefore attempt to improve the text , so that it may offer protection to all and receive the vote of as many Members as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gradin , this year the European Parliament 's annual report on respect for human rights in the European Union is of particular significance .
After all , this year we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
I am particularly pleased that on the occasion of this anniversary we have today been able to deal directly with human rights inside and outside the Union .
This also makes it clear to the public that the Members of the European Parliament demand respect for human rights throughout the world .
The effect of this signal must not be underestimated .
Too often , Member States are themselves accused of violating human rights within their own borders , while at the same time trying to compel their trading partners to observe them by including human rights clauses in their trade agreements .
In this report we also make it clear that the personal rights of vulnerable and socially excluded persons are being violated .
It is in accordance with the intellectual tradition of Europe that the European Parliament , despite all hostility even from its own ranks , will not allow itself to be deterred from pointing out the flaws in our democracy .
I therefore consider it to be particularly important that the report on human rights deals with the situation of refugees and foreigners , children and minority groups .
In general they have no voting rights , and cannot therefore be involved in electing government .
If they are subjected to human rights violations these often go unpunished .
We then say it is their own fault , they themselves are to blame , they do not fit in .
These are the excuses that are given all too often for extreme incidents .
But whether people are foreign , whether they are normal or not , they are still human beings , they still have rights and they therefore deserve respect .
It is precisely this that our report aims to bring home to the governments of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , can the right to life be compared with the right to holidays ?
Is there not a difference in terms of dignity between fundamental political rights and economic and cultural ones ?
Nowadays , human rights are part of the diplomatic dialogue , but in the form of fundamental rights , such as the right to a fair trial , to protection of life and limb , the right to vote and to equality before the law .
Economic rights are based on finite resources , and should be regarded as a worthwhile goal rather than an indispensable requirement for the majority of the world 's population .
In some EU countries , it is hypocritical to claim that everyone has a right to work .
When the UN Declaration was drawn up , the Soviet Union tried to confuse the various rights in order to conceal from people the fact that they were being deceived as to their basic rights .
Such tactics threaten to undermine the very foundations of the rule of law .
When economic rights are used to conceal shortcomings and vagueness in promoting political rights , then we have reached a sorry state of affairs .
Political rights such as democracy , freedom of expression , property rights and freedom of trade are preconditions for the development of enterprise , employment and well-being - goals we are all striving to achieve .
Human rights have nothing whatsoever to do with paid holidays .
Let us go back to the basics : it began with John Locke and his concept of human rights based on life , freedom and property . This was translated by the Americans into life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness and taken up by the United Nations in its call for life , liberty and security of the person .
Abortion , cohabitation laws for homosexuals and the requirements they have to comply with in order to adopt children - all these are matters for national family legislation .
We therefore intend to vote against discrimination , but we shall abstain on family issues which are the concern of individual Member States .
Even though we are only able to offer very limited support for this report , we should like to praise Mrs Schaffner warmly for undertaking so competently what is a virtually impossible task .
Mr President , human rights belong to all of us .
That is what we think , anyway .
Unfortunately , very often this is just talk .
We have already heard that , as far as homosexuals are concerned for example , not everyone would necessarily agree with us .
In the same way I would ask us to look in our own backyards regarding the fate of the Romanies in Europe .
There is room for improvement in every country in this respect .
Their human rights are not being fully respected .
Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam will allow us to take action to produce a framework directive prohibiting discrimination , and a directive to combat racism .
This would be the sort of concrete action our citizens will expect of the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
At the Vienna summit , which debated Article 13 , great hopes were also laid on Parliament in this connection .
Mr President , if today we are discussing the annual reports on human rights in the context of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , then it is not without good reason that the issue of improved institutional and legal protection of human rights within the European Union also features more prominently than ever on the agenda .
This question was made topical both by the High-Level Group and by the Austrian Presidency , and now also in this House at the initiative of my group .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has admittedly brought about some progress in the legal protection of human rights within the European Union , as several people have mentioned today .
Article 13 in particular could represent a certain amount of progress despite all the procedural obstacles that it incorporates .
At a conference in Vienna this article was described as a sleeping child .
I believe it is our task to wake it .
However , even the traditional human rights are not yet firmly enshrined in the law of the European Union .
This is particularly upsetting and alarming as the Union is taking on more and more tasks that are particularly likely to affect fundamental rights , especially in the area of the third pillar , for example the development of a joint asylum and immigration policy , joint measures to combat organised crime , new monitoring procedures and EU-wide police and judicial cooperation .
These policies must be accompanied and restricted by fundamental and human rights that are based directly on EU law .
As we know from our own difficult experiences , a policy area can only be established for the long term if corresponding institutional guarantees are provided .
We are therefore proposing in an amendment that each Member of the European Commission with responsibility for freedom , security and justice should also in future be very much responsible for ensuring respect for human rights within the European Union , and that the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia that was set up in Vienna should be extended to become a general monitoring centre for human rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , we fully agree on the need for the Member States to strengthen their provisions and practices in terms of the respect of human rights in the European Union .
Similarly we do not accept the idea that we should throw stones at others when we ourselves live in glass houses .
When it comes to human rights we should not forget or underestimate the importance of social rights .
The rapporteur does admittedly refer to them , but the references seem to us to be inadequate .
In Europe we need to abandon the defensive position we have adopted towards social rights , as if they were excessive and as if globalisation and competitiveness meant that they need to be ' realistically reviewed ' .
Two positive points on two proposals : the proposal that 1999 should be the European Year for fighting violence against women , and the proposal to step up the fight against international networks and traffickers in clandestine immigration .
Finally , talking about particular cases of glasshouses , we hope that Portugal will stop contributing to the incidents of torture and inhuman treatment of people in prison or in police custody carried out by members of the police or armed forces .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Prison conditions
The next item is the report ( A4-0369 / 98 ) by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on prison conditions in the European Union : improvements and alternative penalties .
Mr President , if we adopt this report today , the main reason will be its political foresight and its success in picking up on what is essential and setting aside rigid ideological considerations , so as to grasp the opportunity of having a report which rallies a broad consensus .
I believe that we should reflect first and foremost on one fact : according to all the surveys - national and European - carried out in Europe , the question of safety and security is of considerable concern to our citizens , who wish for peaceful coexistence .
This report is therefore at odds with their legitimate desire .
My first point is that not just some of us , but all of us are concerned about our citizens ' safety .
The citizens know , however , that good organisation of prisons , with transparency of sentencing , secure establishments and clear alternative sentences which are comprehensible to the general public , also forms part of this peaceful coexistence .
To refrain from asking questions about prison conditions , which are often harsh , cannot enhance the safety of our citizens ; rather , harsh sentencing often covers up for a political inability to guarantee peaceful coexistence .
Secondly , we should not forget the original aims behind this report .
In view of the diversity - and also the positive changes - in judicial legislation , and out of concern for certain rights which are still being denied , for example the misuse of preventive detention and prison overcrowding in some countries , this report was intended to home in on some of the approaches already being followed in certain countries , bringing them to the attention of the others .
We could define it as an exercise in best practice , which neither impairs nor diminishes national sovereignty but gives the European Parliament a clear objective .
We regret that the vexed question of drugs has crept into this report , threatening to jeopardise the unanimity which I hope may return .
I would stress that all the amendments which I have examined , in particular my own and that of Ana Palacio , sought to remind this House that drug-users do not need prison but need alternative penalties , for example recovery in the community or in specialised centres . That was the thrust of our amendment .
I note that various amendments have been put forward : in my opinion , these will help common sense to prevail and the right balance to be struck among the groups .
If this balance can be found on the basis of one of the amendments , we shall have attained our common goal , namely to achieve maximum political convergence on this report .
Mr President , time is so short and Mr Pradier 's report so well drafted , so rational and so far-sighted that I shall make just two points .
First of all , it is true that this is not an electoral debate , but there is one mistaken idea here which must be rebutted , namely the idea that throwing people into prison can somehow solve their problems and ours as well .
Nothing could be more incorrect because , my dear Pierre , you take for granted what cannot be taken for granted : a large number of prison inmates are not guilty but innocent , and are placed in preventive detention for unacceptably long periods .
What happens is that those who suffer this misfortune - as well as those who really are guilty - simply learn in prison how to be bigger and better criminals , because many of our prisons have now become colleges of crime , where people learn how to be stronger , cleverer , sharper criminals who are more of a danger to society .
My second point , Pierre , is that we do not have two societies here , comprising those in prison and those on the outside .
You have rightly given figures for all the European citizens who are in some way affected by the problem because they are related to prison inmates .
The European people should be told once and for all that rehabilitating prisoners who are currently incarcerated , in order to reintegrate them into civilian life , benefits all of us , benefits society and helps to make society more fair and just .
Mr President , in its descriptive aspect this report has two sides .
It looks for clues , explanations and causes , and it denounces the problem .
However , when it moves on to concrete proposals it goes off the rails slightly because it goes into fields which are not part of its remit .
Any social , political or economic argument could be invoked for defending the decriminalisation of the use of illegal drugs .
Now the argument is that decriminalisation would help to relieve the overloaded prison population - and that is not acceptable because that is another debate that belongs elsewhere .
The media only react sporadically to the weaknesses and flaws in the system when there is some spectacular event such as a violent riot or when a famous person is imprisoned .
But rarely do they dig deeper to comment on the alarming rates of HIV contamination , or outbreaks of hepatitis or TB .
Rarely do they see prison overpopulation as dramatic , and its effects on bad sanitation , the prevalence of violence , the few attempts at social rehabilitation or the monitoring of young people , mothers , the mentally ill , alcoholics or drug abusers in prison .
Nor are we told the number of suicides that are covered up , of people lost in the despair of the very pits of human dignity .
As a Portuguese , I am embarrassed by the fact that Portugal tops the table for abysmal prison conditions .
On 15 August this year Portugal had a prison population of 14 592 including those sentenced , on remand or those who could not be classified .
The capacity of the 52 prisons in Portugal is only 10 763 .
When we think that 4 111 of those prisoners are being held on remand , many of them for periods longer than is desirable or stipulated by the law , then we must agree with the rapporteur when he talks about abuse of remand by the judicial system as one of the main causes of prison overpopulation , a measure that ought to be an exception but has actually turned into the rule .
Mr President , our colleague Mr Pradier has presented a report which naturally deserves very serious attention , since the subject in question is an important one .
As we debate it , I should like to focus on one specific point , which is paragraph 35 of his report .
The original text states one reason for not putting someone behind bars , namely overcrowding .
I have to say that in my country at least , and I think probably in most countries , you have to have chalked up quite a few offences and been fairly wild before you end up in prison .
You have to have committed a good many human rights violations .
I do not think you can say that overcrowding is a reason not to put someone in prison .
If you say that drug addicts should not be in prison just for using drugs , I would agree that that makes sense , although not because of overcrowding , but for other reasons .
It would seem very strange to me to use inappropriate methods for rehabilitating people .
The original text gave overcrowding as the reason , as do some amendments , which I find very odd .
The only amendment which does not mention this is that by Mrs Colombo Svevo and her associates .
This simply says that a drugs user should not be in prison simply because he is a user .
That is consistent with a position which we in the Netherlands have long maintained : a drugs user is primarily a patient , and the dealer is a major criminal who must be severely punished .
So I think it is logical to find dealers in prison , but not someone who has committed no criminal offence and has simply smoked or used drugs .
Even so , the prisons are of course full of people who have used drugs or still do so .
That is because they subsequently committed other criminal acts .
But that is quite another matter .
I should like to have seen this distinction clearly made in the report .
I should also like to have seen an answer to the question of how you can keep a prison or a prison wing free of drugs .
These are important issues .
Regrettably absent is any penetrating description of what in fact is and must remain a national responsibility and of what we can do as the European Union .
What we can do is primarily , I think , to pool our experience and so on , but I do not think we should be drawing up European legislation on prisons .
I do not think , culturally , that that is the right thing to do .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes Mr Pradier 's report and his proposals for improvements in prison conditions in the Union .
We agree with the rapporteur that more attention should be paid to the approximately 400 000 persons who are in prison in the different Member States .
A strong effort is needed to achieve the rehabilitation of prisoners and particular attention should be paid to respect for human rights .
Compliance with the standard rules for treatment of prisoners adopted by the Council of Europe must be ensured .
This is also outlined in the 1997 report on respect for human rights in the European Union .
With the Amsterdam Treaty the European Union will have the possibility to approximate rules relating to prison conditions .
This includes a possibility to strengthen cooperation concerning the enforcement of decisions .
It could also include early or conditional releases and integration of prisoners .
This is important to ensure equal treatment of prisoners within the Union .
These possibilities for stronger cooperation between the Member States in the field of prison conditions are one important component for the achievement of a high level of safety within the area of freedom , security and justice that we all - Parliament , the Commission and the Council - now have to implement .
The Commission will consider this report very carefully in the context of its post-Amsterdam powers in this field .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0469 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0533 / 98-96 / 0161 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on certain aspects of the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees ( Rapporteur : Mrs Kuhn ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , all the European institutions talk about the Citizens ' Europe .
In this vote on the directive on guarantees , Parliament has an opportunity to show how citizen-friendly it is .
The common position is to be welcomed , and it is a good basis for the second reading .
The Council has accepted some important amendments introduced by Parliament , though unfortunately not all of them , but it has also included some new provisions .
The Council 's adoption of the two-year guarantee period is positive .
The amendment for used cars was in my opinion quite defensible .
According to this amendment , the Member States can provide that buyers and sellers may agree a shorter period , though this must not be less than one year .
The Council has also confirmed that the burden of proof is reversed in the first six months following purchase .
This means that where a product is not in conformity with the contract it is assumed that the defect existed at the time of purchase unless the seller can prove otherwise .
It was also accepted that the seller should be liable for public statements that are product-related , for example in advertisements , if he cannot prove that he was not aware of these .
Although the Council is proposing a less stringent rule for the commercial guarantee provided by the manufacturer or seller , this will in future be more transparent .
What is stated in the guarantee declaration must be observed .
It is important that reference must be made to the fact that the consumer has legal rights that cannot be affected by the guarantee , which is what Parliament wanted .
The Council has accepted the hierarchy of remedies requested by Parliament for defective goods , although in my opinion it has worded it in such a way that it is difficult to understand .
The consumer can request repair , where possible or reasonable , or a replacement , where one is available .
If neither of these is possible he can insist on the cancellation of the contract or a price reduction .
This is acceptable thus far .
However , what Parliament should not accept is that in the event of a minor lack of conformity the buyer cannot insist on the cancellation of the contract .
In practice this means that if a defective product cannot be repaired and a replacement is not available , the buyer will admittedly be given a price reduction but will still be left with a faulty product .
I consider this to be unacceptable .
In addition , the question arises as to who defines a minor lack of conformity .
The directive should not really serve to create work for lawyers .
I would therefore urge that Parliament should delete Article 3 ( 5 ) .
Also , in paragraph 4 of the same article there is a translation error in the German and English texts .
It should read ' within a reasonable time or without any significant inconvenience ' , as it does in the French version , and not ' within a reasonable time and without any significant inconvenience ' .
The Commission , Parliament and the Council aimed to achieve a minimum level of harmonisation of the consumer goods guarantee with this directive .
On one point , however , the Council seems to have forgotten this in its discussions .
The common position wants to allow Member States to provide that , in order to exercise his rights , the consumer must notify the seller of the lack of conformity within a period of two months of detecting it .
This is inconsistent with minimum harmonisation .
Very few Member States wish to introduce this obligation to notify a defect .
It was simply a sweetener for one Member State so that it would approve the common position , which it then did not do .
A two-month obligation to notify a fault in some EU Member States is inconsistent with harmonised internal market rules , invites the informed consumer to lie - after all , how does the seller know when the defect was detected - and confuses the consumer when buying in another EU country .
A Frenchman who is not familiar with the obligation to notify a fault in his own country , buys a product in Germany and for reasons of time or distance does not report the defect in time and tells the truth out of ignorance , forfeits all his rights .
A buyer who buys his goods locally and discovers a defect will immediately inform the seller because he wants to use the product .
This is generally what will happen .
The committee therefore asks for this rule to be deleted without replacement , and I also ask Parliament today to approve this .
The Council is requesting 36 months for transposition into national law , we are requesting 24 .
There will be greater price transparency with the introduction of the euro , and I hope therefore that consumers will make greater use of the internal market .
Minimum harmonisation of the consumer goods guarantee needs to be introduced at the latest along with the introduction of the euro as cash , so we should keep to our 24 months .
The committee has also retabled other amendments from the first reading .
We have already adopted Amendment No 25 several times in other directives .
I know that one group is now against this .
The same applies to Amendment No 27 , which was adopted by an overwhelming majority in Parliament in the report on consumer access to justice .
Like myself , you have all received letters from credit institutions concerning Amendment No 17 .
However , Amendment No 17 states clearly that it concerns payments to the seller by instalments , as agreed by the seller , which should be able to be suspended until the defect has been rectified by the seller .
It does not concern bank credit , which of course cannot be interrupted because of a defect .
Unfortunately , because of the time available I cannot justify each amendment .
But I can assure you of one thing : at first reading both the committee and Parliament ensured that a balance remained in place between buyers , sellers and manufacturers .
Now , in conclusion , I would like to thank everyone , the Commission , the British and Luxembourg Presidencies and Members who have supported us .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Annemarie Kuhn , whose last major report in Parliament this may well be .
She has followed it through from the beginning and we have now reached a point where we can truly say that we have been mindful of the old principle ' caveat emptor ' .
We have given the buyer / consumer appropriate access to the means of redress , of complaint and of information in this matter .
There has been a very sustained lobby of this Parliament by people saying that the common position is fine as it stands , that there should be no change and that it would be very tiresome at this stage if we had any sort of codecision phase .
Of course , if there was a codecision phase , it is perfectly logical that it would take longer .
However , it might also make some marginal improvements to what is now a fundamentally good piece of legislation , which has set a new balance in the relationship between producers and consumers .
The bulk of the amendments moved by the rapporteur do , within that margin , improve this directive .
I particularly commend those deleting sections relating to the consumer 's obligation to notify any fault within two months , because there is a clear problem of practicability here ; the renewal of guarantees for any goods supplied to replace faulty goods , because obviously the same conditions should apply ; and the removal of Article 3 ( 5 ) of the common position , which prevents the consumer having the contract of sale rescinded if a fault is minor , because a minor fault might be repeated time after time throughout the guarantee period .
I have rather more doubts with regard to the situation in the United Kingdom , about one or two of the other amendments , particularly those which allow a consumer to suspend instalment payments unilaterally in any circumstances , which may result in difficulties in some cases .
There is also the Liberal Group 's amendment which would establish joint liability between the producer and the seller who has ceased trading or does not know of the claimed lack of conformity .
If this is passed , it will provide us with an opportunity for further thought and reflection at the codecision stage .
Finally , I would like to mention the amendment that I have moved with Mrs Jackson and a number of other Members right across the spectrum of Parliament .
This concerns the exemption of auction houses which are selling by auction where a price is fixed only by that auction , and usually acting as agents for antiques and works of fine art .
Our Amendment 34 on this matter , which I hope will be allowed , relates specifically to some provisions which are already in the common position .
I commend that to the House .
Mr President , may I begin by thanking Mrs Kuhn most warmly for the truly loyal cooperation which she has always given .
I mean that most sincerely , and we shall miss her as a colleague when she is no longer part of this House and no longer fighting the good fight on consumer affairs .
Secondly , there is the question of lobbies .
I think I have had less trouble over this than Mr Whitehead .
Looking at lobby activities , I simply note that today , for example , an amendment is being discussed on the subject of guarantees for consumer goods and that the amendment was put down by Sotheby 's , no less .
On the question of lobbies , I do not think we can claim to be whiter than white here .
Our group will be supporting this amendment , but I still do not think it is necessary .
What we are seeking with this directive is a stronger position for the consumer , who in the internal market is increasingly shopping across borders for luxury consumer goods .
It means that when you buy something you can count on having guarantees and that you are no longer dependent on the manufacturer 's warranty alone , but have guarantees for a period of two years in the case of new products and one year in the case of second-hand products .
There is a restriction on this , and that restriction is set out in Article 3 ( 3 ) , which determines the form of recompense if something is wrong with a consumer product .
It means that if a cheap second-hand car with a one-year guarantee is a car in the 500-guilder price range , then in all fairness and reasonableness the form of recompense is deemed disproportionate if you ask for a further year 's guarantee on it .
Anyone concerned about this will , I think , have found a number of things in this directive which certainly regulate the consumer 's rights effectively but also avoid problems for the retailer , the seller .
Something new in this directive is the reversal of the burden of proof .
I am happy at the way in which this has been formulated .
I should like to raise another point , namely small and medium-sized enterprises .
We have regulated quite a few things for small businesses through the right of redress against the hard-pressed retailer .
This is an amendment tabled by our group .
What we do not want for the small business is that the sometimes hard-pressed retailer is forced to hand out lists of service points in the various countries every time a customer buys something .
We do not think that is necessary .
If you buy a nice Philips or Siemens appliance or whatever , the manufacturer himself does that and the purchaser then has that list .
But you must not expect to get it everywhere .
I think rather too much has been demanded here .
I have some reservations about Article 3 , the nub of the legislation , and Article 5 .
I am concerned because I was told that I would be undermining the rights of the consumer .
What I have done is to table an amendment to Article 3 ( 3 ) on behalf of the PPE Group .
I have also tabled an amendment to delete Article 3 ( 5 ) .
The point at issue is the difference between ' a reasonable time ' and ' without any significant inconvenience ' and ' an appropriate period having regard to ... '
I still feel that my ' appropriate ' is stronger than ' a reasonable time ' as required in this very poor wording of the legislation .
I would ask the Socialist Group , if they are willing to support us on deleting Article 3 ( 5 ) , to take on board the other point as well .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our group does not think that we succeeded at the first reading in reaching a proper balance between the interests of the consumer on the one hand and that of sellers and manufacturers on the other .
We are therefore asking for thought to be given to the consequences which the positions of the Commission , the Council and Parliament may bring .
We have thus redrafted a number of amendments , most importantly concerning second-hand goods .
We had favoured excluding them altogether , but since this is no longer possible at this stage in the procedure , we are proposing a mandatory limitation for a period of one year , with the option of further exemptions based on the individual contract .
Secondly , the Council text on ways of redress is unclear .
No one benefits from a woolly legal text , except the lawyers .
We think our text indicates a clear hierarchy and is expressed in clearer language .
Lastly , in a limited number of cases we are advocating that the manufacturer rather than the seller should be liable .
The proposed legislation gives enormous protection to the consumer , but no one seems to be concerned about the same consumer who buys something abroad and cannot then go back to the seller or shopkeeper .
If a better balance cannot be found , then the Liberal Group will be voting against .
After all , what good does it do the consumer to have an excessive level of protection , if in the end he probably has to pay for it himself through higher prices ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Green Group would have liked to establish even broader consumer protection at first reading .
We had requested a five-year guarantee period in order to increase the incentive to produce durable products , as it should be clear that we need to embody the principle of durability in consumer protection also .
We therefore regret that there was not a majority for this at the time .
But I think that a two-year guarantee period is at least better than six months , as is the current situation in Germany , which unfortunately ranks lowest in this area .
I think that it is fundamentally important that we should give consumers greater protection here , and this includes providing the consumer with this guarantee .
However , it should not lead to a situation a minor defect is viewed as a further violation of the principle of durability . For example , if there is a small stain on a carpet it should not mean that the whole carpet must be disposed of , which would also not guarantee that the environmental aspect would be taken into account .
We also consider joint liability of the manufacturer and the seller to be fundamental , and this really must be included in this directive . Of course it is also essential that the period of obligation to notify a fault is not reduced , so that the rights of the buyer and the consumer in this area are not restricted .
We would actually have liked these rights to be extended , but on the whole , I think , we are reasonably pleased with the report .
I would like to mention one final point .
I would have preferred to have an obligation to label a product with the length of its total useful life so that the consumer really can determine policy with his shopping trolley , so that he can exert pressure in this area to ensure that genuinely durable products are made .
That is our concern , and it is clear that we must make sure that these aims are realised by linking environmental and consumer protection .
Mr President , I have to say , unfortunately , that my views on this proposal have not changed much since Parliament discussed it in March this year .
I am still very sceptical as to whether harmonisation is necessary , and I strongly object to the fact that the present directive represents a deterioration of consumer rights in several countries , including Denmark , where it directly undermines the provisions of the Danish Sale of Goods Act .
We should focus on the rights of European consumers , instead of concentrating on how the EU can stimulate people 's willingness to make purchases when they visit other Member States .
A number of the directive 's provisions should be removed in order to protect consumers .
These include Article 1 ( 2 ) ( b ) , the last part of Article 2 ( 2 ) ( b ) , the first part of Article 2 ( 4 ) and Article 3 ( 5 ) .
The basic shortcoming of this directive is that it only concerns the relationship between the consumer and the seller , and does not include the liability of earlier links in the chain of sales of faulty products .
The fact that there is no equitable duty to provide information on the part of the seller is also a problem , and it is unreasonable that consideration for consumers is only included as one of many other considerations .
Consumer considerations should always have top priority .
In addition , there are many ambiguities in the proposal which time does not allow me to list in more detail .
I do , of course , support the amendments in the report which attempt to rectify the shortcomings and ambiguities , but they are not enough , and unfortunately I cannot support the proposal as a whole .
Mr President , I believe that the idea behind this directive is a good one .
We know that in the European Union an increasing number of consumers buy goods in each other 's countries and this is likely to increase with the use of the single currency .
We also know that when they do so , consumers are often under-informed and confused about the nature of the guarantees that go with the goods that they buy .
I have great sympathy with the point of view put forward by Mrs Sandbæk .
The easiest way of dealing with this problem would have been to introduce a simple measure saying that consumers must be informed as to their rights regarding guarantees in the country where they are purchasing goods at the time of that purchase .
If they are buying something in Denmark they know they are in Denmark .
They can look out of the window and see Danish people walking up and down speaking Danish .
They are not going to get a French guarantee , they are going to get the Danish guarantee .
I believe that simple move would have been a great improvement on the situation as it is at the moment in many Member States .
The difficulty of that would have been that it would put the Consumer Directorate out of a job in the European Commission .
The lure of a harmonising directive has proved too much for them .
So in this draft directive the Commission has sought to harmonise the nature of the guarantee offered in all Member States and consumer rights under that guarantee .
The Commission 's association with the directive has not been happy .
The original text was very badly drafted and the impact statement said simply : ' Compliance costs are negligible ' .
This was roundly contradicted by the economic impact statement produced for the Commission by the Wilhelm Consulting Group , which found substantial increased costs likely to arise in some retailing sectors .
The Council has now improved the texts .
We have to say that the common position is preferable to the original and to what I describe as the rapporteur 's ' tinkering ' with the text .
The Commission has also extended the scope of the directive to cover all second-hand goods .
How realistic is this ?
Would it apply to goods sold , for example , in charity shops and car boot sales ?
If the sellers here had to offer a minimum one-year guarantee , as the directive states , surely this directive would threaten their future operation ?
Neither the Commission nor the Council of Ministers has thought through the implications of extending a minimum one-year guarantee to second-hand goods .
Article 7 makes it quite clear that this guarantee would cover all second-hand goods for at least one year .
Do they know about that at Oxfam ?
Are they happy about that at your neighbouring car boot sale ?
In opting to cover second-hand goods the Commission has inadvertently included within the scope of the directive sales of art , antiques and collectibles .
Three of the four remedies provided in the draft directive could not possibly apply to them .
How does one replace or repair a Canaletto ?
Reduction in price would be very difficult to agree .
Amendment No 34 , which I am moving with Mr Whitehead , offers the possibility of excluding the seller 's liability for any lack of conformity in such cases .
I hope this commonsense amendment will find favour .
Finally , the directive and the rapporteur show a touching faith in human nature .
The directive tries and fails to clarify the rights of the ignorant consumer but , in fact , it offers aid and comfort to the unscrupulous consumer who will be only too happy to use all legal loopholes created in order to demand replacement of goods or reimbursement of the purchase price .
Mrs Kuhn has made things much worse .
To sum up , there is one and only one group of people who will benefit from this directive : Europe 's lawyers .
If it is adopted , this directive , I can confidently predict , will encourage legal uncertainty and increasing litigation .
Europe 's consumers have very little to gain from it and Europe 's small businesses will pay for it .
Mr Santer promises less law but better law .
This is more law and worse law .
Mr President , one aspect of our work is to mediate between the requirements of the market and the laws needed to regulate it .
This is true more than ever now that a large-scale market of 370 million consumers is being launched .
We are working on behalf of consumers who are demanding new or recycled products and services , but who are also looking for assurances concerning products which have always satisfied them in the past , consumers who at the same time are calling for more information on what they are consuming , simpler and less dangerous packaging , clearer labels and less pollutant , more eco-friendly materials .
In the final analysis , consumers are calling for greater certainty and more guarantees , and these are precisely the issues addressed in the document under discussion today .
I am convinced that the Commission 's draft has been improved , thanks to Parliament 's contribution , even though it still contains some questionable provisions , such as the one concerning second-hand goods .
We do not perhaps need to back all of the amendments because they would probably disrupt the market , causing more confusion for consumers and traders , and would generate additional costs for commerce and industry without being of any practical benefit to the final consumer .
Lastly , voting for further difficult amendments , or just changes , would delay the conclusion of the legislative process .
Rather , it is time to put an end to the uncertainties of the end-user , avoiding a conciliation procedure which would undoubtedly be long and arduous .
I believe that the common position has taken on board the main wishes of the House at first reading .
Perhaps it would be better to adopt the common position straight away and ensure that the directive is adopted before the end of this parliamentary term .
That would be our rightful contribution to consumer protection .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive now being presented for second reading is particularly important for the operation of the single market and the protection of consumers .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Kuhn , who as in the first reading has done a very thorough , intelligent and extensive piece of work .
In this context , I would like briefly to clarify the position which the Commission took at the Council meeting on consumer affairs in April this year with regard to the Council 's common position .
In the end , the Commission accepted the political agreement which reflected a general compromise among a qualified majority of the Member States .
Before the Commission established its position , it took stock of the positive and negative points in the proposal in question .
The most significant positive points include a harmonisation of the concept of ' a lack of conformity of the goods with the contract ' , a workable system of consumer rights adapted to the current market situation , a single guarantee period of two years , a change in the burden of proof , and the first provisions on commercial guarantees which ensure consumers some degree of protection in connection with matters of openness .
One negative point is that Member States will have the option of imposing an obligation to notify on consumers as a condition for being able to exercise the rights in question .
It is difficult to square this provision with the idea of a common minimum level of consumer protection .
It is clear from the above that there were more positive points than negative ones in the common position , which was the reason why the Commission accepted it .
As a result of this position , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 7 , 8 , 9 , 19 , 20 , 24 and 25 , as well as Amendment No 26 , subject to a change of wording .
The Commission is also able to accept Amendment No 15 with a minor alteration to take account of the problem raised by the Council .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 1 in its present form , and proposes to turn it into a recital reflecting the substance of the new Article 153 , which replaces the previous Article 129a of the Treaty .
Among the changes which are acceptable to the Commission , I would like to emphasise the importance of Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 20 , which was also underlined in the debate here this evening .
They remove the option for Member States to impose an obligation to notify on consumers as a condition for being able to exercise their rights .
This amendment will thus help to make the contents of the directive compatible with the concept of the single market and the objective of establishing a common minimum level of consumer protection through the directive .
As regards the future progress of this proposal for a directive during the second reading and a possible conciliation procedure , I am very glad to say that , in the light of the amendments the rapporteur has presented and the reasons for them , the fundamental positions of the Council and the European Parliament on the issues involved are not so different .
I therefore think there is a good chance that this proposal will be adopted in the very near future , so that European consumers can be guaranteed a number of appropriate and necessary rights .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
CO2 emissions from new passenger cars
The next item is the report ( A4-0492 / 98 ) by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Decision establishing a scheme to monitor the average specific emissions of carbon dioxide from new passenger cars ( COM ( 98 ) 0348 - C4-0425 / 98-98 / 0202 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , perhaps one of the greatest challenges of the next few years for the world and for the European Union is to reduce emissions of gases that affect the climate .
This proposal , which is partial and modest , is concerned with measuring CO2 emissions from new cars .
The report therefore recalls the commitment made - so long ago now - at the Rio de Janeiro Conference , to stabilise CO2 emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 .
It also recalls the commitment made in Kyoto : an 8 % reduction in emissions of 6 greenhouse gases between 2008 and 2012 .
We felt that , although it was a timid proposal , it was the best one .
Taking into account that CO2 emissions from passenger cars account for 50 % of CO2 emissions from the transport sector and 12 % of all CO2 emissions in the European Union , we should remember that the 1996 Council position already proposed the reduction of CO2 emissions by 2005 or by 2010 at the latest , to 120 g / km .
The document presented by the Commission states that , at present , CO2 emissions are at a level of 170 g / km , while Eurostat figures show a level of at least 186 g / km .
The report points out the need for fiscal incentives , fuel economy and labelling and consumer information , which we feel is essential , and which is also covered by another report that was being debated at the same time , for which Mr Fitzsimons was the rapporteur .
The report welcomes the proposal for a monitoring scheme , although I do not entirely understand the insistence that the schemes in various countries should not be harmonised , as it would seem that a certain amount of harmonisation is necessary .
The report also highlights Parliament 's reservations concerning voluntary agreements , although I know very well that the Commissioner defends them , in my view , as a lesser evil . It also welcomes this scheme because , whether it is on the basis of agreements or with regulations , this scheme for monitoring CO2 emissions from new cars will be necessary .
We believe , as we have stated in the explanatory statement , that the diversity of proposals and directives makes them more complex for citizens to understand and also means that their transposition into the legislation of the various countries is more complicated : there are a large number of directives that refer to subjects that are inter-related .
The report states that if measures are not taken and monitoring is not carried out , emissions will increase by 40 % in the next few years .
It emphasises the need to have legislation in place , in case no agreement is reached with the car industry .
It expresses concern that an evaluation is not guaranteed before 2003 and therefore proposes bringing it forward a little .
The report considers the problems that could be presented in the future by cars that use electricity and other fuels such as gas , and we see that in the proposal , the Commission considers the possibility of including those cars in the future .
We disagree with the exclusion of cars registered outside the European Union , which is a growing sector that would be outside our control .
We therefore accepted an amendment to this effect that was tabled by Mr Lange .
I will now conclude , Commissioner , by saying that some of the amendments tabled by Mr Lange that we accepted relate to the inclusion of light industrial vehicles in the monitoring scheme , and bring the deadlines forward somewhat .
The representative from the Commission stated clearly in the meeting of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection that it was not going to be possible to bring forward the deadlines , but as there are always delays in meeting them , we insisted that they should be brought forward a little .
We would stress the fact that it would be necessary - and we tabled two amendments at the last minute - to evaluate the quality of data , and if the data is not good enough to carry out rigorous monitoring , the Member States would have to be told to change their method of collecting data . In addition , more powerful cars with more cylinders should also be included in this monitoring scheme .
All in all , Commissioner , we realise the difficulties that the Council and the Commission may have in accepting some of our amendments , but you are well aware , Commissioner , that Parliament always insists on its political proposals and its proposals to bring forward deadlines , as it knows very well that it is possible that there will be delays if it does not do so .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is nice that we can discuss this legislation in such an intimate context .
Perhaps it would be even nicer if we could do it elsewhere over a drink , but unfortunately that is not possible .
Recently I have found the attitude of the European automobile industry to be much more proactive than in the past .
This has been seen in the Auto-oil legislation but also in the question of CO2 reduction in cars .
I was surprised by the offer of a voluntary reduction to 140g by 2008 , even if it was not quite what we had in mind .
I do not want to sound like Lenin by saying that trust is good but control is better , but in this respect we must of course take action to ensure that this voluntary reduction is also observed .
We need an objective , logical data system in order to be able to carry out this monitoring .
For this reason I fully support the report by Mrs González , which considerably improves upon some of the points in the Commission proposal .
We need data relating to average consumption for individual manufacturers and individual models so that if the voluntary reduction is revised we could still say , if necessary , that it is not acceptable .
We need to introduce statutory regulations , and I would like to invite the Commission to indicate what form such regulations could take .
Traffic is an example here .
We are not supposed to drive at a speed of over 50 km / h , but some of us drive faster . A policeman comes along and tells us this is not allowed , and then we pay attention to what we are doing .
I believe that it must be clear from the outset that there is a fine or a driving ban or similar for driving at a speed of over 50 km / h .
If we are to monitor the situation we also need to know what happens if we have to say that our data indicate that something is not allowed .
We should also include light commercial vehicles , because of course they also emit CO2 and they are fairly heavy polluters particularly in urban areas .
There is also a small loophole , however .
In a large Member State that I know quite well there is a voluntary standard , but at a certain point it was noticed that this did not work as it stood and certain vehicles were excluded , vehicles that are also authorised for use as light commercial vehicles .
We should at least bear this little loophole in mind .
It is for these reasons that we ask in our amendment that light commercial vehicles be included for monitoring purposes and request that Directive 70 / 156 be amended .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear to everyone who is interested in the health of the environment that the Kyoto Protocol established essential framework conditions for curbing CO2 emissions .
The European Union agreed with the other parties to the Convention to set legally binding reduction targets for the emission of carbon dioxide .
The fact that emissions from passenger cars account for 12 % of all CO2 emissions in the European Union means that all responsible people involved in environmental policy are compelled to take rapid action .
The Community had set itself the target of reducing specific CO2 emissions from new passenger cars to 120g / km by the year 2000 . However , today we still do not have a system at EU level to monitor properly whether this target is being achieved .
But in order to be able to identify the effectiveness of the various measures as quickly as possible and to introduce guidelines if necessary , an appropriate monitoring system is absolutely essential .
As proposed in the present report , this can only be achieved by officially recording the specific consumption levels , net weight , maximum net power and engine capacity of newly registered passenger cars .
The advantages of this are not just about being able to measure the success of consumption-reducing measures , but also about identifying the main trends in transport policy .
The measures proposed in this report go a considerable way towards implementing the Kyoto Protocol , as targets alone are not enough to prevent negative effects on the world climate .
It is also essential to lay down monitoring standards and to control these very closely .
It is only in this way that the European Union can play its undoubtedly important role in ensuring that the Kyoto Protocol is more than just fine words .
Mr President , our group 's spokesman , Mr Eisma , is unable to be present here today , so I shall speak on his behalf .
With regard to Mr Lange 's comment , I hope that he - and I know he is here with his daughter , among others - is able to have the drink that the rest of us may be missing at the moment here in the plenary .
But I shall also begin on his behalf by commending the rapporteur , who has proposed some important amendments on behalf of the committee .
The Liberal Group has always been uneasy , not to say unhappy , about the fact that we have a voluntary agreement between the European Commission and the vehicle industry , but now that we have it , the least we can do is ensure that it is properly monitored .
The voluntary agreement entails a reduction in emissions to 140 g of CO2 per km in 2008 .
Parliament has always believed that it should be 90 g per km in order to be able to meet the Kyoto targets .
At most this is a reduction of 25 % , but much more is needed when , at the same time , we know the greatest challenge for the environment in the coming years will be the development of transport .
We therefore agree with the rapporteur that it would be desirable to have some fallback legislation in case the agreements are not adhered to , and we would like to support the rapporteur in this way of thinking .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by saying that voluntary agreements can be excellent , and that we would also like to commend the vehicle industry , but we also know that for these agreements to be successful , it is very important to have measurements and sanctions , if they are to succeed in the long run .
Mr President , it is quite right that the rapporteur should be calling for light commercial vehicles to be included in this agreement .
It is just as my colleague Mr Lange said a moment ago : there is a loophole here .
Light commercial vehicles have been left out , even though they are responsible for substantially high levels of carbon dioxide emissions .
We firmly support the rapporteur 's amendments .
I would also like to stress that the objectives of this voluntary agreement are very modest .
Can it really be possible that , because the average car in 1986 consumed seven litres of petrol for every one hundred kilometres , the Commission accepts the notion that the car industry is heading for a target of six litres per hundred kilometres over a period of twenty-two years , in other words by the year 2008 ?
We can see from the statistics that we in Europe are manufacturing cars that are just too big .
We must be able to do something about this .
Mr President , let me first thank the Committee on the Environment and in particular its rapporteur , Mrs González Álvarez , for the excellent piece of work carried out in connection with this proposal .
It is correct , as both the rapporteur and Mr Lange have said , that this is a part of our climate strategy , while at the same time it is a continuation of the Auto / Oil programmes and thus an improvement of air quality in Europe as a whole .
The Commission agrees with several of the constructive amendments which the committee has tabled .
The Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , No 6 as regards the part which stresses the need for monitoring , Nos 7 , 8 and 27 in principle , No 29 with a change of wording , Nos 33 and 35 , Nos 42 to 45 as regards the parts which increase the number of data categories for large vehicles , and lastly No 46 in principle .
Then there is a group of amendments which , unfortunately , the Commission cannot accept .
This is not for political reasons , but because of technical limitations .
These are the parts of Amendments Nos 9 to 26 and 36 to 45 aimed at including commercial vehicles in the monitoring scheme .
In principle , we have nothing as such against including such vehicles in the monitoring scheme , and environmentally too , of course , it is a sensible idea .
But the fact is that measuring the CO2 emissions of these vehicles is not part of the EU 's type approval procedure , and so we simply cannot include them at the current time .
We appreciate that Amendments Nos 47 and 48 seek to strengthen the Commission 's role by ensuring that Member States provide us with reliable data .
However , we cannot accept the amendments . This is because , in our opinion , the existing wording provides the right balance between an effective role for the Commission and the continued right of the Member States to use their own systems .
Nor can we accept the parts of Amendments Nos 28 to 30 which are aimed at bringing the implementation forward .
The dates the Commission has proposed already give the Member States very little time to implement the decision .
There is also Amendment No 31 , which brings forward the date for the report on the implementation of the scheme .
We cannot accept this amendment either , because we would like to have enough data available to draw up a report of sufficient quality .
Nor can we accept Amendment No 34 .
Then there are Amendments Nos 12 , 14 and 38 which are also unacceptable to us .
We do not think it is appropriate to include vehicles which are registered for a second time , even if this takes place within six months of the first registration .
It would only make the data more difficult to use .
As regards the future indication of the exact format for the transmission of data , the Commission is unable to accept these parts of Amendments Nos 28 and 38 .
This is because we actually have the exact format in Appendix 4 of the proposal .
Amendment No 32 concerns the selection of the year 2002 as the reference year for monitoring the environmental agreement with the vehicle manufacturers .
However , the agreement is based on a fixed numerical target , so it is not necessary to have a reference year .
If the agreement had been based on a percentage reduction , a reference year would have been of crucial importance .
That is the reason why we cannot accept this amendment .
On the other hand , I would like to reassure Parliament that the progress of the agreement will be closely followed every year .
It can hardly be a great surprise to Parliament that the Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 , which criticise the agreement .
I had the opportunity to discuss this not so very long ago , in a very lively fashion , I might add , with the Committee on the Environment .
For similar reasons , the Commission is also unable to accept the part of Amendment No 6 which would entail the Commission beginning the technical work with a view to presenting a legislative proposal .
We also had the opportunity to discuss that part in depth at the same meeting .
But to sum up , it may be said , Mr President , that the Commission is able to support a number of the proposed amendments , and that we are of course very pleased that in general our proposal has been positively received by the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment .
Commissioner , I would like to ask a question concerning light commercial vehicles .
Of course we know that , in the context of type-approval under Directive 70 / 156 , no standards exist as yet for recording CO2 emissions for light commercial vehicles .
But naturally such standards can be created .
So if we say we need them , Directive 70 / 156 must be amended .
Incidentally , in the Auto-oil legislation , a recital in the new Directive 98 / 69 calls for just this .
So what is to prevent the Commission from submitting a proposal for an amendment to this effect ?
Mr President , I am sure that Mr Lange noted that I said we could not include these vehicles at the current time , and that is of course because I share his view that it would be extremely useful to include them .
We shall therefore start on the technical work which this requires .
I shall not pretend that I know how long this technical work will take , but it will take some time .
However , we shall do what we can , and we agree that it would be good if we could get these changes implemented .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Consumer information on fuel economy of new passenger cars
The next item is the report ( A4-0489 / 98 ) by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive relating to the availability of consumer information on fuel economy in respect of the marketing of new passenger cars ( COM ( 98 ) 0489 - C4-0569 / 98-98 / 0272 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , the directive we discussed earlier refers once again to the voluntary undertaking by the automobile industry to reduce CO2 emissions by technical measures .
What we are now discussing has more to do with a change in consumer behaviour , in other words additional measures .
I also consider it to be only right that we should aim to achieve this by means of information rather than legislation , because after all we do not want to dictate people 's needs ; we want to provide information so that people can decide for themselves .
I find it very exciting to think that in car manufacturers ' showrooms we will see large signs on the cars that no longer say how much horsepower a car has or what speed it does or other attractions , but that say that one car 's fuel consumption is 3 litres and that of another the same size is 15 litres , perhaps signs on a strong background , yellow , black , red or green - I do not wish to determine that , as colours are not the concern of politics - but on a striking background , and then the buyer will surely react differently .
I believe that , as the rapporteur has already mentioned , more information should of course be provided in order to ensure honesty , because the test cycle , which unfortunately does not exist yet for light commercial vehicles , does not take into account any extra equipment such as air conditioning or pre-heating systems , which may increase fuel consumption by as much as 20 % .
I believe that the consumer should be told about this honestly , not in detail but in the form of a note to the effect that , if something like this is included , consumption will increase accordingly .
I also think that , in order to make things a little more transparent , we should authorise and demand that more information should be available on this issue via the Internet , so that a consumer who wants to buy a new car can find out simply by sitting at his PC at home that a certain car with extra equipment has a certain level of fuel consumption , and from this he will know the level of CO2 emissions .
It should also be possible to see the fuel consumption of a specific model in the showroom .
This is also quite important , as the third pillar of the strategy is still tax measures to promote cars with low fuel consumption .
To this extent , the consumer should also know exactly how much fuel a car consumes and what tax advantages he might gain from it .
In this respect , I welcome the rapporteur 's amendment , and I fully support it in order to achieve a little more transparency for the consumer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present proposal for a system of consumer information on the fuel economy of new passenger cars includes some important aspects .
It is above all an important component of the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars .
This idea is not a new one .
In my country there have already been voluntary agreements for several years to state fuel consumption explicitly in promotional literature .
This idea is also willingly taken up by manufacturers , particularly by those who can supply economical cars , of course .
I firmly believe that a label that is not only displayed for sale purposes but that is also to be displayed on vehicles on the road will in future have a much greater effect on consumer choice .
I would therefore hope that we can increase the use of incentive systems rather than penalties in such strategies .
The market could regulate itself very well in precisely these areas .
It would regulate itself more quickly if the state were to offer encouragement in the form of bonus schemes or tax incentives that would favour consumer information and prompt industry to provide it .
In addition , this consumer label will help to support the vehicle manufacturers ' efforts .
The main aim in this is to reduce harmful emissions in order to fulfil the commitments of the Kyoto Convention .
But I also welcome in particular the voluntary undertaking of the umbrella organisation of car manufacturers to meet the guidelines for CO2 reduction in a phased plan over the next few years .
This declaration helps manufacturers as well as consumers and in particular the environment .
However , a secondary aspect is that it also contributes significantly to simplifying the law .
After all , it was experts who fixed binding rules , and incidentally the aim is similar to what we are planning under the bus construction directive in the Murphy report .
It is crucial that those who protect the consumer , for example the testing organisation Stiftung Warentest , the ADAC , draw up this benchmark so that the consumer receives reliable information not only from the vehicle manufacturer but also from associations that specialise specifically in this area .
We have seen this before in the case of the Green Paper on efficient pricing in transport .
Most problems are caused by traffic jams in towns .
Here consumption is particularly high , and the effects of traffic jams must of course be given appropriate consideration especially in conurbations .
We must therefore work very hard in this area to eliminate these problems , and I also believe that there should be no cross-subsidies , as mentioned in the Green Paper ' Towards fair and efficient pricing in transport ' , because we have enough problems with cars , so the priority should be to work towards making cars tolerable for the environment and for towns .
To begin with , I should like to thank the Committee on the Environment and especially its rapporteur , Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , not only for having produced a report of high quality but also for dealing with the proposal so quickly .
The Commission agrees with several of the constructive amendments proposed by the committee , and we are able to accept the following amendments in full : Nos 1 , 2 , 5 , 7 , the first part of 15 , 18 , 20 , 22 and the second part of 23 .
Amendments Nos 9 , 12 , 14 , the first part of 19 and the first part of 23 are acceptable in principle and , lastly , Amendment No 17 is acceptable as far as the effect of extra equipment is concerned .
I shall now give the reasons why we cannot accept some of the other amendments .
Since the purpose of the proposal is consumer information - I agree with Mr Lange who said something on the lines of the proposal being a piece of transparency to the benefit of the consumer - we cannot accept Amendments Nos 10 , 11 , 16 and 21 , or those parts of Amendments Nos 19 , 23 and 24 which are aimed at deleting all mention of figures for fuel costs associated with driving 10 000 km .
In the Commission 's opinion , such figures are a clear signal which could persuade consumers to modify their behaviour .
The Commission is aware that in many Member States diesel is taxed less heavily than petrol , but Member States are free to include different taxes in the cost figure , and we are currently holding talks with the Council about a breakdown of this in the directive itself .
Since the Commission intends to keep information about fuel costs in the proposal , we are also unable to accept Amendment No 3 .
In addition , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 8 .
We do agree that Internet advertisements should be covered by the term ' promotional literature ' , but it must be up to the Member States to decide whether an Internet advertisement is considered to be an advertisement on their territory .
Then there are Amendments Nos 4 and 6 which extend the scope of the directive to cover nearly-new vehicles .
We cannot accept this .
Initially , the directive should cover only new passenger cars , but it is conceivable that used cars could also be included at a later date .
These amendments are also aimed at including cars which have only been registered for a single day .
However , the directive 's current definition of new passenger cars already covers this eventuality .
Then there are the parts of Amendments Nos 15 , 18 , 24 and 28 which deal with a simplification of the format in which fuel consumption should be shown , in other words that it should always be given in litres per 100 km and not in either litres per 100 km or km per litre .
This is not acceptable because each Member State has its own traditional way of showing fuel consumption , so it is important to be flexible if we are to achieve acceptance by consumers in the various Member States .
The changes of wording in Amendments Nos 17 and 25 are not acceptable .
We think the current wording regarding cars and climate change is a suitable compromise between drawing attention to the problem and at the same time explaining to drivers what their role is .
To sum up , the Commission is able to support a large number of the amendments .
We are pleased with the quick handling and positive reception which the Committee on the Environment and its rapporteur have given to the proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Depletion of the ozone layer
The next item is the report ( A4-0465 / 98 ) by Mrs Graenitz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on substances that deplete the ozone layer ( COM ( 98 ) 0398 - C4-0580 / 98-98 / 0228 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the ozone layer , which protects people , animals and plants on earth from harmful ultraviolet rays from the atmosphere , has been depleted by 10 % since measurements began in the early 1980s , although in the northern hemisphere over Scandinavia and Siberia depletion is up to 45 % .
Over ten years ago , with the Montreal Protocol , we found a way to control the phasing-out of ozone-depleting substances .
A few weeks ago , the 12th Conference of the Parties to the Protocol marked the start of the section of the Protocol in which the developing countries also committed themselves to reducing production of HCFCs .
In the European Union , production of fully halogenated chlorofluorocarbons was halted as early as 1995 .
We are now beginning to reduce production of HCFCs .
I believe that the Commission proposal is a very good and very sensible one , and will help us to begin this reduction more quickly than provided for the EU in the Montreal Protocol .
In my report I have made some amendments to the Commission 's proposals because I think that in certain areas production can be halted even more quickly , alternative substances are available , and it is necessary to have a certain degree of standardisation in halting production so that there are not several different deadlines for individual product ranges .
In addition , we need a phasing-out of HCFCs so that industry can prepare itself to slow down production gradually .
I believe this is also what the industry wants .
In my report I have also tried to address other problems by means of amendments .
One is the question of illegal trade , which is becoming more and more urgent .
In old installations there are supposedly closed systems from which substances are still disappearing .
Even small amounts , such as 20 or 50 litres of CFCs , are enough to keep these old installations in operation for a number of years , and this is why illegal trade in CFCs takes place .
I hope that these amendments on stricter controls and help for factories to halt production sooner , will also be useful .
I also believe that we need regulations for the export of substances that are already banned in the Union .
I have proposed a certain transitional period so that in particular the developing countries , which under the Montreal Protocol can continue to use HCFCs for a longer time than the European Union , do not have to develop their own industries or halt production at the same time as us , but are allowed to use new substances and build up significantly better new industries by using new substitutes from the outset .
I would like to mention two further points that seem to me to be very difficult and for which I have not really found a solution .
The first is the use of HCFCs in fire extinguishers .
Unfortunately , I only today received the information from the Commission to the effect that , in accordance with a European Court of Justice ruling of this summer , the use of HCFCs in fire extinguishers is banned .
It is highly regrettable that this information was not available for the vote in committee .
I also believe that the proposers of the motion that was approved in committee , who were advised on this by their Green Minister of the Environment , were not aware of it .
I am sorry that I only learned of this this evening and could not speak to the committee chairman about it .
I will inform Parliament of this fact tomorrow before the vote on this issue so that the vote can then be cancelled .
My final point concerns methyl bromide .
Following discussions and votes in committee , a compromise was found in this area to allow the southern Member States to use methyl bromide for longer in soil fumigation .
I know that such a compromise is difficult and should really be rejected for reasons of environmental policy , but I ask the Commission to find a way to allow a decent transition in view of what is currently being discussed in the Council .
Mr President , in October the largest hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic was recorded .
So much damage has already been done to the ozone layer that the hole is now three times the size of Australia .
The survival of the human race is being seriously threatened and we must find a common solution to the problem .
Depletion of the ozone layer is occurring so rapidly that it is impossible to predict what will happen in the future .
We know that depletion of the ozone layer has already had some very serious consequences , particularly in the area where we know that the ozone layer is thin and where the incidence of skin cancer is increasing .
There can scarcely ever have been clearer evidence of the need for cross-border cooperation - and we must act quickly .
We know that the ozone layer is expected to get thinner in the next few years unless we reach agreement on a radical reduction of ozone- depleting substances .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's initiative in putting forward a proposal to improve and tighten up the regulation on substances that deplete the ozone layer .
I should also like to congratulate Mrs Graenitz on the admirable and skilful way in which she has dealt with this difficult and highly technical subject and on the amendments she has proposed , which include a further tightening-up of the Commission 's proposal .
There is one particular issue which I should like to raise in this context .
New ozone-depleting substances which are not covered by the Montreal Protocol or by the EU regulation on ozone-depleting substances are being discovered all the time .
We know that some of these substances have a far more damaging effect than those that are already covered by agreements and legislation .
If we are to achieve the agreed objectives laid down in the Montreal Protocol , we must solve the problem created by these ozone-depleting substances .
To do so , we have to devise a simple and efficient system for controlling the whole area of ozone-depleting substances , so that arrangements are in place for when new substances are discovered .
I would therefore urge Parliament to support the committee 's proposals relating to the arrangements for controlling new ozone-depleting substances .
As I have already said , we know that the hole in the ozone layer is now bigger than at any time in the past .
I should therefore like to say that some things in life should not be matters for compromise , and the hole in the ozone layer is one of them .
The situation is not helped by the existence of companies which produce such substances and are threatened with closure if they are banned .
In the end , however , it is probably better to outlaw certain industries , since we know the effects that they have .
The compromises which have been reached are therefore very disappointing both from an environmental point of view and in terms of competition .
Mr President , I would firstly like to extend my warmest congratulations to Mrs Graenitz on her report .
Things were not easy for her , nor did she make them easy for herself .
The result is nevertheless a very important one .
I think it would have been easy for Mrs Graenitz and also for myself , as Austrians , to present a very different report .
But we as Austrians are having to learn the hard way in the European Union that things do not always go the way we want .
We have southern neighbours who simply cannot yet appreciate this .
It is very clear that one of the great successes of the Montreal Protocol has been that the rate of depletion of the ozone layer has decreased in recent years .
I would like to make it clear that the ozone hole itself has not been reduced , but the rate of depletion has decreased .
The present report recognises the problem of depletion of the ozone layer and is therefore very clearly in favour of halting the production and use of the substances that cause it .
We all know what these substances cause , for example skin cancer and eye damage .
But they also affect all natural ecosystems .
Therefore the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is trying to find a consensus that is as broad as possible while at the same time taking account of particular interests in this very important issue .
For this reason I have tried to play my part in reaching a compromise with my colleagues from the southern Member States on the use of methyl bromide in agriculture .
It is certainly not a concern for Austria .
We do not need it at all , no-one needs it at all , but there are simply some countries that have a particular climate and believe that because of their special situation they have no alternative .
I believe that the European Parliament is helping to ensure that absolutely essential environmental protection rules are implemented as quickly as possible .
We all know that there is a tendency here and everywhere else to water down legislation , and we must fight against this .
However , I would like today also to thank my colleagues from the southern Member States for their cooperation ; it was quite interesting to see that amendments came from Italian members of several different parties , from my group and from Mrs Graenitz 's group .
There is certainly a problem here concerning land .
As Members of the European Parliament , as those responsible for ensuring a thriving environment , it is our duty to prevent damage being done to the essential foundations of life , and at least in future to reduce or prevent mistakes that we have certainly made in the past .
Mr President , although as many speakers have mentioned , a great deal has been done at international level over recent decades , there is still a long way to go . The increased possibilities of access to alternative substances therefore naturally mean that we must try to do more .
This proposal is a step in the right direction .
It is a question of restrictions or outright bans , and of controlling the licensing of exports .
One of the things we unfortunately cannot get to grips with in the European Union is the possibilities of taxation - and I think the Commission agrees with me when I say unfortunately , because that is a very effective way of modifying behaviour .
I can tell you that we used this instrument in Denmark and we did think that it would at first generate some revenue for the Treasury , but I have to say that there was no revenue because people switched to alternative substances immediately .
This shows what it is all about .
It is also very much about economics , but as I have said , we cannot go down that road .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work she has put into the report and say that our group is voting in favour of the amendments which tighten up the legislation .
I can understand very well the rapporteur 's compromise proposal with the PPE Group .
Like the rapporteur , I would also have thought it was a good idea , but like my group , I am now in favour of having tougher regulations .
We think methyl bromide can already be replaced now .
This has already happened , for example , in greenhouses in the northern countries , and there are no problems with using the alternatives .
So it should be possible in the southern countries too .
Mr President , the report contains a number of good points , including tougher legislation , which we naturally support .
However , in some respects it is disappointing , not least as regards methyl bromide .
In particular , I have some questions relating to two compromise amendments tabled by the PSE and PPE Groups , namely Nos 32 and 33 , which allow some noteworthy exceptions that would seriously damage the ozone layer .
Exemptions are being granted here in respect of certain substances that are damaging to health when usable alternatives exist .
It is a pity that a compromise was not sought with other groups , which would presumably have been possible .
In my view , the proposal put forward by the Green and GUE / NGL Groups represents a better option .
I also find it interesting that the proposal is based on Article 130 , since it deals with chemicals .
No doubt it would be possible to apply this to numerous directives that deal with different chemicals , not with a view to harmonisation , but to facilitate more progressive legislation in various countries .
Such a possibility should be exploited .
Mr President , the Commission proposal on substances that deplete the ozone layer contains a serious loophole which some of us have discovered .
A multinational company which runs a factory in my home country , Luxembourg , is allowed to continue to use CFC-11 as a solvent in an industrial process , although a substitute which does not deplete the ozone layer exists and has been used since 1995 in a second production line of the same company .
For almost 15 years Du Pont de Nemours has used CFC-11 as a solvent to produce a polyurethane fleece .
The annual emissions have been , on average , 15 tonnes of CFC-11 , which is quite substantial .
An extension of the authorisation was granted recently .
Du Pont de Nemours now calls its solvent a processing agent but that is just a trick to allow them to continue to use CFC-11 .
We should not allow another extension of these authorisations , especially as a substitute , pentane , exists and has been used successfully in a parallel production line .
My Group has asked for a split vote on the last paragraph of Annex VI of the proposal , which defines a list of processes where the use of CFC-11 may still be permitted as a processing agent .
I propose we just delete this paragraph by voting ' no ' tomorrow .
Finally , HCFCs still have a very high ODP and a high global-warming potential .
I urge you not to permit the use of HCFCs as a processing agent .
Mr President , thanks in part to the Montreal Protocol , we shall be able to quickly phase out substances which deplete the ozone layer .
The desired effect , closing the hole in the ozone layer , will not be felt for a hundred years .
We also hope that by then the number of skin cancer cases will have fallen .
It is a good thing that the European Union wants to take measures to hasten this phasing-out process .
And it can be done , given the rapidly growing number of alternatives available .
The manufacture , use and marketing of methyl bromide is to cease by the year 2001 .
And there can be no exemptions on grounds of climatological conditions .
Climatological conditions in Dutch and German greenhouses are the same as in the southern Member States , but methyl bromide has not been used in the Netherlands since 1992 and is now banned in Germany as well .
If the right technology is used , there is no loss in productivity and it is healthier for the workers too .
As regards the use of HCFCs in fire extinguishers as an alternative to halon , I can say that this is already banned , and therefore in Italy as well , despite the fact that Italy is ignoring a judgment by the European Court .
Alternatives to HCFCs are now available too , and these , moreover , are not carcinogenic .
The only exemption which we regard as justified is for ' critical uses ' , for example CFCs in inhalers or chemical precursors for pharmaceuticals .
Since these substances cannot be obtained outside the EU in sufficiently pure form , all trade in ozone-depleting substances with countries outside the EU must be prohibited .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the Committee on the Environment , and especially its rapporteur , Mrs Graenitz , for the report we are discussing here this evening .
The amendments are almost all aimed at accelerating the phasing-out of substances which deplete the ozone layer - an objective which I can of course fully support .
However , we are involved in some rather intricate negotiations where attention must also be paid to the opinions in the Council .
So the Commission cannot go as far as the European Parliament might like at the present moment in some areas .
Nonetheless , I hope to be able to return to at least some of the proposals at a later point in the procedure .
Against this background , I can reveal that the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 14 , 21 , 22 , 23 and 28 in full and Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 19 , 25 , 25 , 26 , 27 and 30 in principle .
And now I will give some of the reasons why we cannot accept the other amendments .
Some of the amendments are aimed at tightening up the procedures for monitoring , reporting and inspections .
We can accept most of them , but in our opinion Amendment No 20 would lead to an overlapping with existing procedures and is therefore superfluous .
As far as the phasing-out of methyl bromide is concerned , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 5 because the ban on critical use exemptions in agriculture after the year 2006 would be contrary to the Montreal Protocol .
If the criteria for granting critical use exemptions are applied correctly , the possibility of exemptions should continue after the year 2006 .
And finally , there are Amendments Nos 32 and 33 which are aimed at postponing the phasing-out of methyl bromide until 2005 in Member States with special climatic conditions .
This has already been discussed here this evening , and I can say that I entirely agree with what was said by Mrs Dybkjær , Mr Sjöstedt , Mrs Breyer and Mr Blokland , and not with the comments made by Mrs Flemming this evening .
A collective exemption for all the southern Member States could mean that up to 80 % of the EU 's use of methyl bromide was exempt , and then we would no longer be able to fulfil our obligations under the Montreal Protocol .
The protocol demands a complete phasing-out of methyl bromide and does not allow the possibility of continued use after the phasing-out , not even if special types of plastic film are used .
Controlling the production of HCFCs is part of the Community 's ozone policy .
The Commission has proposed that the situation should be reviewed by the year 2002 to see whether developments in global patterns of consumption allow further restrictions to be introduced .
Amendments Nos 6 , 7 , 8 and 9 will limit this flexibility because they introduce additional reductions now , before we know whether they are appropriate .
The Commission therefore cannot accept these amendments now .
Then there are some amendments which aim to encourage the control of the use of HCFCs .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 11 , 12 , 13 and 31 , because they would increase the problems and costs for small and medium-sized enterprises by bringing forward the date for phasing out the use of HCFCs in solvents for refrigeration equipment and polyurethane foam .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 16 on prohibiting the sale of second-hand equipment containing HCFCs , because that would increase the probability of illegal disposal and the release into the atmosphere of HCFCs .
Amendments Nos 17 and 29 are aimed at prohibiting the production of products containing HCFCs for export to countries where their use is still permitted .
Here we are aware that excessively restrictive legislation in the Community could easily lead to production facilities being located elsewhere .
The Commission understands the aim of Amendment No 18 , but it would conflict with the exemption for special cases in Article 5 ( 6 ) .
Then there are Amendments Nos 10 and 15 , which are concerned with halons and HCFCs in fire protection systems .
The phasing-out of halons is high on the agenda , but it is important to ensure that unnecessary releases into the atmosphere are avoided .
Unfortunately , many Member States do not yet have facilities for recovering , storing , re-using or , for that matter , destroying halons in a safe way .
It will be some time before this is the case .
Therefore the Commission is unable to accept Amendment No 10 .
Amendment No 15 is aimed at introducing a new exemption , whereby HCFCs would be allowed to replace halons for fire protection purposes .
I believe this was the amendment which Mrs Graenitz referred to in her remarks .
Finally , I would once again like to thank Mrs Graenitz and the Committee on the Environment for their report and their thorough examination of the Commission 's proposal which we have been discussing here .
I look forward to further constructive cooperation which can ensure that the Community continues to play a leading role in the protection of the ozone layer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Agenda
Before we come to the approval of the Minutes , I have received a request from four political groups - the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the European People 's Party , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left and the Green Group in the European Parliament - for the Council and the Commission to make statements this afternoon on the situation in Iraq .
They propose that this item should be included between 3 p.m. and 3.45 p.m. , and that the debate on topical and urgent subjects should be correspondingly shortened .
I shall put this proposal to the vote , and then we shall establish how to proceed .
( Parliament approved the proposal ) I also have a proposal from the PPE Group to delete the subjects ' Relocation by Rank Xerox ' and ' Philippines ' in order to accommodate this debate .
Are there any comments from any other groups ?
If not , I shall put to the vote the deletion of subjects IV and V from the topical and urgent debate .
Mr President , you know as well as I do that this is a very urgent and very recent issue .
Could you meet with the secretaries-general of the groups to decide how the afternoon 's topical and urgent debates will take place ?
None of us has had time to consider in detail how a debate should be structured , whether the Council and the Commission can come and which urgencies need to be removed .
It would be fair to give us a little more time and you can make the announcement later on .
I have no problem with that .
The meeting of secretaries-general will take place after the vote .
How to arrange the debates and which urgencies to remove can be proposed at the beginning of the afternoon .
The House must decide the changes to the agenda .
Mr President , may I endorse that proposal as it is a foreign affairs matter ?
It is my understanding that there is an Austrian Minister able to comment on behalf of the presidency and that seems to me the correct way forward in this kind of situation .
We should listen to the presidency and to the Commission and then have a debate .
I am entirely happy with what you propose procedurally .
Mr President , obviously these are unusual circumstances and I support your proposal .
However , I would like to suggest that if we decide to remove two urgencies , we should follow the precedent we have set in the past and still vote on them even though we do not debate them .
There was an agreement at the beginning of the week to put those two items on the agenda .
That will be discussed in the meetings of the secretaries-general and the House will decide at the beginning of the afternoon 's proceedings .
I am sure there will be no problem but the House must decide .
Mr President , could I just ask for clarification on whether there is going to be a resolution on Iraq ?
As far as my Group is concerned , we are happy to have a resolution ; we have a text which we are prepared to discuss with other groups .
I think the PPE Group may have asked for a resolution , but I do not know whether I have been correctly informed .
Mr President , I too believe that Parliament - as the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy has just said - should have the opportunity to hold a debate .
We do not at this point need a resolution .
If one should prove necessary , Mr President , then it is something for January when we will certainly be returning to this , but it is not something for now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group has come to believe that however complex the issues , there are a number of points which are very clear to do with the United Nations , our objectives and the need for legal measures to be taken against Saddam .
Like the Socialist Group , we therefore want to see a resolution to wind up this debate .
Otherwise we are just talking a lot of hot air .
Mr President , my Group believes that the political responsibilities for what is happening in Iraq today are extremely clear .
We had a brief discussion this morning , and I am pleased that you have responded positively to the request for a debate on the matter .
In the circumstances , it would be appropriate to have a debate without resolution .
Mr President , I should like to make known the indignation felt by the GUE / NGL Group with regard to last night 's air attacks ...
Mrs Moreau , this is not the time to embark on the debate .
For the moment , we are trying to establish whether a resolution should be drawn up .
The debate will take place this afternoon .
Would you be good enough to tell us , Mrs Moreau , whether or not your group wants to have a resolution , without going into the substance of the debate ?
Mr President , Parliament must make known the indignation felt by its Members with regard to the air attacks ...
( Mixed reactions )
You do not have the floor , Mrs Moreau .
I shall put to the vote the question concerning the motion for a resolution .
Mr President , I am indignant at the way in which you have cut short our colleague , Mrs Moreau , and I would ask you to let her give her opinion regarding the resolution .
I am sorry , Mrs Berès , but when people do not respect the Rules and begin a debate at the wrong time , I cannot allow that .
I shall open the vote to establish precisely whether or not a motion for a resolution would be appropriate .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
Our former colleague , Mrs Claudia Roth , is present in the official gallery .
I am sure you would wish to join me in greeting her and welcoming her back on a visit now she has relinquished her duties .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , this House agreed yesterday to include 50 000 tonnes of mackerel as part of the food-aid package to Russia .
I would call upon you to use your good offices to inform the Council of Fisheries Ministers , who are meeting in Brussels this morning , that it should respect the opinion of this House and should not ignore this recommendation , which was made as a result of a very clear vote .
Thank you , Mr Gallagher .
We shall inform the Council of that without delay .
Mr President , I have pleasure in being the bearer of good news this morning .
The international situation is not as happy as we would like , but yesterday , an agreement was signed between Chile and Argentina establishing a permanent peace between these two countries .
I believe it is welcome news , coming as it does after a century of dispute : there have been 23 conflicts between Chile and Argentina over border issues . If the House agrees , I should like to ask the President to convey our congratulations on the newly signed peace agreement to both Chile and Argentina
Thank you , Mrs Miranda .
At times like the present , it is indeed a pleasure to hear that there is at least one place in the world where peace is being made .
On behalf of the House , I shall convey our congratulations immediately .
Mr President , in connection with the urgencies in the Minutes , under Item 4 of yesterday 's topical and urgent debate there is a request to introduce a new item : the relocation of the Rank Xerox company .
This is incorrectly recorded .
The company is named simply Xerox .
I should therefore like yesterday 's Minutes to be corrected and also , in this afternoon 's discussion , we should talk about Xerox , not Rank Xerox .
It makes Parliament look a little silly if we cannot even give the company 's correct name .
Thank you , Mr Metten .
We shall check on that .
( The Minutes were approved )
VOTES
Mr President , I have heard that the President-in-Office is still airborne and cannot land .
Nevertheless , it is important that we should at least hear what the President-in-Office has to say .
With this decision you have now adopted the budget for 1999 , which is the last budget under the current financial perspective .
May I ask the President in the Chair to declare what the President-in-Office now has to declare , namely that he concurs with the decision of Parliament at the second reading , that we have not exceeded the maximum rate of increase and that the budget is therefore approved by the Council .
Mr President , I would call on you to deliver that declaration on behalf of the President-in-Office .
Yes indeed , Mr Samland .
Mr President , on checking through the document before us , I discovered that a paragraph had been omitted . It refers to an amendment concerning the Structural Funds , which we adopted in the Committee on Budgets but which does not appear in this document , probably because of the pressure of time .
As I recall , it was paragraph 7 , which , following today 's vote , should be properly included in this document .
I should like to check with the services that this is the case .
I am informed by the services that it is included , but this will be verified in due course . Each of the versions in the different languages will also be checked .
Mr President , this is the last budget for certain distinguished members of the committee : the chairman , Mr Samland ; Lord Tomlinson ; Mr Dankert from our side , Mr Brinkhorst from the Liberals , probably Mr Kellett-Bowman ; and , I think , Mr Bardong from the PPE as well .



May I , on behalf of everyone on the Committee on Budgets , give them our wholehearted thanks for the work they have done and wish them well for the future .
( Sustained applause )
Thank you , Mr Wynn , for those remarks .
I have in fact received the following statement from the President-in-Office of the Council : ' You have just completed your second reading of the 1999 draft budget .
The outcome of your vote corresponds to our expectations and I am consequently pleased to state that the Council can accept the maximum rate of increase which results from your second reading ' .
In the light of this statement which I have received from the Council , I can declare the 1999 general budget finally adopted .
( The signature then took place of the general budget for 1999 )
I think the House can congratulate the rapporteurs , Mrs Dührkop and Mr Viola , and all those who have negotiated on behalf of Parliament , on the excellent job which they have done .
Mr President , before we begin voting on this report , I should like to draw attention to the Rules of Procedure with regard to Annex V. I am in fact a little surprised to see that the voting list begins with the vote on the preamble and the recitals when Article 3 ( 3 ) states , with respect to a report whose draft decision concludes that discharge should be granted , that the proposal for a decision is put to the vote first , and is to be followed by the vote on the motion for a resolution .
The mistake no doubt results from the fact that there is confusion between the decision and the resolution in the draft prepared by the Committee on Budgetary Control , but the Annex is very clear , and it is easy to see why .
The important thing is to decide on what we are saying , and what appears in paragraph 23 of the resolution , in other words whether or not we agree to grant the discharge ; the vote on the recitals and the explanatory statement , which normally constitute the resolution , is to be held afterwards .
I would ask you to observe the Rules of Procedure on this matter , because this has not always been done , as we have seen in connection with the opinions of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Experience has also proved that it is always easy for Parliament to let off steam in the first part of the resolution before nodding off in the second part .
You are clearly right , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
In formal terms , the motion for a resolution which the committee has adopted does not exactly follow Annex V of the Rules of Procedure . I think that the best course is to put the question to the House , so that it can decide in what order it wishes to vote , since there is a proposal from the committee responsible which follows a different order .
Mr President , I believe the rule has indeed been observed here , because it is quite clearly shown that the text up to paragraph 25 deals with the decision and that the subsequent paragraphs relate to the resolution .
That is where the reasons are listed which , with the passages being clearly headed , we normally have in the remarks , in the conditions which the Commission has to fulfil in connection with the decision on discharge .
Although there is no heading here in the paper , the division is clearly marked by asterisks .
The way the services formulated the heading , which only says ' Part A ' , is therefore confusing .
That is not how we handed it in , and we ought to have been told clearly that a heading had to be inserted .
But I think that can be rectified .
Thank you , Mrs Theato .
It is now clear that the motion for a resolution extends as far as paragraph 24 and the proposal for a decision begins with paragraph 25 .
Is that not correct ?
The rapporteur will be able to confirm this .
The motion for a resolution extends up to and including paragraph 24 and the proposal for a decision includes paragraphs 25 and 26 .
Is that so ?
Mr President , I have to say that Annex V of the Rules of Procedure on giving a discharge is a total nightmare for us to follow .
We have been given contradictory analyses as we have gone through this .
I would urge you to ask the House to bring the Rules of Procedure into line with the Treaty as soon as possible .
As for the point of detail raised by Mrs Theato , she , in my view , is correct and we should vote on it in the House to clarify the procedure .
Mr President , I find it very damaging to decide on the basis of a chance majority whether or not a Rule is to be respected .
I find the Rules of Procedure to be perfectly clear .
I therefore fail to understand how it is possible to make an exception to them on the basis of a chance majority .
I request that we respect our Rules of Procedure and vote in accordance with its provisions and not à la carte .
In the Rules of Procedure , Article 3 ( 3 ) of Annex V reads as follows :
' The proposal for a decision shall be put to the vote before the motion for a resolution .
The procedure for giving a discharge shall end with a vote on the motion for a resolution as a whole ' . This means that we must vote on paragraphs 25 and 26 before the rest , then vote on the rest , and finally on the text as a whole .
Mr President , if you make such a division , the section should begin with paragraph 26 and end with 29 .
If you look at the document , you will see that a break occurs in the text at that point .
Mrs Theato , please allow me to seek further clarification .
We are attempting to establish what constitutes the proposal for a decision and what constitutes the motion for a resolution .
I see paragraph 23 reads as follows :
' In the light of these considerations , decides to give a discharge to the Commission ' .
This appears to be a decision rather than a resolution .
So , the proposal for a decision extends from paragraph 23 onwards .
Mr President , that is precisely what I said .
We have a decision and a resolution .
That is what the Rules of Procedure require .
The decision lays down what is to be done , what Parliament has decided , as you just said .
The resolution contains the remarks relating to the decision , the action to be taken .
This is what the section beginning with paragraph 26 is about .
Mr President , this confusion just goes to show how odd these Rules of Procedure actually are .
I would reiterate Mrs Theato 's statement that the proposal for the decision goes from paragraph 1 through to paragraph 25 .
It is all part of the decision and then you have the motion for resolution from paragraph 26 onwards .
Before the vote on paragraph 23
Mr Martens has the floor .
Mr President , I should like to speak and I must apologise to the House that we are voting on paragraph 23 in exceptional circumstances as the President of Parliament yesterday presented us with a declaration from the European Commission .
We discussed this and do not agree with the conclusion , in which it is stated that if paragraph 23 is not adopted along with the discharge for 1996 , if it is rejected , then a motion of censure must be tabled .
We do not agree with this .
A large majority in our group wants to reject paragraph 23 .
On the basis of our Rules of Procedure , this means that the matter must be referred back to the Committee on Budgetary Control and the debate must continue between Parliament and the Commission .
That is the effect of a refusal to grant discharge .
I would also add that we as a group have every confidence in the President of the European Commission .
We are counting on him to implement the reforms he has proposed .
That is the meaning of our vote .
I should like to end by making the following point .
A motion of censure is not the right way to express the approval and confidence of Parliament .
The Commission President should be able to intervene and we would then be able to approve a motion of confidence .
That would be the right thing to do .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , it had not been my intention to take the floor before this vote , I must say that I have never heard such hypocritical rubbish as was just spouted by Mr Martens !
( Loud applause from the left ) After what has happened on this issue over the last few weeks in this House , everybody here knows that this is now a major political issue of confidence in the financial competence of the European Commission .
I wish it to be known , as Mr Martens has raised it now , that in the event this vote goes against granting discharge , I have here , and will table immediately , a motion of censure on the European Commission on behalf of more than the required number of Members under the Rules of our House .
( Interruption from the floor ) Mr President , those people who believe that it is possible to say to the public , to the European Commission and to this House that they have no confidence in the financial competence of the European Commission , but who are not then prepared to do what politically follows and sack them , simply are not fit to be in this House .
We challenge them to do that !
( Loud and sustained applause from the left )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I must say that it is very clear that we cannot grant discharge to the Commission .
We formally protest against the fact that around 6 p.m. yesterday we were given a statement , translated into three languages to make things easy for the groups , which actually threatened Parliament and was tantamount to blackmail .
We find such action unacceptable .
( Applause from the centre and right ) A Parliament with a little self-respect will not tolerate this .
We are also convinced that this declaration came after the socialists had collected their signatures .
Otherwise it would not have been so clearly stated .
We do not believe it is correct to equate a refusal to grant discharge with a motion of no confidence .
We do not believe these are the same thing at all .
We are not therefore going to fall into this trap .
( Applause from the centre and right ) Finally , it is of course clear that refusal to grant discharge indicates that there are indeed serious problems and that we want to see a serious response to these serious problems .
It is for this reason that we are today refusing to grant discharge .
( Applause from the centre and right )
Mr President , I regret that we have entered this debate prematurely before the vote , but here we are .
It seems to me that it raises questions at three levels .
Firstly , the question of procedure ; secondly , the question of the institutional or interinstitutional propriety of the matter ; and thirdly , a political issue .
On the question of procedure , it is quite clear in purely procedural terms that we have two quite separate votes .
The vote to refuse discharge is entirely separated procedurally from the question of whether we wish procedurally to move to a motion of censure .
So the procedural issue is quite clear .
On the institutional question , I am bound to say that when I received the statement from the Commission yesterday evening at about 6 or 7 p.m. , I felt it was tantamount to an interference with parliamentary procedure and sovereignty .
( Applause from the centre and right ) Inter alia , the statement said that if the budget discharge is not given , the European Parliament must clarify the situation by proceeding to a vote on a censure motion .
The European Commission has no business telling this House how we must proceed .
( Sustained applause from the centre and right ) I believe that the Commission , by saying this to the House , has ensured with certainty that it will be roundly defeated on its desire to see a discharge through the House today .
My Group , like all the groups , has had a long debate on this issue , and we are divided in our opinions .
I myself , and I will not explain the detail of it , shall actually vote to grant the discharge .
But I deeply resent yesterday 's advance interference - and , in a sense , institutional blackmail - by the Commission .
Finally , on the political question .
Procedurally the issues are separate ; institutionally I believe the Commission was wrong ; but politically , there is a consequential logic that must be followed in this House .
Personally , I believe that if we think the Commission is financially incompetent , a certain political logic follows that , and we must face our responsibilities .
Mr President , with regard to the vote that we are about to take , and in particular with regard to the Commission 's reaction , I would like to say that my group too has reflected very deeply and very calmly on this matter , and has come to the conclusion that a majority of the Commission does not deserve to be granted this discharge .
Let me explain why . The act of granting discharge is not an administrative act .
It is an intrinsically political act , and a politically important one .
We are not verifying whether or not the Commission has correctly exercised its mandate in accounting terms .
The political act that we are now engaged in is significant in its own right .
Thus in our opinion , and regardless of the views that each of us may have as to whether the Commission deserves to be censured or not , which is a totally different issue , there is clearly no legal connection between censure and discharge .
That is why we believe these two acts or situations are totally separate .
The only way we can interpret the Commission presenting this issue in such a manner is as an act of political pressure , as a form of blackmail .
I repeat , this reaction can only be seen as political blackmail , as unacceptable pressure on this Parliament .
I would like to state quite unequivocally that the Commission must not and cannot be allowed to dictate what Parliament can and cannot do .
The Commission cannot be allowed to dictate the procedures that we should follow in this instance .
Parliament is independent and must now exercise its independence in this case by voting against the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is quite normal for each group to be allowed to voice its opinion as we approach a vote as important as the one which we will be casting in a short while .
I agree with the majority of my colleagues who have just given their opinions , apart from Mrs Green , of course .
We cannot accept blackmail or intimidation of any form , whether it comes from the Commission or the chairman of the Socialist Group .
( Applause from the right ) Do not forget that blackmail and intimidation are the weapons of the weak .
In view of the votes which we have just cast by very strong majorities - you must have noticed this because of the votes which have been displayed here - I do not see how you can now grant discharge after having cast these votes .
There is no legal connection between discharge and a motion of censure .
We will be refusing the discharge , and we will then see within our groups whether we endorse a motion of censure or not .
That depends on each group , but we must not establish a connection between them .
Mr President , the text which was distributed last night by the Commission is without doubt highly inappropriate .
The two instruments , discharge and motion of censure , or motion of confidence , are quite separate in legal terms , but in political terms they are inextricably linked .
As far as discharge is concerned , there are also divisions within our group .
We are not all in agreement .
Dreading the prospect of a weak Commission , I personally shall vote for the discharge .
However , I deeply regret the fact that , as shown by the events of the last few hours , it is the Commission itself that last night weakened its position .
All we can do is observe and be sorry about this .
Mr President , I have two comments .
Some people in this Parliament today seem to think that we are voting on a definitive refusal to grant discharge .
I would remind colleagues that we have not been allowed to have an amendment under our Rules of Procedure to refuse to grant a definitive discharge .
What we will be voting on , I hope as soon as possible , is whether we wish not to grant discharge at this stage , or whether as I have understood the Rules of Procedure , it has to go back to committee .
Therefore , the arguments , particularly those advanced by the Socialist Group Leader , are inappropriate .
It is a procedure which is continuing and I as rapporteur will continue to follow this in the Budgetary Control Committee , should the vote go that way now .
Secondly , under Article 122 of the Rules of Procedure , could I urge us to go to the vote immediately .
Now that all the groups and the rapporteur have expressed their views , I shall take a roll-call vote on paragraph 23 , at the request of the PPE Group , the Group of the European United Left , the Union for Europe Group , the Socialist Group , the Europe of Nations Group , the Group of the European Radical Alliance and the Green Group .
As the rapporteur has explained , the rejection of this paragraph will mean that the report is referred back to committee .
I put paragraph 23 to the vote .
( Parliament rejected paragraph 23 , and the report was therefore referred back to committee )
Mrs Green , this is not the time to continue with this subject .
You can table your motion of censure and explain your Group 's position in the debate .
Mr President , I notice that you allowed Mr Martens to take the floor when he wished but you are refusing that right to me .
( Mixed reactions ) I tabled a motion of censure .
I give notice that my Group intends to vote against the motion of censure , to give confidence to the European Commission .
Let us see you vote for it then - those of you who have voted for this .
We believe it is ...
( Mixed reactions )
Mrs Green , I have allowed you to announce your motion of censure and state your Group 's position twice .
But I stopped you when you began a debate on the matter .
This is not the time for a debate on a matter which is not on the agenda .
You can have that debate at the proper time .
After an important vote Members will draw their own conclusions and will adopt their political position .
I say the same to the rapporteur .
It has been referred back to committee .
In the committee you will continue as the rapporteur .
Mr Elles , the matter is finished unless you wish to raise a point under the Rules .
Mr President , we need to finish voting on that report before any personal declarations are made .
We still have four paragraphs to vote on .
We need to do that before we can refer this back to committee .
An incomplete report cannot be referred back to committee .
Mr Elles , our Rules are so strange that they say that if the discharge is not given , it must go back to committee and it is up to the committee to take its decision .
I did not make the Rules , but that is what they say .
We cannot vote again .
It will go back to the committee now .
That is the only course of action available .
Mr President , I am absolutely astonished by this inability to understand the true meaning of democracy .
I have been calling for the floor for half an hour ; various representatives of political groups have spoken , some even twice , and I have not been given the right to speak .
I note above all else that , as this parliamentary term draws to a close , we in this House are giving a very sad demonstration of our capacity to interpret the needs of our citizens : the Commission blackmails Parliament , and Parliament - or one of its largest groups - blackmails the Commission and the other Members , by tabling motions for which it does not vote itself .
We are becoming a laughing-stock : the peoples of Europe expect us to do our work , and all we can produce is foolish nonsense !
Mr President , could you give us a ruling on what Mrs Green is saying ?
I understand her to say that she intends to table a motion of censure .
Is it in order for a Member to announce that she intends to table a motion to do something and to announce at the same time that she does not intend to vote for it ?
That is a problem of political consistency .
Anyone can judge their own political consistency and anyone else can make their own interpretation .
Mr President , with regard to the Rules , Annex V is very clear with regard to referral back to committee .
I am not going to get into the question of Mrs Green 's intervention earlier on .
However , the report and the criticisms have been very clear .
It is open to the individual Commissioners to resign if they feel they do not have the support of this House .
I just told you that I will only allow points of order .
I will not allow more debate on that question .
Mr President , in connection with Rule 163 of our Rules of Procedure , I very much regret that both the rapporteur and you yourself say that the rules are strange .
Anyone in this House is free to submit a proposal to amend the Rules of Procedure , and the Committee on Budgetary Control has been working on this for years . The Committee on Budgetary Control has not , however , done so .
They could have done this some time ago already and now the Rules stand as they are and must be applied as such .
Mr President , as I understand the procedural point we have reached now , after the vote you will refer the Elles report back to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I should like to ask you , as you refer the report back , to invite the Commission now to put on record a statement of the response to the vote , as distinct from the premature statement that it issued yesterday evening .
Mr President , I merely wish to enquire whether we shall have the opportunity to explain our vote on the important decision we have just taken .
All the explanations of vote will be given after the votes .
Everyone will be able to give a corresponding explanation of vote .
The Commission discussed yesterday whether it should make a statement only after the vote .
There were two opinions .
But in the end , in the interests of transparency , it decided to state its position beforehand .
The position is the same .
You can read the written statement which you were given yesterday .
Now the Commission has made its position clear , and everyone else has done likewise , we shall proceed with the vote as planned .
Mr President , it is not necessary to request a separate vote for the amendments .
According to the Rules of Procedure , the amendments must be put to the vote separately .
There are some people here who rejected the amendments in the collective vote .
You are not aware of this , but it is the case .
Therefore , we must have separate votes .
I am sorry to have to contradict you , Mr Pimenta , but the Rules of Procedure specify a deadline for requests for separate votes on amendments .
That deadline has passed without any requests for separate votes having been submitted .
Mr President , I must point out to Mr Pimenta that our group did not ask for 20 and 23 to be split because according to the group 's official voting list we intended to vote for both amendments .
But the simple fact that a number of people did not keep to this produced this result .
Mr President , this is certainly not a matter of a pound of fish or a pound of peas .
It is about guarantees for all the people of the European Union .
Under these circumstances , if we are asked to vote separately on the two amendments because there is a chance that one of them might be adopted and the other rejected , I would surely go along with that for the sake of the people .
Mr President , following what the rapporteur has said , I should like to say that I fully agree with her that as one amendment in fact concerns Article 5 , whilst the other concerns Article 6 , this is in line with the request for separation which we had for amendments relating to separate articles .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot go back on a vote which has been taken , all the more so because the vote was in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
I would remind you that changes to collective votes can only be requested within a certain deadline .
I therefore have to rule that the vote has been duly taken .
( The President declared the common position adopted as amended )
Mr President , there is a point of order that I have been wanting to raise all day .
If I am not mistaken , there are new members in the ranks of the Socialist Group who have not been announced - strange figures in white .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , we should perhaps be properly notified of their presence .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , we adopted this Amendment No 15 in committee , but unfortunately the representative of the Commission who was attending our committee meeting did not inform us of the existence of a judgment delivered by the European Court of Justice in July of this year , which states that in the European Union the use , and hence the marketing , of HCFCs in fire extinguishers is prohibited .
In this amendment we have therefore put ourselves at odds with a judgment of the Court of Justice .
I should never have voted for this amendment if I had known that beforehand .
The Commission did not tell us about this until yesterday evening , and I believe the rest of the committee would not have voted for the amendment either .
May I therefore recommend to the House that it votes against this amendment , since I do not believe that a judgment of the Court should be overturned through the back door by means of an amendment .
( Parliament rejected the amendment )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Thank you for congratulating me so warmly , Mr President , but I must inform you that I voted against my report .
We negotiated on this report , and we made some very interesting mutual concessions .
However , it is always easier to achieve less than one would have wanted than to go beyond it .
I was unable to accept my report due to an amendment which was adopted .
Therefore , as is becoming customary for me , I am returning my report to the chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
The Chair does not usually comment on the substance of reports which have been adopted or rejected , Mrs Schaffner , but I felt I should pay tribute to the considerable amount of work you have done on this matter .
Mr President , I am anxious to know whether the sitting is closed or whether the next report will be put to the vote .
I am afraid that the vote on the next report , in other words your own , will have to be held over until this evening .
It is already 1.10 and we have been voting without a break since 9.30 this morning , which does us some credit .
Mr President , that the fate of 400 000 people who are in prison is not important enough for us to delay lunch by six minutes speaks volumes about this Parliament .
Mr Pradier , your report will be put to the vote this evening , with numbers present and in an atmosphere of calm and concentration that are not possible at the moment , since everyone is exhausted except those Members who are now going to give their explanations of vote .
Mr President , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has voted against the second reading of the 1999 budget .
We have done this while at the same time being delighted that the strategic amendment , which the majority of Members of Parliament voted in favour of at first reading , was not adopted at second reading .
In fact , this amendment sought to place large sums in the reserve for categories 3 , 4 and 5 , so that Parliament would be in a better position to discuss the future institutional agreement on a new financial perspective .
This amendment , as the Legal Service pointed out in an opinion it recently delivered , did not comply with the budgetary rules .
It was contrary to the principles of entering funds for a specific and genuine purpose .
However , I should particularly like to protest , on behalf of my group , against what this strategy inferred or rather what it implied .
This strategy was in fact taking the taxpayers in the various Member States hostage .
Placing appropriations in reserve naturally increases the sums provided in the budget .
This in turn results in an increase in Member State contributions , and therefore in the taxation of citizens , of the taxpayers in the Member States .
In the case of France , for example , the amendment in question was resulting in an increase of about 4 billion in French contributions .
Realising that its strategy was getting it nowhere , the Committee on Budgetary Control rejected this amendment .
We are very pleased about this .
We are also very pleased that the Structural Fund reserves have not been withheld , but we note that the European Parliament has once again increased its expenditure , even though expenditure is being reduced during the current period .
This is why we did not vote for this second reading by Parliament , it being a step towards additional expenditure .
We welcome the compromise over the so-called strategic reserves which the European Parliament has reached with the Council .
It is important that the two arms of the budgetary authority should continue to work together smoothly , not least with a view to future negotiations on a new financial perspective , Agenda 2000 , agricultural reform and the new initiatives that need to be taken to facilitate the enlargement process .
We therefore regard the understanding with the Council as a constructive development , since it means that the principle of establishing strategic reserves in the budget has been abandoned .
We also welcome the fact that the budgetary authority has agreed to increase the commitment appropriations for the PHARE programme by EUR 48 million in comparison with Parliament 's first reading .
It is important to give clear political signals and fulfil expectations during the period leading up to accession .
We are also pleased to see that the Council has introduced a budgetary framework to enable Parliament to transfer EUR 400 million from the 1998 budget to provide food aid for Russia .
The Commission should act quickly to introduce concrete measures to combat fraud and ensure that the supplies reach those who are in need .
Although the attempts that have been made to reform the common agricultural policy are a move in the right direction , we would like to see more energy devoted to ensuring that agriculture becomes more geared towards the environment and consumers , as well as better adapted to the needs of the market .
We are also firmly opposed to the support which the European Community provides for tobacco growing .
We cannot agree in principle to the discharge - which is dealt with in a separate report - being discussed in relation to the 1999 budget .
Not only are there grounds for questioning the legality of attempting to insert conditions relating to the discharge in the remarks under budget line A-1100 , but it is also impossible , either politically or objectively , to justify focusing attention on those conditions in this way .
As regards MEPs ' travel allowances , we still maintain that expenses should only be reimbursed on the basis of the actual costs incurred .
The budget which we have just voted on is both sensible and moderate .
Sensible because it should allow us to carry out our projects , and moderate because it is increased by less than the public expenditure of the Member States .
However , I should like to emphasise three points which are particularly close to my heart : the European Parliament must continue its efforts to provide the European Union with substantial room for manoeuvre on the budget in anticipation of future actions ; sufficient funds must be made available for those actions which we consider to have priority ; and humanitarian aid must not be neglected .
The 1999 financial year is probably the most difficult so far , in view of the balance that we have found between reducing the increase in the budget , implementing real requirements and evaluating the perspectives for the future .
The European Parliament would therefore like to include reserves in its 1999 budget .
I am sorry that the Commission has not pursued this option .
The programmes are coming to the end of their journey .
We know what we want in future .
We have the resources for this ; they just need to be evaluated properly .
The European Union has set itself the goal of completing Economic and Monetary Union and achieving unprecedented enlargement by the start of the 21st century .
None of this is feasible without sufficient funds .
A very restrictive implementation of the expenditure will enable many projects and actions to be undertaken and carried through to a successful conclusion .
The same applies for humanitarian actions , whether they constitute aid to future partners or not .
Let us therefore be vigilant .
We have voted in favour of a good budget which constitutes an appropriate link between our recent past and our immediate future .
Let us now follow its implementation very closely in order to keep to the principles which we have successfully negotiated .
There is good reason to be very pleased about the significant progress that has been achieved due to this proposal for a directive , which the European Parliament has been calling for since 1994 .
It was high time provision was made for bringing into line national laws dealing with legal guarantee systems ( as opposed to commercial guarantees ) in connection with contracts of sale concluded with consumers .
The differences between the national systems pose serious problems for consumers , who are purchasing more and more goods abroad .
I deeply regret that the common position of the Council cannot be adopted without an amendment .
In fact , this is delaying the entry into force of a text that is essential for the effective completion of the single market .
Nevertheless , fundamental improvements had to be made to the text .
I am therefore happy that my amendment , which seeks to include in the body of the articles of the directive recital 14 dealing with second-hand goods , has been adopted .
For reasons of consistency in legal terms , I hope that it can be accepted by the Council .
In fact , it was inconceivable that this measure that is based on common sense , and which indicates that the consumer cannot automatically demand replacement of the good when it is second-hand , should only be referred to in a recital , and not in the articles themselves .
However , I have voted against several amendments proposed by the rapporteur , Mrs Kuhn .
Some of them , such as Amendment No 17 which concerns payment by instalments , have absolutely no link with the guarantee system .
As in the first reading , these amendments are unrealistic and unnecessary .
They upset the essential balance between the interests of consumers and the obligations and constraints which are a burden on producers .
I am thinking particularly of the SMEs and SMIs , for which some amendments will have serious consequences .
On behalf of the members of the EPLP I would like to explain that they were unable to support Amendments Nos 32 , 33 , 15 , 14 , 13 , 12 , 11 and 10 of Mrs Graenitz 's report .
We feel that Amendments Nos 32 and 33 would introduce an overlong and unnecessary extension of the widespread use of methyl bromide in many parts of the European Union whereas in other parts of the Union , its use has been eliminated and adequate alternatives found .
Equally we are unable to support Amendment No 15 as this reintroduces a use for ozone depleting substances where there are now well established and better alternatives .
With regard to Amendments Nos 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 and 14 we feel that the deadlines for phaseout of O.D.P. substances proposed by the Commission are practical and realistic and that advancing the schedules has little environmental benefit and creates problems in particular for SMEs .
Therefore we cannot support them .
The Greens believe it is essential that ozone depleting substances are removed from the market immediately and an effective ban should have been put in place a long time ago .
The Social and Christian Democrats in Europe seem determined to delay the ban of the dangerous ozone destroyer , methyl bromide , and we believe that any proposal to prolong the use of this toxic substance is a menace to human health and the environment .
The hole in the ozone layer has increased in size by 20-25 % during the past two years alone .
It is incredible that any MEP would allow or support practices which will allow this depletion to continue .
Scientists agree that rapid phasing out of the production and consumption of methyl bromide is the single most effective additional step to the Montreal Protocol to stop the depletion of the ozone layer .
Methyl bromide is a highly toxic pesticide gas used in agriculture .
It kills all kinds of soil organisms , good and bad alike .
Europe is the second biggest user of methyl bromide in the world , 90 % of which is used in agriculture , mainly in Italy and Spain .
These countries are exerting strong pressure to permit the continued use of this poison for a longer transition period .
It is irresponsible that , for the sake of the vested interests of a few shortsighted farmers in Italy and Spain , the whole world should suffer from increasing UV-radiation with its devastating consequences such as an increased incidence of skin cancer and other irreversible damages to the environment .
The fact that Ms Graenitz and Mr Poggioloni propose to phase out this substance by 2005 is just not good enough .
This is four years later than even the EU Commission itself proposes .
Germany and the Netherlands have already successfully phased out the use of methyl bromide and Denmark , Sweden and Finland will do so by 2001 .
The Greens want the deadline as proposed by the Commission to be reinstated .
The other disturbing factor is that there appears to be a policy of double standards .
The ozone-depleting hydrochlorofluorocarbons will be outlawed for use in the EU , but companies in the EU will be allowed to continue to export exactly the same chemicals for use outside the EU .
This is not acceptable and runs counter to protection of the global environment .
The Elles report has been referred back to committee .
There are therefore no explanations of vote on this report .
( Protests from Mrs Lulling ) No , I am sorry .
I would point out that explanations of vote - and please consult the Rules of Procedure , which you know very well - are given on the final vote .
There was no final vote , since the report was referred back to committee .
Mr President , I protest against your decision not to allow explanations of vote on the Elles report .
Mr President , the Vienna summit will go down in the history of the European Union as the Great Procrastination .
That is certainly not the fault of the Austrian Presidency .
I find it all the more regrettable in view of the fact that the presidency is about to pass to the new German Government , which has already proved on several occasions to be so inexperienced that the contradictory statements of its spokespersons - whom certain major French newspapers regard as absolute dilettantes - have already broken a fair quantity of china even before the guests have arrived .
In the present difficult situation , the EU deserves better than to be put at the mercy of raw debutants on the European stage .
But the Council , of course , still has politicians with experience , realism and a sense of responsibility .
And , thank heaven , in matters where vital interests of the Member States are at stake , such as fiscal policy , unanimity is still required , so there is hope that damage limitation can be successfully pursued during the next six months .
I am not one of those who deplore the fact that the Vienna summit dealt with the duty-free problem .
Indeed , I believe that one of the most tangible successes or results of the summit was the mandate given to the Commission , which has refused to yield to our pressure on this matter .
In the present employment situation , we urgently need a stay of execution for duty-free shops , at least until 2002 , when we shall have euro notes and coins in our purses and wallets .
Tax-free sales will not turn the single market upside-down .
The costs involved in running an airport , which are currently defrayed by revenue from duty-free sales , will have to be met from other taxes once the curtain falls on duty-free .
It is naïve to claim that duty-free sales result in revenue shortfalls that the Member States can ill afford .
The abolition of duty-free is liable to cost more than it would allegedly yield in excise duties .
Mr President , before beginning my explanation of vote , I should like to draw attention to the Rules of Procedure . I believe you were obliged to accept explanations of vote following the refusal of discharge .
There was a vote to refuse discharge , following which the matter was automatically referred back to committee , thereby preventing a final vote , but discharge was definitely refused .
Similar matters , such as the vote on the calendar of part-sessions , have already been referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , and it concluded that explanations of vote were admissible where there was no final vote , because other votes had been taken beforehand .
Therefore , Mr President , there is absolutely no doubt that you have to accept explanations of vote , not on referral back to committee , but on the refusal of discharge .
I am in no doubt on this point , Mr Berthu .
I cannot accept explanations of vote , because there has not been a refusal to grant discharge .
There was a vote against the proposal to give discharge , which is not the same thing , and now the matter has been referred back to committee .
We are not going to embark on a long debate on this now , but I would stress that it is quite clear that there has not been a refusal to grant discharge .
( Interruption by Mrs Lulling ) There has not been a refusal to grant discharge , Mrs Lulling .
Look at what you voted on .
You voted not to accept the proposal from the Committee on Budgetary Control , which was proposing to give discharge .
So you did not give discharge and you referred the report back to committee .
Mr President , I would ask for the matter to be referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , and if it decides in our favour I would ask for retroactive authorisation to be given for our explanations of vote .
With regard to the Vienna European Council , we congratulate the Austrian Presidency which during the past six months has made a very genuine effort to provide more innovative solutions than usual to the Union 's problems , for instance in its document on an immigration strategy .
Unfortunately , these days the obstacles are so considerable and so closely linked to policies that we have pursued for a long time that no presidency will be able to remove them by itself , however great its goodwill .
We have said on many occasions that the Vienna Council resolved neither the problem of how the Union will be financed in future , nor the problems of our agricultural policy , the institutions that are intended to take charge of enlargement , or the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty in the area of the movement of persons , but that it did at least set some deadlines for resolving them in the future .
We do not know if these deadlines will be respected .
Many people doubt that they will .
In any case , however , we have not said enough , and the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations would like to point out that these dates really amount to evading the issue during the time between the elections in an attempt to avoid presenting the electorate with the real questions .
The debates were suspended for a good part of 1998 due to the German legislative elections . We would now have to work at full speed in order to bring the discussions on Agenda 2000 to a close in March , before the European elections next June .
By the same token , the Commission did not put forward in Vienna its comprehensive proposal for amending the treaties following Amsterdam , that is , Amsterdam II or Maastricht III , or whatever you wish to call it , so as not to frighten the French electorate in the middle of the parliamentary debate on the revision of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
For years the European institutions have been trying to increase their powers whilst evading the verdict given by the electorate .
They believe they are avoiding the problems in this way .
In reality , they are only increasing them . This is illustrated particularly well by the issue of democratic control of EMU , which was concealed in Maastricht , so as not to put off the electorate due to too much federalism , and then again in Amsterdam , so as not to reopen Pandora 's box .
This entire issue is now being raised again , under the worst conditions , as indeed the president Mr Gil-Robles pointed out in Vienna .
We cannot continue to go about things in this way .
Mr President , I believe that the Vienna summit was a success in many respects .
I do have to say , however , that the Austrian Presidency , which has essentially been very proficient , made an unforgivable blunder in its declaration on behalf of the Council , when it used the term ' western Balkans ' in its description of the situation in Croatia .
I believe we must differentiate very precisely when considering the region that was once artificially united as Yugoslavia .
There is Croatia , which ought to be integrated into the European structures at long last .
On the other hand we have Bosnia-Herzegovina , where it is a matter of establishing the elementary essentials of statehood and where we see in particular that one entity within the state , namely the Republika Srpska , is denying refugees the right to return and set up home in its territory .
Then there is Serbia , where a despotic regime continues to besmirch the good name of the Serbian nation and is trying to assert itself by pursuing the Milosevic style of politics , based on warfare and oppression .
I believe that each of these various elements must be considered separately and that the synthetic term ' western Balkans ' should be consigned to the archives of the European Council .
I have to admit feeling somewhat disappointed by what was achieved at the Vienna European Council .
Certainly , the clear , reaffirmed priority given to the fight against unemployment is very positive .
However , concrete measures are being postponed until later .
This attitude is all the more regrettable since the meeting of finance ministers had raised hopes and hinted at a new lease of life for the future of the European Union .
We must say that we are somewhat dissatisfied .
The unresolved issues have all been postponed until later , as if time could reconcile the different approaches .
Such procrastination illustrates once again the institutional shortcomings of the European Union , while the economic pillar is given considerable decision-making powers .
If we can be satisfied with declarations of good intent , we have a right to question whether the political organisation of the Union is pertinent in view of the challenges which all of us are confronted with .
Certainly , enlargement could prove to be an opportunity for Europe , but the condition for this is that we have to adapt the decision-making process to this new order .
In order to implement our plans and ideas , there must be an effective and legitimate executive power , and a legislative power with sufficient means to guarantee its democratic nature .
In this sense , the rotating presidency has reached a turning point at which the decision-making process is becoming more and more uncertain , whichever country holds the presidency , and whatever the Council 's political majority .
Even before it takes effect , the limitations of the Amsterdam Treaty are becoming evident , even though it represents an important step forward for European citizenship and for the European Parliament .
In order to prevent the European Union from degenerating into a purely economic entity where the social dimension would be sidelined , the shambles that is the institutional side must be relaunched to rejuvenate the political Europe , or even just to create it .
Contrary to expectations , the Vienna Summit did not take any decisions on how Europe will be financed in the future .
A few days away from the launch of the euro , the Member States preferred to ignore this extremely sensitive issue .
Some of them are hoping that their contribution will not increase , or will perhaps even be reduced , whilst others refer to the principle of ' fair returns ' , as expressed in the past by Mrs Thatcher : ' I want my money back ! ' .
With no possibility of sidestepping the issue , it will return to the negotiating table in Brussels in March 1999 .
The 1992 Edinburgh Summit had decided on a financial perspective for the Union until 1999 . Nothing was planned beyond then .
If we limit ourselves to the declarations made by some Member States , the future prospects for the construction of Europe are rather gloomy ...
Spain , Greece and Portugal , countries benefiting from the Cohesion Fund , are determined to catch up with the others in economic terms .
They have shown their reluctance to ' stabilise ' total actual expenditure , namely at a ceiling of 1.27 % .
Between those countries which want to pay less and those which do not want to receive less , the debate seems to have got off to a bad start .
However , certain facts lead me to believe that once we get them with their backs to the wall , the Member States will not be able to continue to take this position indefinitely .
In 1988 and 1992 , the increase in resources was spectacular ; in particular , the volume of Structural Funds was doubled .
In moderation , Europe has so far always adapted its resources to fit in with its objectives .
It would be a first if problems were resolved ... by saving money .
A positive point to come from Vienna is the ambitious and dynamic timetable adopted for 1999 : the Union 's finances in March , in Brussels ; the Employment Pact ; tax harmonisation ; the major infrastructure networks and defence in June , in Cologne ; cooperation in the area of justice and home affairs in October , in Tampere ; and coordination of economic policies , combating fraud , the environment and foreign policy in December , in Helsinki .
It should be noted that if the Brussels meeting fails , all of these will be compromised , and indeed , a few weeks away from the European elections in June 1999 , which will see the reconstitution of the European Parliament and , indirectly , the appointment of the new president and the new members of the Commission .
Another positive factor is the progress achieved by Europe since the Amsterdam Treaty was signed .
Its resistance in the face of the Asian crisis shows that monetary union is in good shape , and it has made the Member States react less nervously when tackling issues in areas which affect their national sovereignty : defence , taxation and institutional reform .
A breath of fresh air seems to show that Europe is increasingly aware that it is growing stronger as the union between its members is strengthened .
Failure in Brussels would halt the momentum of the euro and open up a period of uncertainty or perhaps even crisis for Europe ; this would compromise the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty and plunge the Union back into constant clashes over the budget .
The European Union will not be able to put off for ever voluntarily taking charge of unemployment problems - an open wound in its breast - , which it has partly generated through the burden of taxation on employment .
Peace and even modest growth in Europe have a price .
Everyone knows that peace is not something which is achieved automatically , but is created each day at a cost .
Everyone also knows that the price to pay for peace cannot be compared with the cost of the wars , in terms of human lives and the financial cost , which have devastated our continent twice .
We owe it to ourselves and to our children to build a Europe of peace .
Upholding human rights is a prerequisite for security and peace .
Until we can guarantee the right of all people to good health and well-being , peace and security cannot be assured .
The human rights violations that occur today are the cause of tomorrow 's conflicts .
The vicious circle of violation and conflict can and must be stopped .
This should be accomplished by combating starvation and poverty .
Global inequality has increased dramatically during two centuries which have been dominated by neo-liberalism .
Together we must strive to overcome inequality both inside and outside the Union .
We do not share the view expressed in paragraph 23 that it is regrettable that the CFSP continues to form a separate pillar of the Union .
We do not think there is anything contradictory between working for a common EU policy on human rights and the EU 's second pillar .
On the contrary , human rights and foreign policy are closely interconnected in other policy areas , for example trade and aid .
However , defence issues should , in our view , continue to be decided at national level .
The Danish Social Democrats have abstained on those parts of the report which refer to harmonised cooperation in the human rights sector .
The fact that foreign and security policy falls under the third pillar does not in principle prevent there being a coherent and consistent human rights policy in the Union ; that depends to a far greater degree on political will .
I should firstly like to warmly congratulate Mr Barros Moura and Mr Roubatis on the high standard and reliability of both their reports .
With their work , the European Parliament is fully involved in the commemorations marking the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
In addition , they suggest some interesting lines of approach for the future .
I would also like to pay tribute to the British Government for its decision to accept the extradition of General Pinochet , so that he can be held responsible for the crimes which were ordered by him or carried out in his name .
It is merely to do justice to the thousands of Chileans who have died , disappeared or been hunted down over many years by this bloodthirsty and dictatorial regime .
With regard to Mr Barros Moura 's report , I should like to support it unequivocally , and I am delighted that it seeks quite simply to return to the values proclaimed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Therefore , I too wish to see a reform of the international financial institutions , in particular taking into account the social consequences of monetary programmes imposed on developing countries .
With this in mind , it seems important to me that a voluntary code of conduct for businesses should result from the WTO negotiations .
The idea developed by some to create a ' Social Label ' should be seized upon .
On this subject , I think that it should be possible in connection with the award of public contracts to introduce clauses known as ' best social offer ' clauses , no matter what the Liberals say .
I am among those who believe that human rights and social rights are closely linked .
I do not wish to elaborate any further on the report by my friend Mr Barros Moura , since I would also like to give my support to Mr Roubatis 's text ; this seeks to give the European Union an instrument which would enable it to respond to matters of urgency .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is because responding to matters of urgency is at the centre of the campaign for human rights which is being led by tens of thousands of citizens .
What we need , therefore , at our level is an instrument to replace this militant force .
It seems to me that the existence of such a body , working in collaboration with the organisations protecting human rights all over the world , is justified .
I would add that it is not necessary to quote examples here .
Each day and each hour bring their share of obvious violations of the most fundamental rights of men , women and children .
One year away from the third millennium , the situation should be reviewed ... and new concrete measures should be taken .
We have taken part in the final vote on the Roubatis report .
The report contains many good human rights initiatives , but we object to the uncritical attitude reflected in its call for greatly increased funding and legal uniformity in the European Union .
I do not share the rapporteur 's view that political integration within the EU needs further strengthening .
The EU should , first and foremost , be based on international cooperation .
According to the rapporteur , the USA 's position as a moral guide is no longer tenable on account of its continued use of capital punishment .
It should also be pointed out that the USA 's credibility has been further undermined by other factors , for example other forms of human rights abuses perpetrated in the country , its massive exports of arms and instruments of torture , as well as its role in international relations and conflicts .
Moreover , it is a tragedy that 50 years after the signing of the Convention on Human Rights , we have to recognise that intervention by MEPs in individual cases is still widely used by Parliament as a means of promoting human rights - a clear indication of the arbitrary way in which human rights are being applied .
Mr President , our group has voted against Mrs Schaffner 's report on respect for human rights in the European Union .
Moreover , I am very pleased that the rapporteur has said that she voted against the report herself .
Human rights are in fact violated very often in the European Union , and the European Parliament makes declarations rather too often which are not always concerned with human rights and do not really achieve results .
The Members , that is us , are also European citizens , and they too are often deprived of their rights . Of their right , for example , to explain their vote on a report leading to a vote , as stated very clearly in Article 6 ( 1 ) of Annex V , which I would ask you to refer to .
It says there in black and white : ' ... taking into account Parliament 's vote ' , and this is before referral back to committee .
Our vote on the refusal to grant discharge was based on the grounds that extremely serious criticisms had been levelled at the Commission for its management of budget appropriations .
We are very pleased that Parliament has refused to grant this discharge , by 270 votes to 225 with 23 abstentions .
In doing so - the Commission was aware of this even before the vote - , the majority of Parliament deemed that the refusal of discharge seriously undermined the credibility and authority of the Commission .
This is why we hope that the European Parliament clarifies the situation , and that it votes for a motion of censure , taking into account the seriousness of the criticisms made , and the political link that therefore clearly exists between a refusal of discharge and a motion of censure , and that it adopts the motion of censure , which is being circulated within Parliament at this very moment on our group 's initiative .
Moreover , this text has already been signed by about 15 Members .
It will certainly obtain the required number of signatures .
Mr President , I wish to begin by stating quite categorically that the Group of the European People 's Party is also fiercely dedicated to the defence of human rights in the European Union , wherever they may be threatened .
It has been said that nobody could vote against a human rights report on the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , but we have had to do that , since this report , though presented as a human rights report , was actually the very opposite in substance .
It was an attack on two of the foundations of our democratic constitutional order , namely marriage and the family on the one hand and the concept of citizenship on the other .
These two elements are the basis of every modern constitutional state , and that is why we have to say ' no ' to this report , because it seeks to undermine these foundations and therefore does not merit the name ' human rights report ' .
Thankfully , Mrs Schaffner has preserved her good name by dissociating herself from the report . How I wish that the same could be done with the title , to preserve the good name of human rights !
We think it is important for the European Parliament to demonstrate its respect for human rights within the European Union .
We welcome the report 's broad view of human rights and the purposeful stance it adopts on , amongst other things , combating racism and xenophobia , social rights and rights for ethnic minorities and refugees , as well as homosexuals .
We should like to highlight the importance of the European Parliament adopting a progressive attitude with regard to human rights within the Union .
The debate on human rights , to which this report contributes , clearly demonstrates the ideological dividing-line that exists where such issues are concerned between the progressive left and the reactionary forces on the right .
We are vehemently opposed to the more or less pronounced tendencies in some amendments towards hostility to women , opposition to abortion , prejudice against homosexuals and laxness with regard to racism and xenophobia .
We are also strongly opposed to the attempt to put forward a proposal on the liberalisation of drugs , on the pretext that this is associated with human rights .
Drug abuse and its tragic social consequences can never be seen as a human right .
We deeply regret that this kind of proposal should have been put forward during the session .
It only serves to undermine people 's confidence in the European Parliament 's stance on human rights within the European Union .
I would like at the outset to commend this extensive report which has been compiled by the rapporteur on this important subject of the state of human rights within the European Union in the year 1997 .
It is both proper and reflective that we are discussing this topic on the 50th anniversary of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
I agree with the rapporteur when she says that we only have to read the Amnesty International Annual Report to see just how extensively human rights are ignored in today 's world .
The Community institutions are alert to the importance of respect for human rights both at home and abroad .
However , I feel that I have to clarify an amendment tabled by Ms McKenna on this report .
Ms McKenna regrets the fact that the Special Criminal Court is being used in Ireland for non-terrorist related offences and the underlying tenor of the amendment would seem to suggest that she questions why the Special Criminal Court is being used at all .
The following points must be borne in mind in this regard :
Neither the constitution nor the Offences against the State Act 1939 provide that the Special Criminal court should be established only to hear paramilitary-related cases.-There are only two respects in which the Special Criminal court differs from the ordinary courts .
Firstly , there is no jury .
Secondly , instead of one judge , there are three judges .
In every other respect , there is no difference .
The same rules of evidence , legal representation and so on apply and of course the decisions of the Court are reviewable by the court of Criminal Appeal.-In the Joseph Kavanagh v Irish Government case , it was made clear that the DPP is free to give direction , in accordance with the Offences Against the State Act 1939 , that a person may be tried in the Special Criminal Court where the DPP is satisfied that the ordinary courts are inadequate to secure the effective administration of justice .
Examples of this could include murder cases , organised crime and drug trafficking and / or related hideous crimes.-The use of the Special Criminal Court recently for some drugs and organised crime cases has arisen as a result of the clarification of the powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions under the existing legalisation .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has voted against Mrs Schaffner 's report . Under the pretext of protecting human rights in the European Union , the report puts forward a variety of measures , from voting rights for immigrants to marriage for homosexuals , which are entirely questionable .
Since I am unable to deal with all of them in my explanation of vote , I will mention just one of them , which in paragraph 46 of the resolution , ' calls on the Member States to recognise and promote their regional languages , especially ... by signing and ratifying the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages ' , as adopted by the Council of Europe in 1992 .
I am afraid we cannot accept this call for the ratification of the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .
Firstly , this text provides that for the languages concerned in each country , the authorities should be capable of using them in their dealings with citizens , which would not only be very costly , but also contrary to Article 2 of the French constitution which stipulates that the language of the French Republic is French .
The present situation , where regional languages are freely used , but where the Member States may use a preferred language to preserve their unity , seems quite satisfactory to us .
Furthermore , even if it was generally admitted that when the Charter was ratified , it would only cover a limited number of traditional regional languages , it was clear that pressure would soon mount for additional languages to be included in the Charter , especially those spoken by immigrants .
Certainly , from its very first article the Charter seems to exclude the ' languages of migrants ' .
However , there is no mention of the languages spoken by the children or grandchildren of migrants , who will not themselves be classed as migrants , but who are likely to continue to speak the language of their country of origin , in view of the problems of integration .
This fear is increased by Article 7 , which provides that the principles laid down for regional languages would also apply to ' non-territorial ' minority languages .
Moreover , the Charter is designed to promote destructuring in the Member States , which is completely in accordance with the wishes of some European federalists to leave no firm links between Brussels and the regions .
The promotion of transnational exchanges between regional languages used in identical or similar form in two or more states is provided for in Article 7 , for example ; Article 14 provides for encouragement of direct cooperation across borders between local authorities in whose territory similar regional languages are used .
From this point of view , the ratification of the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages would merely give a new impetus to a Europe of the Regions , which the euro will also speed up at the same time by depriving the Member States of one of the instruments with which they exert their national identity .
We are not surprised to discover once again that the European Parliament is helping to undermine the nation states .
Human rights should unite us .
Yet , as is the case every year , a number of my colleagues have used the annual report as an excuse for asserting political and ideological alternatives that have nothing to do with human rights .
Irresponsible neo-Marxist , neo-Leninist and libertarian dinosaurs , they have put forward proposals seeking to undermine the family unit and the principles of citizenship , which are the foundations of any society or nation .
This is why it was impossible for us to vote for Mrs Schaffner 's report as amended , and why we were pleased to see that she has refused to take responsibility for its creation .
Generally speaking , we are forced to recognise that some of the people who make the most fuss about protecting human rights were the first to support for decades Marxist-Leninist regimes that treated them with disdain , cynicism and brutality .
Moreover , we should point out that they have never seen fit to repent , although they were accomplices , and even agents of totalitarian Communist regimes which are responsible for the deaths of more than 100 million innocent human beings .
I would also point out , as the files on the KGB have proved , that all the Communist parties in Europe were paid for by the USSR until 1989 .
And they , or their fellow travellers , are the ones who come and give us lessons in ' human rights ' !
It is high time we denounced this terrible farce .
Just as it is time we condemned the unethical alliances the Socialists make with Communist parties .
In this respect too , their particular idea of what is right and wrong seems to me to come and go .
As the late lamented François Furet rightly pointed out , the obsession with fascism and , therefore , with antifascism , has been used as an instrument by the Communist movement to hide from the general public what it really stands for .
It is lamentable that the Socialists have always gone along with this ludicrous situation .
When looking at this bloody century which ends with the ravages left by those twin scourges , the Red Army and the Black Death , I take my lead from Winston Churchill and Charles de Gaulle who were the ones who really fought for human dignity .
It is with some hesitation that I am voting in favour of the Schaffner report in the final vote , since it contains a great deal of material that has little or nothing to do with human rights in the EU .
As is the case every year , Parliament examines the state of human rights within the European Union .
However , the vote held today is of particular importance , since we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the 10th anniversary of the Sakharov prize , which was founded by the European Parliament .
This being the case , I must congratulate the rapporteur who has presented an outstanding piece of work on this subject and who , above all , has fully participated in the game of consultation and compromise .
It was not easy , since it is so difficult to sort out the problems on one 's own doorstep .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report , because respect for human rights is an essential aspect of any democratic society and should be one of the fundamental pillars of the Union 's domestic and foreign policy .
Moreover , I agree with the proposal that 1999 be designated ' European Year to Stop Violence Against Women ' .
I also believe that we must combat the attacks on personal rights perpetrated by certain ' sects ' .
I also agree with the idea of the right of access to the labour market , health care , social security , housing , education and the courts .
The ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty will reinforce the prevention of all forms of discrimination ( Article 13 ) , a notion which is particularly close to my heart , and which cannot be separated from the notion of freedom .
I should like to conclude by saying that I must support the entire report which , voted for by the House , does Parliament great credit .
The protection of human rights is a matter of great importance and concern to me and to my colleagues , and I fully understand the significance of this annual report .
But equally difficult issues , to my mind , are the lack of a uniform definition of the concept of human rights and , to a lesser extent , the substance of this report .
I should have appreciated it , at least on this one occasion when we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , if the report had not been allowed to degenerate into a party-political manifesto for the majority group in the relevant committee but had addressed the real problems in the Union .
I for one cannot make any sense of the piecemeal list and the repeated interspersing of violations inside the Union with cases from outside the Union .
For that reason alone I rejected some items , even though I believe that the cases described constitute violations of human rights ; the fact is that the violations in question occurred outside the Union and should not therefore be part of the report on which we have been asked to vote today .
Once again , utter confusion prevailed during the discussions and the vote on the report on the situation in the European Union concerning respect for human rights .
Nevertheless , the tragedies of modern history have emphasised the danger which results from ignoring the truth about human dignity .
It will still be more important than ever during the year of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to point out a few basic truths .
The 1948 Declaration makes itself clear : it identifies the rights which it proclaims , and does not confer them ; they are in fact essential to human dignity .
And yet , what are we seeing ?
The development of all sorts of so-called rights in the name of the principle of ' non-discrimination ' ( Article 13 of the draft Treaty of Amsterdam ) , which can justify any form of behaviour , for instance , in relation to sexual practices .
This positivist shift of the law in Europe is very serious : it marks a break with the most basic form of European humanism , which would urgently need to be rediscovered as far as adults are concerned and introduced to the younger generation .
When confirming the revelation in the Bible of the unity of mankind ( cf .
Genesis ) two thousand years ago , Jesus Christ came to teach us the best way to promote respect for human rights . ' In everything , do to others what you would have them do to you . '
Mr President , I must tell you that I am somewhat amazed .
You allow Mr Fabre-Aubrespy to give an explanation of vote on the Elles report concerning the 1996 discharge during his explanation of vote on the Schaffner report .
You have broken the rules twice : firstly , you did not allow us to take the floor when a very important vote was being taken , and then you allow one Member to give his opinion and not other Members .
Finally , Mr President , I am obliged to tell you that you are wrong in thinking that there has not been a vote on discharge .
Now , please clarify what you said : there was no discharge , there was no refusal of discharge , or discharge was not granted .
Could you give me your interpretation ?
With pleasure , Mrs Lulling .
First of all , it is true that I may have been rather inattentive in allowing Mr Fabre-Aubrespy to hold forth on various amendments which did not have a great deal to do with the Schaffner report , but as you will have noticed , I have a very liberal way of chairing the proceedings .
Having said that , as regards the question you are raising , I would refer you firstly to Rule 122 , ' Explanations of vote ' : ' Once the general debate has been concluded , any Member may give an oral explanation on the final vote ' - on the final vote .
And secondly , in Annex V , under the terms of which we voted , in the context of Article 3 , ' Giving of discharge ' , you will remember that , for the final decision , we decided by a comfortable majority in the House that no amendments were possible and that we only voted for or against the conclusion of the committee .
That conclusion was in favour of giving discharge , but it was not adopted .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy was therefore pointing out to me under Article 6 , ' Referral back to committee ' , that Parliament 's vote must be taken into account .
That is quite clear , but this vote was not a final vote , which means that the Chair maintains its interpretation that no explanations of vote can be accepted on the Elles report , and if for once I have shown too much indulgence , I would ask you to forgive me .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.29 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr Elliott has the floor .
Mr President , I seek clarification on the proceedings for the rest of today .
It was intended that the joint debate on racism and xenophobia should take place following the vote .
I should like to know when that will now take place .
The services tell me that the debate will probably take place at 6.20 p.m.
Agenda
Ladies and gentlemen , following the decision taken this morning to include a debate on Iraq in this afternoon 's agenda , I would like to suggest that once the Secretaries-General of the political groups have discussed the matter , the last two subjects of this debate should be deleted . I am referring to the relocation of Rank Xerox and the Philippines .
The speaking time for Members could then be set at 45 minutes .
Mr Hallam has asked for the floor .
Mr President , this morning Mr Martin made the excellent suggestion that we should still be able to vote on these urgencies .
I understand the importance of the situation in Iraq but I feel that these urgencies are also important and we should at least be allowed to express our views .
During the discussion one group was not prepared to allow the vote without debate .
As you know , all groups must agree on such a procedure .
Mr President , I understand that the group concerned was the UPE .
It has used this squalid manoeuvre to remove from the agenda an item that only yesterday we voted to put on the agenda by 290 votes to 55 .
The concerns of the thousands of workers and their families affected will not go away .
We will be attempting to bring this issue back next month .
Hopefully then the UPE will face its responsibilities rather than use these squalid manoeuvres as a way of preventing the House from having a view on these matters .
Mr President , we have no objection to the Xerox motion being discussed before the House .
But what we do not want is a vote on something that has not been discussed .
We have every sympathy for the workers involved , but the reasoning in this motion for a resolution is entirely out of order , and the facts set out therein are totally inaccurate .
If we are to have a vote then we must have a debate .
We could waste time discussing that but we have limited time and we have to discuss important matters .
Before there was only one group taking that position .
Now there is another group which does not want to vote without previous debate .
Mr President , very briefly , it could at least be resolved in terms of consensus here if it was agreed that we are going to deal with both those issues next month .
People would then feel that they had the opportunity to deal with it .
Mr McCartin says ' yes ' and so does Mr Pasty , so you have the commitment there .
Do you think it is necessary to vote on the proposal ?
I do not think so .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the situation in Iraq .
I give the floor to Mr Pinheiro , on behalf of the Commission .
You all know that the European Union - and , of course , the Commission - has always maintained that the solution to the Iraqi crisis must be founded in the framework of the United Nations through full compliance by Iraq with all relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions .
Over the last 14 months , in which this has been discussed time and again in the different instances , the European Union , through its Member States , has reiterated its position in this regard .
On 9 November the European Union explicitly condemned as totally unacceptable Iraq 's decision on 31 October to cease all cooperation with UNSCOM , and supported the United Nations Security Council 's response to that decision - United Nations Security Council Resolution 1205 .
As you know , we still insist that compliance with the requirements of United Nations Security Council resolutions is absolutely necessary for the crisis to be resolved .
It is unfortunate that apparently the military option has become inevitable : we hope these actions will be limited to military targets .
We reaffirm , as we always have , that we have nothing against the Iraqi people , but rather , against the regime and its leader .
Consultations are now taking place within our Member States .
The presidency issued a declaration not long ago , the thrust of which roughly coincides with what I am able to say at this juncture .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are facing a serious crisis , indeed we are in the midst of a serious crisis , and of course the first thing to ask is : who is responsible for it ?
On behalf of my group , I should like to say plainly and unequivocally that responsibility lies with Saddam Hussein and his regime , and from your words , Commissioner , I infer that this is the view of the European Union , of the European Commission .
Who is this Saddam Hussein ?
Is he a politician who breaks the odd rule here and there , who engages in a spot of beggar-my-neighbour policy ?
No , Saddam Hussein is a ruthless dictator ; he is a danger to those around him as well as a brutal oppressor of his own people , be they Kurds or Shiites , or simply ordinary Iraqi citizens . He even diverts foreign aid for the use of his own family and entourage instead of giving it to the people who really need it .
For years now , the international community has been trying to put him in his place by means of military actions , not to mention numerous diplomatic overtures .
We surely all know how often the United Nations and Russia have tried to mediate through diplomatic channels .
And in fact every time , after every mediation effort , it has taken a few weeks , sometimes a few months but sometimes only a few days for us to see that the attempts to mediate have not delivered what they promised . Above all , we have seen Saddam Hussein failing to honour his promises and his agreements .
Time and again , United Nations observers and inspectors are more or less expelled or forced to leave the country .
Saddam Hussein has been playing a dangerous game of cat and mouse , not only by occasionally vilifying the Americans or European countries or obstructing their work . No , he has even turned the United Nations , that very institution which we here in the European Parliament are pledged to defend , into a laughing-stock .
He has robbed the United Nations of its authority , and every one of us , every country and every single Member of Parliament with our respect for the principles of humanity , human rights and peace and our desire to ensure that these principles are upheld in that part of the world , has effectively been turned into a laughing-stock by Saddam Hussein and his regime and its political methods .
And yet I am not very happy about the action that has now been launched , and while my group is completely at one in its perception of the problem , I am sure that different conclusions have been drawn as to whether the action that has been taken was really the best available option .
There are doubts , there are reservations , there are criticisms about the timing , the moment chosen by a greatly weakened President and the motives behind the timing of these air strikes .
There are also doubts and criticism about the fact that the United Nations was not consulted before the actual decision was taken .
I have enough legal training to appreciate that there are various possible legal arguments , all of them well founded , on the question of whether there ought to have been a new UN or Security Council resolution .
There are certainly good grounds for claiming that a new resolution would have been superfluous , since a basic resolution , which covered the sanctions too , had already been adopted .
Nevertheless , I should have deemed it more prudent and more reasonable if the United States , and Britain too , had involved the United Nations in some way in the decision and in the conduct of their military action , at least through a consultation process .
After all , there is at least the danger that the very thing we seek to avoid by tackling Saddam Hussein in various ways , namely the erosion of the authority of the United Nations , is the very thing that will happen if there is even a suggestion that it might have been wiser to involve the United Nations in the decision-making process .
That , at any rate , is the view of many people , and that is the personal view I would express in my own group .
The problem now is to find a solution to this difficult situation we are in , and I fear that if we do not deal more thoroughly with the roots of this crisis , we shall be forever having to stand up in Parliament and voice criticism , and there will be a succession of mere pinpoint actions ; air strikes will be carried out , but nothing fundamental will change in Iraq .
The fact that we in this House have often been critical of what may be a rather unbalanced approach on the part of the United States of America is clearly indicative of one thing : Europe needs to develop a common foreign and security policy .
As long as Europe conducts its foreign , security and defence policies in such a weak , pussyfooting and inconsistent manner , it will not be possible to hold the United States any more firmly to particular principles and standards that we profess .
The second point is this : it is absolutely crucial that we persuade the United States to conduct its policy in that region with a greater degree of regional coordination .
We know how sensitive the region is .
We are aware that any hiccup in the peace process creates difficulties for the entire region and even puts a strain on Europe 's relations with the Arab world in general .
A solution to the Iraq problem , a campaign against this appalling regime , can only be achieved in concert with the other Arab states .
It is foolish to believe that such a policy can be pursued from without , whether by Europe or by the United States , in the face of public opinion in the Arab nations .
If we cannot win over the hearts and minds of the Arab population inside and outside Iraq , we shall never be able to solve the problem .
The third point concerns humanitarian aid .
Time and again , especially here in the House , we have stated categorically that the people must not suffer for the sins and errors of Saddam Hussein , and that must continue to be our guiding principle ; it is quite plain that we must provide financial aid in the coming months to help those who will really be made to suffer once again .
And so to my final point . A great deal of criticism has been directed at the world 's policeman , the United States .
It is a dangerous situation , whether it results from the American desire to take action or because nobody else is prepared to perform that function .
Let me return to the point I made at the beginning .
There is only one answer to the problem posed by the United States ' role as a one-man police force , and that is to strengthen European defence and security policy .
The Anglo-French decision is a first step , but let us try to curb the tendency , the desire of the United States to act as the world 's policeman , and let us seriously pursue a common foreign and security policy in Europe in order to establish a counterweight on this side of the Atlantic .
Mr President , I find myself in substantial agreement with the two previous speakers .
The first question we have to ask ourselves is , was this massive use of force necessary ?
My answer is the same as theirs : yes , regrettably it was .
After years of diplomacy , which got ever closer to the brink , with Saddam Hussein becoming ever more evasive , ever more dishonest , there was no alternative .
Saddam Hussein has been laughing at the United Nations , an organisation whose values he derides and whose mandate he does not accept .
The UNSCOM report was damning .
It is absolutely clear that Saddam Hussein does not just possess weapons of mass destruction but he has been moving them around .
He has been deliberately evading attempts to trap those weapons using the UNSCOM mechanisms .
Why , we must ask ourselves , does he want to retain this ability for chemical and biological warfare ?
We know he has used it against his own people .
We have every reason to believe he will use it against other people .
Let me remind you of the scale of those weapons .
The British Prime Minister said in his statement last night : ' Since 1991 the inspectors have destroyed or rendered harmless 48 Scud missiles , 40 000 tonnes of chemical munitions , 690 tonnes of chemical weapon agents , 3 000 tonnes of precursor chemicals and a biological weapons factory , but over 30 000 chemical weapons warheads and 4 000 tonnes of precursor chemicals remain unaccounted for . '
The second question we must address ourselves to is : was this the right time ?
I simply do not buy the wag-the-dog thesis that President Clinton would engage in this kind of activity in order to spare himself domestic embarrassment and buy a few days .
This is a matter of life and death ; life and death for Iraqis , both friends of the regime and foes of the regime ; life and death for Iraq 's neighbours , particularly for Israel ; and conceivably for all of us .
It is clear if you listen - as I am sure many of us did last night - to the television broadcasts from Washington , that all his advisors , both civilian and military , decided this was the right time to act .
Speaking for a moment as a Briton , I do not believe that a British Prime Minister would endanger British lives in this cause , at this time , if he did not think that it was inevitable , necessary and right to act at this moment .
May I seek to focus our thoughts not just on the act , but on its consequences ?
Parliament is not an executive body in this field of foreign policy , but we have a duty both to analyse and criticise what has happened and also to think ahead and advise the governments of our Union .
Mr Swoboda said this is an unhappy reflection on our failure to create a robust common foreign and security policy .
And yet we know that the next six months are going to be crucial for that policy .
The events of the last 24 hours indicate how desperately we need an analysis and planning unit that links all the Foreign Offices of Europe , a high representative for the common foreign and security policy and perhaps above all , a General Affairs Council that is genuinely prepared to engage in debate about difficult issues in difficult parts of the world .
But it has an even more urgent impact .
There has , in recent months , been real energy behind the attempt to create a defence policy for this Union .
The St. Malo Declaration , albeit fashioned with the Balkans in mind , could provide us with the basis for wider institutions for use around the world , in the interests of Europe .
The next few weeks are going to provide not only a real challenge for Europe , but a particular challenge for the British and French Governments .
They have a choice .
They can either go back to their historical snarling at each other across the Channel or they can regard this crisis as an opportunity to reinforce the steps they have already taken together and that they recommend for the rest of us .
They can leave it to the instincts of the Foreign Office and the Quai d 'Orsay , or they can set aside those historical thought patterns and try to develop for Europe some kind of iron fist to go inside the silk glove of a common foreign and security policy that to date has been 95 % rhetoric .
I believe that a defence policy for our Union is a glittering prize which should not be lost in the smoke and dust of Baghdad .
We all bear a responsibility for trying to turn this crisis into an opportunity .
That responsibility lies on no-one more heavily than on the German presidency , which will inherit the consequences of the last 24 hours .
There are major opportunities for this to provide the seed for a major rethink of how Europe expresses itself , not just in the Gulf but in the wider context of the Middle East .
I have no doubt , personally , that the timing of this attack on Baghdad was influenced not just by what was happening in Baghdad itself , but by developments in the peace process and in Palestine .
There is a real opportunity for a benign European initiative in Palestine in the months before 4 May .
Israel is about to become snarled in a difficult and contentious election campaign .
The authority of Yasser Arafat hangs in the balance ahead of 4 May .
Whatever else we may think , the US President is bound to be distracted by domestic considerations .
Europe will have to think fast ; it will have to think creatively ; it will have to use the good offices and the intelligence of Mr Moratinos .

But I really believe that if we regard ourselves as serious players on the world stage with a real role in the regions around us , we will have to use the next few months to think creatively and effectively .
Allow me , in conclusion , to return to the substance of the matter .
The British Prime Minister said last night : ' There is no realistic alternative to military force .
We are taking military action with real regret but also with real determination .
We have exhausted all other avenues .
We act because we must . ' I should like to say , not as a British citizen but as chairman of our Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and , I believe , a good European , that when the dust settles and the new situation is apparent we must be able to say that Europe must act together and we must act because we have no choice .
This is a difficult moment , but difficult moments are what give birth to real creativity and to real advance in this Union of ours .
Mr President , if we want to determine where the blame lies for what has happened in the past 24 hours - whether it lies with Washington , London or Baghdad - then we must search out the first cause in this whole process .
If we do that , it is clear that the blame for the current crisis lies firmly with Saddam Hussein and his regime in Iraq .
Iraq has provoked one crisis after another over many years since the Gulf War in 1991 ; notably , and in particular , in January of this year when first it expelled all United States personnel from the UNSCOM team in that country .
In August of this year it barred the entire UNSCOM team of inspectors from entering new sites and in October it ended all cooperation entirely with UNSCOM .
These provocations add up to a consistent pattern of non-cooperation and concealment that has prevailed for fully eight years , during which time inspections have repeatedly been totally or partially obstructed by the Iraqi authorities .
All attempts to find diplomatic solutions to the crisis have failed .
Why ?
Because of the bad will on the part of Saddam Hussein .
He has continuously blocked , obstructed and frustrated inspections by the UN Special Commission , in clear violation of UN resolutions .
He has shown total disregard for the memorandum of understanding signed between Iraq and the UN Secretary-General in February of this year , after a personal intervention by Mr Kofi Annan .
This week , Mr Richard Butler , Chief Weapons Inspector , reported that Iraq is continuing to refuse to comply with the terms of Resolution 687 .
It is believed still to possess biological weapons , illicit ballistic missiles and chemical weapons .
The military intervention of the past 24 hours is unfortunate but it is the necessary consequence of the Iraqi regime 's own intransigence .
My Group remains very sympathetic to the suffering of the Iraqi people under the sanctions .
But the first cause for the sanctions lies also with their own dictator .
We unequivocally support the United States and the United Kingdom in their attempt to eliminate this threat to regional and world peace , and I hope Member States will do likewise in the Council .
Mr President , a short while ago we were both relieved and proud when Kofi Annan returned from Baghdad after having managed to reach an agreement , although we all knew in the back of our minds that this agreement could prove short-lived .
It soon became clear that this was the case when the UNSCOM personnel were sent into the country and then out again .
I do not need to go into the details , as Mr Swoboda and Mr Spencer have already done so comprehensively .
For me the question remains as to why Saddam Hussein is making things so difficult if he has nothing to hide .
Perhaps that is too simplistic .
In short , Mr President , the actions now being taken were in fact inevitable , but the timing is causing doubts among many people .
I can understand this , but I do not believe that it will affect the vote in Congress , and meanwhile the facts on the ground in the Middle East remain just as serious .
Does this action bring a solution any nearer ?
I suspect not .
UNSCOM will not be returning .
Saddam Hussein will not be affected .
So what can we do to help achieve some progress in the region ?
Support the opposition ?
We know from experience that this is very fragmented .
But the EU could nevertheless make an effort in this direction .
Initiatives must also be taken with a view to providing humanitarian aid , because it is extremely sad that just before Christmas Iraqi citizens are lying in hospital and may be suffering from a shortage of medicines .
Like Mr Spencer , who has given an excellent analysis of the situation , I also see a bigger role for the German Presidency .
This presidency certainly has a lot on its plate , as we have Agenda 2000 to consider , which is already the subject of considerable controversy .
Alongside the US position on this , I believe it is important for the EU to take serious and firm measures in relation to the Middle East , of which Iraq is of course a part .
We must do something substantial for the Iraqi people , something to make them feel that they have not been abandoned to this dictator .
The only form I can see this taking at present is humanitarian aid .
Mr President , I am about to change the tone of this meeting .
To start with , I do have to say that , in our view , Saddam Hussein is a tyrant and his regime is unacceptable . However , what we are actually discussing here today is an unprecedented attack on the Iraqi people .
Saddam Hussein will not be harmed by this attack , but the Iraqi people certainly will be .
They have been suffering under an inhuman embargo for several years now , and as a result , 500 000 children have already died . It is those children , their mothers and their fathers who are bearing the brunt of the United States ' attack .
This is the reality of the situation .
It is not a matter of defending Saddam Hussein .
He is undoubtedly a tyrant .
Nevertheless , the United Nations inspection team itself recognises that 428 inspections were carried out within a month , of which over 290 were conducted according to plan , and 128 were new . The inspection team also admits that there is no great confidence in the impartiality of its leader , Mr Butler .
This , Mr President , is the true state of affairs .
We have much to regret with regard to this situation .
Firstly , it is unfortunate that Parliament is not making a clear statement against what amounts to barbarism , whatever other name it may go by , and that there is no resolution to this effect . In addition , once again , the European Union is not going to adopt a common position .
It is not going to become a point of reference for the world in terms of the defence of peace . It is not standing out against the United States ' barbaric conduct in launching an attack that the United Nations were not even aware of and that Kofi Annan himself has condemned .
Therefore , the European Union should at least stand by Kofi Annan and not by the United States .
The European Union must become a point of reference in the defence of human rights , of life and of peace , but it is unfortunately missing another opportunity of doing so .
Mr Blair 's unreserved support for the attack , in which he was joined by Mr Aznar , is much to be regretted .
I regret that more voices have not been raised here - yes , I most certainly regret it , colleagues - to condemn such barbaric behaviour .
I am about to conclude , Mr President .
However , I still regret that a stronger voice has not been raised to condemn this attack , and that the United States should be able to pursue their policy of fait accompli without any opposition from the European Union . I must stress yet again that it is not Saddam Hussein who is being punished , despite being a tyrant , but the Iraqi people , who have already suffered enough .
Mr President , the Green Group condemns the unilateral action taken by the United States and the United Kingdom .
Nevertheless , we also condemn Saddam Hussein 's criminal regime and policies .
He is a criminal and should be treated as such .
He should be charged and tried , and if he is found guilty , he should be arrested and punished using strictly lawful methods .
We cannot condone this ' rough justice ' and lynch law !
Such tactics have no place in an international legal system .
In recent years , we have seen the gradual emergence of an international judicial system .
We are not going to lynch the murderers in Rwanda - we are bringing them to trial !
We are not going to lynch the murderers in Bosnia - we are bringing them to trial !
We are not going to lynch Pinochet - we are bringing him to trial !
If we wish to avoid a state of chaos in which ' private police forces ' compete against each other , we must act according to international law .
Mr Swoboda bemoans the fact that the USA is the world 's policeman , and would like the EU to provide some competition in that respect - as if that were a viable solution to the problem !
If the Russians and Chinese were also to set up their own rival world police forces , then by the year 2000 there would be four or five different ' world superpower police forces ' all competing to establish their own world order in accordance with their own best interests - how I pity our grandchildren !
The European Union stands or falls on legality and the rule of law .
At the present time when we are working even harder to promote human rights and the rule of law through our numerous reports , how can representatives of the European Union possibly countenance ' rough justice ' as an alternative to the courts ?
We must abide by the rule of law , even when the going gets tough !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are confronted with a situation here which is really disturbing for us : things are clear in so far as one side is wrong and the other right .
As far as we know , the Buttler report which has turned humiliation into a means of diplomacy , is based on three incidents which occurred in connection with the inspection of 130 sites ; this gives a rate of roughly 2.5 % for incidents of obstruction and friction .
However , this report is causing so much fuss that it is preventing us from understanding the conclusions of the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency , according to which Iraq fully cooperated with the visit of inspection carried out on its nuclear sites .
Therefore , what pressing matter has prevented us from taking time to assess the contents of both these reports ?
How can a country justify its decision to confiscate an international authority ?
Does the fact that it is joined and supported by other countries make the confiscation less serious in some ways ?
It is nevertheless unfortunate , and it is perhaps even suspicious , that this hypocritical war which will set ablaze a region and cause loss of human life , takes place at such an opportune moment for US domestic policy .
While the American President may have thought that he could use the President of Iraq as a means of drawing enemy fire , there is every chance that he will be seen to be using him as a fig leaf .
It is preposterous that anyone would forget about Saddam Hussein 's atrocities and cynicism .
However , by turning him into a victim , the US President unfortunately obliges us to condone the behaviour of some and to take a hard line with others .
What is at stake is our determination to resist the temptation to go to war , but to fight against the show of force , and resist punitive strikes .
We are determined to show that we have certain political , moral and diplomatic requirements in international relations , and in fact , to face up to our ideals .
Mr President , the Security Council has clearly stated the conditions that Iraq has to meet .
But it is also clear that Saddam Hussein constantly flouts the undertakings he gives .
The international community can no longer stand by while Saddam Hussein keeps playing these games .
Last month the United States and the United Kingdom made it perfectly clear that enough was enough and that they would be prepared to intervene if Saddam Hussein failed to honour his undertakings , and without any advance warning .
That is why this use of force is justified .
For some time now there has been no alternative to serious punitive action .
The attack by the United States and the allies was therefore justified , although I agree with the Dutch Prime Minister Mr Kok that this is a terrible thing from a humanitarian point of view .
Iraq has tried to use the weakened position of the US President for its own benefit .
Not to intervene now would not only jeopardise the credibility of the United Nations , but also security in the region .
Saddam Hussein does not only attack neighbouring countries when he sees his chance , as in the case of Iran and Kuwait . He is also ready to murder members of his own people , including members of his own family .
This barbaric dictator must go .
He is a tyrant .
With him all banned weapons must also be banished from Iraq .
Mr President , we are nine days away from Christmas .
Iraq is the only Arab country where there are Christians , churches and Christmas trees , and where the presents being given to children are bombs , an embargo , thousands of dying children , genocide , and a concentration camp for 18 million Arabs which is guarded by the West .
What crime has Iraq committed ?
Iraq wants the right to dignity , territorial integrity , sovereignty over its natural resources , and non-interference in its internal affairs .
What is Saddam Hussein asking for ?
To stand up and be counted ?
Who is a tyrant in the Middle East ?
Saddam Hussein ?
Or Bill Clinton cavorting with tarts in hotels and hallways , wiping his secretions on dresses ?
The law is being invoked , but where is the United Nations Security Council ?
Where is the Security Council 's resolution ?
Where is the peacekeeping operation ?
Has the matter been referred to the Austrian Presidency of the Council ?
To whom has the matter been referred ?
We talk about policemen , but who are the criminals ?
Aramco , Exxon , or British colonial power in Kuwait ?
We talk about regimes , but which is the model regime ?
Emir Jaber of Kuwait or the Wahhabite family of Saudi Arabia ?
Europe is staking its credibility .
The Arab nation is watching Europe .
The Arabs are not people from the suburbs !
They are from Nineveh , Babylon and Mesopotamia .
I say the following to the Iraqi students I have given lectures to as dean in Baghdad and Babylon : ' One day , France will become France again , we will hold out our hands to the people of Iraq , and we will make up for the crime that Europe has committed , the Europe of so-called human rights ' .
Long live Iraq .
( Mixed reactions )
Mr President , all peoples hoped that 1945 would draw a line under the tragic succession of wars ; instead , history shows that in 1945 warfare did not end , but peace broke out .
Never before as in the past 50 years has there been so much war , genocide , injustice , migration of populations and suffering by innocent people .
With regard to the momentous events currently unfolding , we roundly condemn not the Iraqi people , whose ancient civilisation - perhaps the most ancient human civilisation of all - we admire , but Saddam , who has sacrificed his population on the cruellest of altars in a bid to achieve his own dreams of glory and omnipotence .
We likewise condemn the fact that the international organisations - including the European Union - are utterly powerless , miserably impotent in the face of this tragedy and those which preceded it .
This impotence feeds the conviction in the United States that they are the avenging angel .
Mr President , we hope that this cruel chapter will soon end , thanks partly to the Union ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I have to stop you there , Mr Parigi .
You have gone beyond your speaking time .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance
The next item is the joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions :
B4-1087 / 98 by Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-1100 / 98 by Mr La Malfa , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; - B4-1138 / 98 by Mr von Habsburg and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-1144 / 98 by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1151 / 98 by Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; on a political settlement of the Trans-Dniestrian problem .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my group has tabled this resolution because we believe it is time the European Union took a more active role in the search for a solution to the Trans-Dniestrian conflict .
Many of us are largely unfamiliar with the whole situation in the region to the east of the River Dniester , and we believe it is necessary that the European public should know more about this conflict .
Moldova is linked with us through a partnership and cooperation agreement .
One day Romania will be a member of the European Union , and Moldova will then be our immediate neighbour .
The conflict in the Dniester region has now been continuing for eight years and has received scant public attention .
The conflict centres on the future status of the region of Trans-Dniestria within the Moldovan state .
It is a power struggle , through which some of the protagonists are seeking to consolidate the status quo .
The confrontations are about political and economic power to a great extent .
It is élite groups , rather than the general population , who are locked in this tussle , and even the dispute about whether Russian or Romanian should be the official language in Trans-Dniestria is merely a side issue .
We in the European Union have been asked and are called upon to play a part in the development of a strategy for the solution of this conflict and to assist the OSCE in these intractable disputes .
We cannot turn a blind eye to this conflict ; in the coming weeks and months , we must try to find an answer to the outstanding problems within the framework of the partnership and cooperation agreement and at the talks in which the Council is engaged .
At the heart of the matter are the following questions : how can cooperation with the OSCE be most intelligently structured , how can the Russian troop withdrawal be organised , what is the best solution to the problem of dissolving the arms and ammunition depots , what can be done to guarantee fair treatment for the political prisoners , especially Mr Ilie Ilascu and those imprisoned with him , what kinds of peaceful cooperation can be developed between Moldova and the Trans-Dniestrian region , particularly in the economic and social domains , and what financial support can we give to help resolve these issues ?
What is far more crucial , however , is that we should learn from the situation in Northern Ireland and from other cases too that it is necessary for the European Union to play its part in establishing a deadline for the resolution of these conflicts .
We know from our own experience that a political conflict can only be properly resolved if a timetable is set .
Mr President , we have been waiting for a fair and lasting settlement in Trans-Dniestria since 1992 .
For six years a conflict has been brewing there that could explode and cause an escalation in the political situation .
The people of Moldova must remember the 1992 war and make every effort to prevent renewed bloodshed .
Why are the fine words and the Moscow Memorandum not acted upon ?
My group is pleased that , partly thanks to the initiative of Mrs Mann , we have also been able to signal our support for peace to Moldova and Trans-Dniestria .
The forces for peace deserve every support , as do the international efforts of the OSCE , the Russian Federation and Ukraine .
I hope that they will continue to do what they can to give peace the best possible chance .
I call upon the Council and Commission to make a contribution to the peace process - perhaps this would be a deserving cause for TACIS funding .
Priority must also be given to the destruction of the major arms supplies which the Russians left behind .
As we know , the presence of large quantities of weapons can in itself trigger a spiral of violence .
Madam President , Moldova , I am sorry to say , is something of a forgotten country in our part of the world .
That is why I should like to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Mann for the energy with which she has dedicated herself to bringing about a real and radical change in this widespread disregard .
We tend to forget Moldova , even though it is enormously important to our security .
It is worth observing how the governments of the applicant countries react when the subject of Moldova is raised .
Mr Gabriel , the former Romanian Foreign Minister , once pointed out in a very interesting speech that there were two absolutely critical points for security in Europe .
One of them was the Trans-Dniestria issue and the other was the question of Kaliningrad .
These are two places which , simply because of their geographical positions and because of the huge quantities of arms deployed in them - an inexplicable phenomenon in actual fact , because even Russia cannot explain today , and is unwilling to try and explain to the outside world , why so many weapons are kept there - represent a real threat to the security of the entire continent .
We are not just talking about a small remote place ; we simply must look at the wider picture rather than walking around with blinkers on .
I believe it is very important that we in the European Parliament should also pledge our support to the relevant missions , especially the OSCE , so that they know they have the backing of the political representatives of the European Union , who are willing to provide assistance and support if and when it is needed .
A solution to the conflict is possible if there is enough strength behind the peace efforts .
In the developing conflict , Russia is on one side and the European Union is effectively on the other .
We shall be doing Europe no favours if we allow a one-sided show of strength by Russia .
It is essential that we demonstrate by our presence there that we are really supporting the young Moldovan democracy , that we are doing our best for Moldova .
If we do that , I believe we shall have done what is best for ourselves too .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament supports the OSCE Ministerial Council in its appeal to the parties involved in the Trans-Dniestrian conflict and agrees that it is high time the latter took decisive action to find a solution to the conflict .
We are well aware of the efforts of the OSCE mission , which is seeking peace in the region on a shoestring budget , with a great deal of commitment and often with restrictions on the exercise of its mandate .
We know that any solution must respect the internationally recognised borders of Moldova .
The situation is complicated by the fact that the agreed withdrawal of the Russian forces is being delayed by Moscow and is further complicated by the storage in Trans-Dniestria of huge quantities of arms and ammunition , as has already been mentioned .
Moldova - and this is repeatedly forgotten here - was subject to the same fate as the former German Democratic Republic , spending 40 years under Soviet rule .
Moldova has applied for membership of the European Union .
That is repeatedly ignored here .
We should offer this particular neighbour a solution in the framework of the European Conference , in the context of the enlarged Union , and I ask the Commissioner to suggest which strategies the Commission might have for Moldova over and above the partnership and cooperation agreement .
Madam President , the Commission obviously shares the European Parliament 's concerns about the situation in Trans-Dniestria .
Although there has been no incidence of violence since 1992 , there can certainly be no guarantee of peace until there is an agreement between the leaders of the two parties and neighbouring countries , notable Russia .
In order to facilitate the dialogue and to assist the mediators , notably those from the OSCE , the Commission proposes to finance a project under the TACIS programme to rebuild one of the bridges over the River Dniester destroyed in 1992 in Gura and Kolui .
This proposal has been coordinated with the OSCE mission in Chisinau , and we consider that it is in accordance with the proposal contained in this resolution .
We are continuing to monitor the situation in the region and sharing the information we have with the Council and the Member States , and we are prepared to take any other possible measures which might help to resolve the conflict .
Lastly , on behalf of the Commission , I would like to emphasise the very laudable efforts of the Moldovan authorities to consolidate democracy and develop the market economy , even in circumstances which everyone recognises are extremely difficult .
Thank you , Mr Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following seven motions for resolutions :
B4-1086 / 98 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-1088 / 98 by Mr Happart and Mrs Berès , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-1102 / 98 by Mr Monfils , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-1119 / 98 by Mrs Maes and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ; -B4-1139 / 98 by Mrs Pack and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-1152 / 98 by Mrs Ainardi and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; -B4-1159 / 98 by Mr Kerr , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; on the urgent need to take measures against doping in sport .
Madam President , Commissioner , at the beginning of August I initiated the urgency procedure for a European Parliament resolution on doping in sport .
I am grateful to the Members of the House who added their support to my initiative along the way , because they have improved my original basic text .
Ten heads are better than one !
This joint motion for a resolution is further proof of that .
I do not consider myself to have a moralising role , but there are at least two good reasons to take a firm stand against doping .
Firstly , the whole procedure is immoral .
It is immoral that young people are being set the example of taking risks with health , ostensibly for reasons of sporting performance , but mainly for financial advantage .
We simply cannot accept the principle of cheating in this context .
Doping is used in disregard of morality and to deceive society , and of course it reminds me of the use of hormones in food .
It also reminds me of every kind of fraud , including the financial kind .
This sort of attitude , this kind of thinking , seems to be insinuating itself into sport and if the European Parliament fails to react to it , we will actually be failing in our fundamental duty to create a better and fairer society .
We must insist that the principle and ideal of sport must continue to be upheld first and foremost as an example of morality to young people .
Madam President , doping undermines the body , the mind and sportsmanship .
As Mr Happart rightly says , it is cheating , and I welcome his initiatives on this issue .
The IOC , International Olympic Committee , has decided to do nothing for the moment , so preparations for the World Conference in Lausanne must be thorough and honest .
An international agency must be set up and a clear list of banned products provisionally updated .
But the ICO cannot do this alone .
International organisations such as the Union also have an important role to play .
The recent Vienna summit provided a start , and it is now up to the individual Member States to coordinate their efforts , harmonise their policy and use the European framework in connection with health policy and sport .
EU sports ministers must quickly meet in order to draw up a possible European action plan .
Madam President , I am not always able to agree with Mr Happart , but I am pleased that I can on this occasion .
This is a problem of serious concern to us all as we believe that sport is so poisoned by doping that we scarcely have any confidence left in the sports organisations to eliminate this scourge .
That is why we are placing our trust in the Union .
We hope that the Member States will coordinate their policies , but we also hope that the Commission will produce a directive so that this coordination can become a reality , including effective monitoring .
This is why we proposed the creation of an independent administrative body .
Madam President , doping in sport has already reached serious proportions .
We are seeing how the purveyors of these banned products prove ever more creative in developing new products and new trickery .
It has become a veritable mafia with its own laboratories and its own circuits .
This is why it will be necessary not only for the Commission to adopt a good preventive policy and for there to be a list of banned products , but also for effective controls to be carried out to ensure that these products are indeed eliminated .
By a preventive policy we mean a policy which also thinks pro-actively , that is also aware of likely developments .
What today may be permitted because nobody knows about it , may tomorrow be revealed as a dangerous product .
We want to put an end to the poisoning of sportsmen and -women .
Sport is healthy provided it is not subject to the laws of unadulterated commerce in which the health of people is sacrificed .
Madam President , I will state my point briefly and simply .
Taking drugs and doping other than for medical reasons is wrong .
Drug-taking is psychologically , mentally and physically damaging to the user .
Then there are the moral implications , and the cheating that it leads to .
Sportsmen and women set examples to Europe 's young people .
They pay far more attention to what sportsmen and women are doing than to what politicians are doing .
That is why it is so important that we stop this practice .
Sports organisations need the help of politicians to stamp this out and that is where the Commission has a responsibility .
Thirdly , this is an issue that crosses national frontiers .
It cannot be dealt with by nation states acting alone .
It requires cooperation at international level .
The Commission has a responsibility .
Europe has a responsibility .
We should take the lead and not be sitting back waiting for others to give the lead .
Madam President , for some months now doping scandals have been revealing a chain of responsibility that is not limited to sportsmen and women themselves , far from it .
And our debate reflects growing concern about the spread of the scourge of doping in a great many sporting disciplines .
Member States ' resources for prevention and for the fight against doping are currently very inadequate .
I am pleased that the French Government , spurred on by Marie-George Buffet , has taken the initiative on a bill to fight doping and to protect the health of sportsmen and women .
Full details of this initiative were relayed at the Vienna European Council .
Our group 's motion for a resolution is concerned with combating not just doping but the deep-rooted causes of doping , to make sport human again .
Individual legislation must be adapted or strengthened , and measures must be taken at European level in close association with the sports movement , especially in the fields of research , definition of norms for analysis of doping substances , drawing up a list of banned products and combating trafficking in these products .
Too often it is only sportsmen and women who currently face sanctions , and nobody bothers the people who administer the doping substances .
This situation must be corrected , and all the traffickers and doctors who prescribe these products must be severely punished .
I hope the adoption of the resolution supported by our group will be a signal to those attending the World IOC Conference in Lausanne next February .
Finally , this debate demonstrates the need for a major effort to harmonise legislation and to take European initiatives in line with the gravity of the problem .
This is a very important resolution .
I am in charge of sport for the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and we are still waiting for the Commission to produce a directive on sport .
I should like to pass the message back to the Commission that we have been waiting for this for some years .
I understand there was a discussion on this subject at the recent Council of Sports Ministers in Austria .
It would nice if Parliament got sight of it before we all disappear next June .
Some of us , of course , hope to be back and to take up the initiative then , when we have competence under the Amsterdam Treaty .
It is a very good resolution .
It is very comprehensive .
It deals with an important issue which is not about doping but about money in sport .
This is the key .
Look at the recent Tour de France and the fact that half the teams seemed to be doped .
Other major sports are often subject to doping and money is at the heart of the question .
The huge financial rewards motivate people to do unnatural things to their bodies in order to win .
We need to take some of the money out of sport , take the dope out of sport and put the sport back into sport .
It is a problem that is fairly widespread .
Sometimes when I look at my ex-colleagues in the British Labour Group I have a feeling that maybe they are on a little Prozac too because they seem to be rather quiet when it comes to major issues like the bombing of Baghdad .
Perhaps we could suggest that they have a little Viagra as well as a little Prozac .
That might give them some backbone to stand up to Mr Blair .
This comprehensive resolution should receive the unanimous support of Parliament .
My message to the Commission is to get its act together and bring forward a directive that includes the issue of doping in sport .
Then we can implement it across the Union .
Mr President , I did not hear the translation very clearly .
Are we now talking about foie gras or Viagra ?
Mrs van Bladel , the words do indeed sound very much alike and besides , I am not sure that there is much difference between them in substance .
But I do not think this is the time to go further into such matters .
Mr President , I shall ignore Mr Kerr 's provocative remarks and go straight to the point .
Today everyone recognises the need to combat doping in sport , just as much on ethical and social grounds as for public health reasons .
This evil is afflicting all countries and every government must act .
Where national laws exist today they are disparate .
With these products circulating in a single market and with sporting events being held at European level , it is essential that legislation is harmonised .
The conclusions of the last European Council in Vienna are along those lines .
They emphasise the need for mobilisation at European Union level and invite , and I quote , ' the Member States to examine jointly with the Commission and international sports bodies possible measures to intensify the fight against this danger , in particular through better coordination of existing national measures . '
The French Government 's attitude towards this issue has been firm and proactive , thanks to a bill being piloted through parliament by Marie-George Buffet , Minister for Youth and Sport , and the action of our former colleague , Bernard Kouchner , Minister for Health .
If the conclusions are the same , the remedies perhaps go further .
With her Italian opposite number , Giovanna Melandri , Marie-George Buffet has just approached the German sports minister to ask him to arrange a meeting of the sports ministers of the Fifteen before the opening of the conference being held by the International Olympic Committee on 2 and 3 February in Lausanne , to examine proposals they might formulate or support .
This resolution today is the least we could do .
The situation is worsening because of the lack of harmonised legislation in the single market of the Union .
It will only be possible to combat doping effectively if there are international rules .
Those Member States which already have laws in this field must harmonise them , and those which do not must adopt them .
To this effect , and on the basis of Articles 100a and 129 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , which will be strengthened by the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Commission must take initiatives on both the single market and public health .
To the extent that a recommendation is possible , we believe the Union must soon provide itself with a strong legal instrument and adopt a directive .
Beyond the question of regulations , we all have a duty to contribute to restoring the spirit of sport and the values it represents , ensuring that it continues to be capable of inspiring dreams .
Mr President , the use of doping substances to improve athletes ' performance goes far beyond the explosion of media interest in stars like Ben Johnson , at the Seoul Olympics , and Richard Virenque and his team at the last Tour de France .
Doping can be found in both amateur sport and youth sport .
The first victims are sportsmen and women who are encouraged to artificially exceed their own limits by using doping substances that are always one step ahead of latest testing methods .
This is a real attack on human health .
The second victims are tomorrow 's sportsmen and women : our children .
They are forced to preempt their physical growth and to sculpt their muscle mass prematurely from a tender age as part of the forced development of the bionic champions of the future .
The message should be loud and clear : we should let our children enjoy the pleasures of play and prevent unscrupulous entrepreneurs and even parents from exploiting them .
How , faced with a situation like this , could the Commission have produced a communication on Community action in sports matters ignoring this almost uncontrollable single market in illicit doping substances ?
Mr President , sometimes the intake of a muscle-building substance is dictated by ignorance , and those who encourage the use of anabolic substances , erythropoietin , growth hormone or other such substances are unaware of the precise advantages and drawbacks of such usage , but do not hesitate to suggest their use in order to make a profit , however substantial that may or may not be .
Very often , however , even people who are familiar with the effects of the substances administered suggest their use regardless .
It is these unscrupulous individuals , who pursue success through deceit and bad faith , who ruin sport by riding roughshod over all ethical principles .
The most recent spread of doping has been fuelled not only by the excessive growth of spectator sport but also by a pseudo-medical culture , which has led to a downright obsession with the use of drugs .
My own opinion is that a sick athlete should be able to take whatever drugs the doctor prescribes to help him recover , whereas a healthy athlete should take nothing other than what is contained in a balanced diet .
Unfortunately , however , the controversy of the past few days has placed the most disparate things in the same basket : just as the same effects have been attributed to bread , steak , coffee and mineral water , it is equally inappropriate to use the catch-all term ' doping ' with reference to anabolic steroids , erythropoietin , growth hormone , somatostatin and - perhaps just because they rhyme well - creatine , carnitine , integrators and amino-acids in general .
Prohibition could , then , be applied to substances which actually cause structural changes in the biological composition of an organism .
Taking anabolic steroids to increase one 's body mass is one thing ; supplementing one 's diet with substances which are easier to digest and absorb , for the same calorific and energy value , is another .
Disrupting the hormone balance by administering growth hormone or some other hormonal substance is one thing ; enriching one 's nutrition with a vitamin compound is another .
I am convinced that doping in sport is absurd in cultural terms , in that the spread of such behaviour could deprive man of the pleasure of relying on his own strength to move about .
Let us not forget that physical and sporting activity is still the only form of motor activity which ensures that human beings maintain the morpho-functional characteristics which make them human .
Do you remember the scientific forecasts of the recent past , predicting a man who is all head , with tiny limbs and no muscles , assisted in his every movement by technology , the so-called bionic man ?
Fortunately this has not come about .
Today 's scientists could attempt to create a bio-chemical man , where everything could be done thanks to a pill , drink or injection , but I still believe - or rather , I have every confidence - that this will not happen .
Our task as administrators is to establish strict , clear-cut rules , the same for all the Community countries , to prevent this phenomenon from becoming a truly dangerous one .
Mr President , the Commission shares the opinions expressed in all the motions for resolutions on the importance of doping in sport .
Furthermore , it also believes that it is important , as a matter of urgency , to attack some of the underlying causes , such as the excessive commercialisation of sport , which are often at the root of this scourge .
The Commission also welcomes the conclusions of the Vienna European Council on doping , and welcomes the fact that Parliament is also taking an interest in this issue .
Today 's debate gives us an opportunity to present the various initiatives launched by the Commission , which are in keeping with the majority of the motions tabled by honourable Members .
Last spring there was an exchange of letters between Commissioner Oreja and the Italian Minister for Sport on the need for a coordinated initiative on doping at European level .
Following the events of last summer , in particular during the Tour de France and in Italian football , the Commission immediately entered into contact with the President of the International Olympic Committee and with Member States .
On 21 September 1997 , Mr Samaranch made it known that the sporting organisations wanted government action to focus chiefly on trafficking , harmonisation of legislation and awareness-raising campaigns , leaving the sports organisations to deal with offenders .
At that meeting , Commissioner Oreja announced that he would be participating in the World Conference on doping to be held in Lausanne .
The Commission has examined the issue of doping in sport on three occasions in its contacts with the Member States and with the sporting world .
This question was first discussed at the meeting with directors of sports organisations in the Member States held in Vienna on 7 and 8 October ; it was again discussed at a meeting with the Austrian , British and German sports ministers , and it was also considered at the European Sports Forum , which brings together governmental and non-governmental organisations and sports federations ; the director of the International Olympic Committee and the head of the French Minister for Sport 's private office also took part in this meeting .
As some Members have emphasised , the Commission considers doping to be one of the key problems in sport .
This issue has not been dealt with in depth , given that the two working documents currently available are merely reference documents , while we look forward to a dialogue with the Member States and sporting organisations on the most appropriate form of Community intervention .
The services of the Commission have met to examine various options for action , with a view to presenting a common position at the Lausanne Conference .
Two projects are already being financed under the framework programme on research to the tune of ECU 2 million : one is a study involving research into growth hormones , which is a key issue today in the battle against doping , and the other is a research study in conjunction with the International Olympic Committee 's Medical Commission on methods of standardisation to enhance the validity of tests , particularly in court .
The Commission also intends to contact the European Ethics Committee with a view to its issuing an opinion on certain scientific and ethical problems connected with doping .
Other avenues for Community action currently open to us are as follows : to make doping one of the priority objectives and themes under the new framework programme on research , to finance information campaigns in conjunction with sporting organisations , to cofinance a clean sports guide with the Olympic Committee and the Council of Europe , to adopt Community directives on health and safety at the workplace and on the protection of young people at the workplace ; and , lastly , to look for solutions in the field of the free movement of persons .
Commissioner Oreja has convened a meeting with ministers ' personal representatives , scheduled for 19 January , in order to coordinate a common EU position for the conference .
And he has already made contact with the forthcoming German presidency in order to consider how to approach the problem of doping at the meeting of sports ministers .
However , all this work should yield more tangible results after the Lausanne Conference , leading to genuinely useful and effective Community action .
The Commission considers that for the time being there is no need for legislative action .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fifteen Member States of the European Union are the world 's top sporting force , so it is incumbent upon us to set an example .
I think that the Vienna declaration underpins the actions already set in train by the Commission , which will be completed after the Lausanne Conference .
The Treaties offer many possibilities , but as always we need to clearly define the objective and means , bearing in mind the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
The Commission considers that the majority of the proposals included in your motions for resolutions either have been or are in the process of being implemented .
Your support and interest will reinforce the action the Commission has already initiated , which should complement the actions drawn up by the Member States , by sporting organisations and by bodies such as the Council of Europe .
I believe that we are on the right path and that this action will be translated into concrete and positive results , as we will not relent in combating doping in sport and sport will always prevail over those who try to breach its rules .
Lastly , I am delighted that all the Community institutions - Parliament , Council and Commission - are of one mind on this and are proposing identical strategies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a matter of urgency that we respond to the extent of the doping problem .
Of course , the problem is not new , but recent events in cycling and football , in France and Italy , have brought it home to the people in all its gravity .
Because we are concerned about our young people , because we consider sport to have a role in education and to be a means of preventing exclusion and marginal behaviour , we want the European Union and international sporting circles to condemn unequivocally the use of doping substances .
Sport is a school of courage and perseverance where we learn the spirit of endeavour , the taste for competition , and respect for each other .
What is left of these principles if cheating becomes a rule of the game ?
We combat drugs widely in our institutions .
Our leaders and our police join forces to protect our citizens , especially our young people .
My group hopes this degree of effort will be made to combat doping in sport at all levels .
Cooperation between the judiciary , the police and the customs services must be strengthened in order to reduce the movement of banned doping substances and their use in sporting circles .
The health of sportsmen and women is at stake , both professional and amateur .
The ethics of sport are at stake and must be recovered at all costs .
We have reacted by means of this resolution because the European Union can no longer keep silent .
Doping in sport cannot be controlled at national level as it is a worldwide phenomenon .
While ultimately I welcome the working document the Commission has just published on developments in and prospects for Community action in sport , I very much regret that it has played down the doping problem .
In February a World IOC Conference will be held on this problem in Lausanne .
It will consider the creation of an Olympic anti-doping agency .
We support this initiative on condition that the agency is independent , international , transparent and non-profit-making .
I think it is in everyone 's interests for the European Sports Ministers to meet before this IOC Conference , so that the European Union plays its part in that drive to establish common rules for the protection of the rights of sportsmen and women , the application of sanctions in cases of infringement , and medical checks on sportsmen and women .
Finally , the Commission has a role to play alongside Member States in prevention and information in schools , amongst young people and in amateur and professional sports clubs .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Welcome
Before giving the floor to the representatives of the political groups , I should like the House to allow me to extend a particularly warm welcome to the delegation from the Chamber of Representatives of the Republic of Cyprus to the Joint Parliamentary Committee , led by Mr Tassos Papadopoulos , which is now in the gallery observing our proceedings .
Yesterday and today the EU-Cyprus Joint Parliamentary Committee is holding its fourteenth meeting in Strasbourg , and on behalf of Parliament I would like to express the hope that its meeting will be productive , and also to wish the delegation a safe return to Cyprus , an enjoyable festive season and a happy New Year .
Topical and urgent debate ( continuation )
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions on human rights :
Death penalty -B4-1092 / 98 by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-1093 / 98 by Mrs Karamanou , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-1101 / 98 by Mr Cars , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-1126 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta , Mr Orlando , Mr Tamino and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1127 / 98 by Mr Wolf , Mrs Aglietta and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1131 / 98 by Mrs Breyer , Mrs Schroedter and Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1140 / 98 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-1153 / 98 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; -B4-1154 / 98 by Mr Guttiérez Díaz and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ;
Sudan -B4-1081 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mr Frischenschlager , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-1091 / 98 by Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-1132 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1143 / 98 by Mr Robles Piquer and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-1150 / 98 by Mr Hory and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ;
Pakistan -B4-1085 / 98 by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations ; -B4-1090 / 98 by Mr Newens , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-1103 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-1135 / 98 by Mr Holm and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1142 / 98 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Mann , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ;
Iran -B4-1125 / 98 by Mr Pradier and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ; -B4-1134 / 98 by Mr Telkämper , Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1145 / 98 by Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-1156 / 98 by Mr Carnero González , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ;
Child soldiers -B4-1078 / 98 by Mr Bertens , Mr Nordmann and Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-1109 / 98 by Mr Pasty , Mrs van Bladel and Mr Kaklamanis , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-1137 / 98 by Mrs Schroedter and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-1141 / 98 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-1155 / 98 by Mrs Elmalan and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ;
FYROM -B4-1117 / 98 by Mrs van Bladel , Mr Caccavale and Mr Pasty , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-1124 / 98 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ; -B4-1148 / 98 by Mrs Pack and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party .
Death penalty
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the umpteenth time the European Parliament is expressing its revulsion at the fact that anachronistic and mediaeval methods of questionable efficacy are still being used for the punishment of convicts , and this indeed , in countries that wish to be regarded as modern and democratic , such as the United States of America .
Yet , incontrovertible facts such as today 's bombing raids on Iraq prove that the use of violence is at the core of American policy in every sector .
At a time when we are celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights , in the USA the five-hundredth convict since 1977 , when the death penalty came back into force , is being executed while 3 000 more are on death row .
As we were told yesterday by the American delegation in Strasbourg , headed by the campaigner Angela Davis whom I see in the gallery , even underage children are executed in the USA while the penal justice system operates selectively to the disadvantage of the weaker socio-economic groups and in particular anyone whose skin is dark .
In Pennsylvania , 87 % of those convicted during 1998 were black .
This week we adopted a series of reports on human rights issues .
So on the basis of our decisions and in the name of respect for human rights , we call upon the United States of America to abolish the death penalty and allow retrials for the journalist Abu Jamal in Pennsylvania , Martinez in Florida and others , to give them a chance to defend themselves .
We also appeal to the governments of other countries , Saudi Arabia in particular and Turkmenistan , to abolish the death penalty and immediately commute their decisions on executions .
Finally , the European Commission and the Council must insist on the abolition of the death penalty by inserting a special clause in the economic and political agreements they conclude with third countries , to promote an immediate worldwide moratorium on executions until the death penalty is eventually abolished in every country in the world .
Mr President , the Liberal Group has always been opposed in principle to the death penalty .
We are therefore pleased that attention is being brought to this issue by an international campaign which starts this week in Strasbourg .
European opposition to the death penalty must be standard policy , and it must also form an element of our foreign policy .
Member States and applicant countries must be expected to ban the death penalty .
This is a measure of civilisation which we in the Union are entitled to expect .
But the European Union must also support global agreements .
I and others continue to be horrified that China , Iran , Saudi Arabia and the United States have maintained the death penalty .
As the previous speaker said , we must call for a worldwide moratorium on the capital punishment and promote a resolution to this effect at the UN General Assembly .
This must be part of our contribution to the celebrations of the anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Mr President , perhaps I could point out to Mrs Karamanou that she did not mention the death penalty in Iraq .
I say that because our proliferation of resolutions on the death penalty is threatening to turn into cheap self-indulgence .
And I think what we need to do is to make sure , as soon as possible , that we no longer have to table resolutions on the death penalty .
There is one positive aspect .
At least this time we are not just launching a bitter attack on the United States , we are also talking about Saudi Arabia .
I am rather pleased about that , because we do not often mention it .
That fact needs emphasising , because the situation in Saudi Arabia is well known .
In my view , the fundamental point is the moratorium , no longer as some vague hope but as an initiative which must be taken this year by the Council within the United Nations .
We do not want a repeat of the game of ping-pong we had in 1998 , when Italy and the Austrian Presidency kept batting the ball back and forth saying : ' you want it , neither do I , ' and so on , with the result that no resolution was tabled in the United Nations .
1999 must be the year a universal moratorium on executions is established .
We cannot keep putting this initiative off indefinitely .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , human rights are indivisible .
That has been the motto of this Human Rights Week .
Human rights also apply to those who have committed offences and are in prison .
They too must be given the opportunity to acknowledge their guilt and to start a new life .
That is why recognition of the universality of human rights goes hand in hand with rejection of the death penalty .
Three women and two men are sitting in death cells in Turkmenistan .
They may be executed within the next few days .
Their last hope is that they will be granted a reprieve from the President of Turkmenistan .
That would not diminish their guilt , but it would be an act of respect for human rights .
We therefore call on the President of Turkmenistan to summon up the courage to carry out this act of mercy , thereby according precedence to international human rights over national law .
That would also enhance the credibility of his celebrations for the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Mr President , this badge I am wearing represents all the emotion of the meeting yesterday when I welcomed a delegation from the various strands of the American abolitionist movement , led by Angela Davis .
Angela made an impact on people of my generation and quite a few began to campaign for her freedom .
She too was condemned to death .
Released from prison thanks to the mobilisation of international support and a suspension of the death penalty in the United States for several years , she has remained true to her commitment and continues to fight in defence of the oppressed and against the death penalty .
The accounts we heard yesterday from the members of the delegation , Abu-Jamal 's lawyer , and the Amnesty International representative , make one shudder .
And they are sure to be here now .
In the United States the death penalty is also racist and discriminatory .
The risk of being condemned to death and executed correlates with black skin and poverty .
As the international community celebrates the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the United States is approaching its 500th execution since 1977 , continuing to use a barbarous and inefficient method , once described by Albert Camus as genuine administrative murder .
Over 3 500 people are currently on death row .
Mumia Abu-Jamal , a black journalist sentenced to death in 1982 as a result of a plot by police and judiciary and a travesty of justice , has become a symbol of the fight against the death penalty .
Since his application for a re-trial was rejected by the Supreme Court in Philadelphia , he could be executed at any moment .
All the demonstrations , all the stands that have been taken , all the resolutions we have so often passed in this very House , are helping to prevent his execution .
Let the President of the United States and the Governor of Pennsylvania be advised that we will not resign ourselves to the inevitable .
In adopting the joint resolution supported by our group , we are strongly expressing our determination to save Mumia Abu-Jamal by preventing his execution and to abolish the death penalty .
Mumia must not die ; he must be granted a re-trial .
But we need to go further and demand that our governments and the European authorities take a stand and intervene more resolutely with the United States , in the context of transatlantic economic relations .
Forgive me , Mr President , but I cannot end without mentioning the fate of Leonard Peltier who was brilliantly defended by Bobby Castillo , his spokesman , during our meeting yesterday .
Leader of the American Indian Movement , he was given two life sentences .
He is currently very ill and is not receiving attention .
We must keep up the pressure .
Mr President , I am opposed to capital punishment as I believe it to be immoral , unjustified and counter-productive .
It should be noted that in many , although not all , cases the countries that employ it most are those whose record on democracy , human rights and the rule of law leaves a lot to be desired .
In those countries it is often used to suppress political dissent .
A further argument against capital punishment is the number of instances even in the most democratic of countries where miscarriages of justice have occurred .
If one is wrongly convicted and executed , it is regrettably then too late for an appeal .
Finally , terrorists in many countries have seen the value of martyrdom and exploited the death penalty to advance their particular causes .
We should not give them the opportunity to do so .
I would urge Members to support this resolution , particularly the call on the United Nations to support a universal moratorium on executions as a prelude to abolition itself .
Mr President , debates on the death penalty all too often turn into an opportunity to denounce this or that country whose legal order makes provision for such a penalty ; discussion of the death penalty frequently turns into a condemnation of and lament about the legal order in the United States .
One of the most worthwhile aspects of the resolution on which we are to vote this afternoon is , I believe , the fact that it emphasises with sufficient clarity that the death penalty is unjustly provided for and carried out under the most disparate systems .
The death penalty is almost always imposed on disadvantaged individuals , belonging in some countries to economic or ethnic minorities , in others to political minorities .
For this reason we are duty bound to emphasise forcefully that human rights have no colour , and that by the same token this penalty has no political colour .
Mr President , I have little to add to what my colleague Aline Pailler has said . Many of us had the opportunity of hearing the lawyers acting for Abu-Jamal and Peltier speak yesterday .
We were also able to hear Angela Davis ' personal testimony , and were delighted to make her acquaintance after working for her freedom some time ago . All the speakers stated clearly that the death penalty was not only immoral - as several colleagues stated here - but unacceptable to the European Union , because the European Union must be totally opposed to the death penalty .
It was also pointed out that in the United States the death penalty is used to punish the poorest citizens and coloured people .
It is quite true that we do condemn the death penalty wherever it is used , in China , Iraq , Iran , and everywhere else .
The United States , however , prides itself on being the leading democracy in the world .
That is why it is all the more remarkable that there should be three thousand people on death row in that country . One of the three thousand is a Spaniard , a European , named Joaquín José Martínez .
There is considerable doubt as to his guilt , and someone else has claimed responsibility for the murder . If he is not helped soon , he may be executed like Abu-Jamal .
I believe that we must put forward a common position - and that on this issue we can - and that we should do so next year in the United Nations . We must join forces to call for a worldwide moratorium on the use of the death penalty .
Sudan
Mr President , the situation in Sudan remains hopeless .
The government is continuing to violate human rights on a massive scale and millions are dying of starvation .
The combined efforts of the IGAD continue to prove fruitless .
They deserve every praise , but they are being frustrated by the constant stream of weapons which is further fuelling the conflict .
They are the oil on the fire which will further escalate the spiral of violence .
Rather than earning dirty money from all the conflict , destruction and human suffering , there must now be an end to these arms sales .
This is why I am pleased with the Union 's existing arms embargo .
But it is not enough .
The Union must also invite the associated countries to observe it , as well as calling for a United Nations embargo .
The mechanisms for ensuring observance of these embargoes must also be tightened up .
The Union must give a good example of leadership in stopping the flow of arms , thus providing one of the first conditions for resolving the conflict .
This is what the people of Sudan deserve as they have been busy trying to extricate themselves from their civil war since 1956 .
Mr President , Mr Bertens knows Sudan .
I do not know the country .
Sudan has topped the list of urgent debates over the past 18 months , but to no effect in the field .
The resolution we have before us today seeks to adopt a more serious approach by urging the Council to agree to an arms embargo and even to propose this to the Security Council .
I have nothing whatsoever against this proposal , but it seems to me that it is going to be difficult to monitor its implementation .
I am therefore very curious to learn how the Commissioner sees the practicalities of this arms embargo and control procedures .
Above all , I find it rather selective .
Since the departure of Mobutu from central Africa the flow of arms into the sub-Saharan region has increased .
Take Angola , where war is now being waged .
We pumped millions into this area for mine clearance , and the mines are now being laid again .
Then there are the recent arms sales in Bulgaria and also Zimbabwe , where a million a day is being spent keeping aircraft in the air to keep Kabila in power .
I agree with the measures for Sudan , but they should apply to other African countries too .
Mr President , as various previous speakers have indicated , during the past week the world has been recalling the adoption 50 years ago of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , rights which apply to everyone throughout the world , without distinction of any kind .
They also apply to the Sudan .
In Sudan , as the previous speaker said , human rights are violated daily by both the government and the rebels .
For 15 years civil war , displacement and destruction have reigned in that country .
With the physical destruction comes destruction of the country 's economic and social fabric , so that the people are left virtually without hope .
In southern Sudan in particular , religious freedom is being suppressed .
We continually receive information about the persecution of Christians . We learn that priests , such as Father Sebit and Father Boma , are being tortured or mistreated , and we know that almost the entire southern population is stricken by famine .
This is a form of human rights violation that is mainly encouraged by the government there .
It amounts to the institutionalisation of human rights abuses by the government .
But we in the Union and our associated states are also accomplices , in that we are responsible for weapons reaching the Sudan so that the crisis can continue .
I believe this has to be changed .
The Sudanese Government must also sign the international conventions prohibiting biological weapons , chemical weapons and anti-personnel mines .
Mr President , we have marked with great solemnity the anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
However , we do this with regret every Thursday afternoon in this House - which is perhaps rather less crowded than it should be - when we must unfortunately acknowledge that so many persons are still deprived of their rights .
This is the case in Sudan , where the civil war is compounded by famine and the suppression of all types of freedom , in particular religious freedom .
I do not believe that our resolution on Sudan - to bring an end to this state of affairs and initiate a process of change - should be restricted to words alone . It should go further , to support a strict embargo and curbs by all possible means on the activities of those who - not least in Europe - by trading in arms and through other forms of trafficking allow human beings in a vast area of the world to remain deprived of all their rights .
Pakistan
Mr President , I should first like to say that I attach great value to human rights and to the life that God gives us .
This is why I was so saddened by Mrs Eriksson , who yesterday morning had the brutality to accuse pro-lifers of violating human rights .
After the systematic human rights violations of communist regimes , including barbarous abortion practices , she should be ashamed of such an ignominious slur .
In this week following the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , human rights were on the agenda yesterday and now again today , in the monthly topical and urgent debate , where we are having to talk about Pakistan for the second time in six months .
In this Islamic country non-Muslims have long been able to live in relative freedom .
The present Prime Minister Mr Sharif is seriously restricting this freedom .
He wants to make Pakistan a Muslim state with the associated administration of justice and reintroduction of the death penalty .
In 1991 he received a parliamentary majority to change the Pakistani Constitution to make the sharia ( Islamic law ) the basis for all legislation .
The consequences of this are enormous .
Anyone who insults the Koran receives life imprisonment .
Anyone who defames Mohammed in word , writing or illustration can expect the death penalty .
For proof , the courts can accept the eyewitness testimony of four Muslim men or two Muslim men and four Muslim women .
The eyewitness testimony of women or non-Muslims has no legal force .
Sharif is continuing to pursue this policy .
The National Assembly recently adopted Constitutional Amendment 15 , granting just 10 of the 210 seats in the National Assembly to religious minorities .
The amendment imposes strict observance of the sharia within the judicial system .
Among other things , this means that anyone employed by the judicial authorities must be a Muslim .
Next month the Pakistani Senate will be voting on this amendment .
Former Prime Minister and present opposition leader Benazir Bhutto has warned that it could lead to a totalitarian Islamic regime comparable to that in neighbouring Afghanistan .
The threat of these laws should also be seen in relation to Pakistan 's social problems .
There is great poverty with a huge gulf between rich and poor .
Child labour is widespread .
It is because of this poverty that the blasphemy laws are so ' life threatening ' to religious minorities , being exceptionally well suited to ensnare them .
In practice these religious laws are used for the purposes of personal feuds , with Christians being accused of defaming Mohammed as a result of quarrels between neighbours .
The joint motion for a resolution calls on Pakistan to take human rights seriously .
The government must guarantee every citizen in Pakistan , whether Muslim or otherwise , the right to fair legal recourse .
The Commission and the Council can help ensure that Pakistan takes this call seriously .
Mr President , it gives me no great pleasure to be supporting a motion which is deeply critical of the human rights situation in Pakistan .
Having said that , I would like to disassociate myself from the rather provocative opening comments of Mr van Dam , whose remarks I felt were irrelevant and inappropriate to this debate .
There are a large number of Pakistani people in Pakistan , London and around the world , citizens who are deeply disturbed about the events to which our motion refers .
The Pakistani authorities should be aware that their country 's image is being gravely damaged .
This motion is not restricted to the sufferings of a single minority group .
It refers to the ill-treatment of Christians , Ahmadis , members of the MQM , in particular in Karachi , and the rights of people , especially women .
These rights will be further threatened by the proposed Constitutional Amendment 15 if the Senate supports it , and we appeal to it and to others to refuse to give it their approval .
Under the blasphemy laws , one of the sanctions prescribed is death and the framing of these laws allows vindictive actions , often heard in courts packed with mullahs and with hostile crowds outside .
Reports of mass violence or primitive legal practices dismay the friends of Pakistan - and I count myself , along with colleagues here , as a friend of Pakistan .
We do not wish to question the rights of the people to determine their own affairs , but we do ask that they respect the terms of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the 50th anniversary of which we are marking this week .
We appeal to the Pakistani Government to place more emphasis on human rights , consultation and dialogue in the interests of all their citizens - their citizens in their own country , their former citizens around the world and others who share these concerns .
Mr President , we are negotiating a cooperation agreement between the European Union and Pakistan , and one point which is often emphasised in such agreements is the capacity to implement regional cooperation .
Pakistan has been implementing a singular form of regional cooperation for some time , by vigorously supporting the Taliban regime in Afghanistan . Now , as in every case of self-respecting regional cooperation , it is receiving something in exchange : an invitation to apply Islamic law in that country .
I believe that the ancient maxim of one of the fathers of modern legal and political thought , Alberico Gentile - ' silete teologi in munere alieno ' - should echo loudly around this House , which is undoubtedly one of the most legitimate heirs of that tradition .
Mr President , we are deeply concerned about recent developments in Pakistan .
Many people have been murdered for their religious beliefs and the terrible acts of cruelty look set to continue .
Hence we note with alarm the proposal that has now been put forward in Pakistan , namely Proposed Constitutional Amendment 15 .
Naturally , we should recognise that Muslims must be able to live their lives in accordance with Islam and practise their religion .
However , the proposed tightening of control will lead to hostility towards those who practise other religions and Pakistan 's non-Muslim minority .
We must therefore urge the Senate , in no uncertain terms , to vote against the amendment , so that human rights , which are so important for us , for the people of Pakistan and for the future of the world , are not jeopardised in any way .
We should not forget that , out of the 49 states in the world where Islam is the principal religion , in only three of them - Saudi Arabia , Iran and Taliban-controlled Afghanistan - do fundamentalist laws take precedence over case-law .
I very much hope that Pakistan will not go down that road , but will instead continue to respect human rights and openly encourage the different religious groups to go on living together .
I truly hope that the Pakistani Government does not spark off any new disturbances as a result of this amendment .
Mr President , my group has been seriously concerned about the situation in Pakistan for a number of years now , as religious minorities have increasingly been the victims of violence - and not just threats of violence .
On 18 November nine Christians were murdered in Noshehra .
We then received the disturbing reports about two MPs from the Muattahida Quami movement who are still being held prisoner and ill treated .
I received a letter this week from the Pakistani Embassy stating that the nine murdered Christians were not Christians at all but members of sects and that the head of the murdered families practised fatah magic .
It was apparently a family vendetta .
This is a typical example of what has just been alluded to , of how Christians are presented in a bad light and then persecuted in this way .
This letter from the Pakistani Embassy also states that the two MPs held under arrest are not being ill treated at all , but are bearing up well .
Our information is again very different .
The conflicting information from the NGOs and the Pakistani Government is yet another reason for supporting this resolution and for asking the Commission to take action to try to ban these kinds of practices .
Finally , I should like to lend my support to the call for Constitutional Amendment 15 not to be adopted , because in my opinion this would make the situation in Pakistan even worse .
We call for action by the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , shortly before the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , these rights were once more trampled underfoot in Pakistan .
A month ago , a Christian family of nine , who were manifestly not separatists , were murdered by Islamic terrorists in the town of Noshehra .
Little has changed since June , when we voiced our protest here in the European Parliament against the discriminatory treatment of Ahmadi , Christian and Swanti groups and against the blasphemy laws that have been used since 1986 to persecute religious and other unpopular minorities .
Violence in Karachi has increased .
Parliamentarians from the Muttahida Quami Movement have again been arrested and their supporters brought before military courts .
A new article for insertion into the constitution has been approved by the National Assembly and now awaits adoption by the Senate .
Its purpose is to proclaim the Koran and Sunna as the supreme law of the land .
The executive branch of government is to be empowered to decide on its own authority what is lawful and unlawful .
And not only that : Article 15 is to apply irrespective of any contrary provision of the constitution , of any law or of any court judgment .
That is nothing but a licence for all fanatics and will most probably provoke a new wave of terrorism against minorities .
What scope does the Commission have to prevent an outbreak of uncontrolled violence ?
Could suitable clauses be inserted in the agreement ?
Could there be international legal conferences to discuss good and bad judicial practice ?
Could joint decisions with Pakistan be suspended until democracy and human rights are finally accorded high priority in that country , which is , after all , a member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation , a community for which we in the European Parliament bear some share of responsibility ?
Iran
Mr President , you have probably never heard of Darioush Forouhar and his wife , or of Pirouz Davani , editor-in-chief of an Iranian newspaper , or of Majid Charif , or Mohamad Mokhtari or Jafar Pouyandeh .
Well , do not worry .
You will not hear of them in the future either , because they have either been shot , assassinated or put to death , or they have disappeared .
That is what happens to intellectuals and dissidents in Iran today .
And this offensive against these intellectuals and dissidents is currently taking a particularly worrying turn .
That is why I think we must try to support President Khatami 's efforts in his statements and initiatives on freedom of expression and freedom of the media .
That is also why we must ask for NGOs to be allowed into the country to help those , inside Iran , who are trying to lead this country down the path of democracy .
Mr President , I am in complete agreement with Mr Pradier .
At the very least , I should like to put the name of Reza Hadjzadeh on the list in the resolution . I have just obtained his name from the Iranian intellectual opposition which suffered persecution during the appalling terror .
No doubt we should be pleased that the Iranian President has pronounced himself in favour of cultural freedom and freedom of speech and of the press , which we acknowledge in the resolution , but the question is whether we should not have gone further .
We sent a fact-finding team from the European Parliament to Algeria , and even though terrible atrocities continue to be committed there , I still think it was a useful exercise .
The Iranian intellectuals , as well as the entire civilian and pro-democracy community , are very anxious that we should establish a presence in Iran .
I should like to float the idea of trying to set up some kind of commission of inquiry which , if possible , would go to Iran to study the situation and demonstrate solidarity by simply being there .
Mr President , once again Iran is on our agenda in a debate on human rights violations .
Whereas last time it was principally members of religious minorities and women who were threatened and imprisoned , and sometimes even murdered , this time it is intellectuals , opposition members and again women whom we must defend .
In August there was the disappearance of Pirouz Davani , editor-in-chief of the newspaper ' Pirouz ' .
On 25 November Marij Charif , founder of the ' Iran Farda ' monthly , was found dead after being abducted .
Recently Mohamad Mokhtari and Mohamed Jafar Pouyandeh , both writers and journalists , were also kidnapped and murdered .
This is in addition to the murder on 22 November of Darioush Forouhat and his wife Parvaneh , both opposition members .
On top of all this , there is the constant repression of women : for some time now women have been prohibited from being treated by male doctors and specialists , when just 7 % of doctors in Iran are women .
We are forced to conclude that the spring which seemed to be on its way with the new President , Mr Khatami , has returned to the harshness of winter and Iran is again becoming a dangerous country with a ruthless and violent regime , despite the moderate stance of its President .
We call on the Commission and the Council to put Iran on the Council 's agenda as a matter of urgency , to demand that Iran protect its citizens and to consider whether it is possible for the 15 Member States of the European Union to adopt a single line on refugees from Iran .
Our conclusion is that Iran is at present a dangerous country for intellectuals , women and journalists .
Mr President , for several weeks there has been a wave of repression of Iranian writers .
Majid Charif , Mohamad Mokhtari and Jafar Pouyandeh were abducted and assassinated .
This was hardly a coincidence .
They were members of the committee responsible for arranging the general meeting of the association of Iranian writers , which , I would remind you , had been banned by the government .
These assassinations , part of a climate of confrontation between various factions that are struggling for power , are intended to silence the intellectuals .
We can express our solidarity with them by adopting the joint resolution supported by our group , and we demand that the Iranian authorities take the necessary steps to find and punish those responsible for these crimes and to guarantee the protection and security of their citizens .
We can also express solidarity by supporting the proposal from the Iranian writers in exile to send to Iran an international commission consisting of intellectuals and members of parliament from all over the world , to investigate these massacres and save the lives under threat .
Mr President , the events of the last few hours have demonstrated especially clearly the importance of Iran to us .
No objective observer of the situation there can be in any doubt of the enormous progress that has been made in Iran under President Khatami .
Accidents will happen - that is only to be expected - but most of the trouble is orchestrated in other countries .
That must not be forgotten .
Time and again it is the same Iranian freedom fighters who import terrorism into the country .
We should therefore make every effort to encourage the Iranian Government , and especially the President , to continue along the path of liberalisation and democratisation .
There is , however , one point that we must make as forcefully as possible . It concerns the intolerable persecution of the Bahai , for the Bahai are one of the most civilised groups , and we must support them in the exercise of their freedom .
Mr President , dark conservative forces have a stranglehold on Iran .
Journalists are being killed , dissidents and intellectuals silenced and women pushed back into their traditional role .
Mr Habsburg is right when he says that we should also be concerned about the fate of the Bahai .
The forces of democracy and reform have not yet had a chance in Iran .
The election of President Khatami was a positive development , but one swallow does not make a summer .
The Union must do all in its power to support the forces of democracy in Iran and express its clear condemnation of the situation .
Finally , I hope that national governments , including the Dutch government for example , will see the so-called official reports for what they are worth - reports from embassies , and from other Union countries , which are sent to Europe stating , and I quote , that Iran is now a safe country so that asylum-seekers can be sent back and no new asylum-seekers need be accepted .
I am amazed when I read reports of this kind in the Dutch and foreign press .
Mr President , we live and learn !
I am genuinely surprised to hear how favourably Mr von Habsburg assesses the Iranian situation .
I am very much on the side of the Bahai and agree that they must not be persecuted .
But to act as if everything that has been said about women , about intellectuals and about critics of the regime was irrelevant - I am simply stunned !
It is certainly true , and this is how I had actually planned to begin , that Iran has a new President , for whom , on the basis of his statements and attitudes , I certainly have a high regard , even if I do not agree with him on every detail .
But perhaps it is precisely because a relatively liberal President has been elected by the people against the wishes of the ayatollahs , or at least of the fundamentalist ayatollahs , that there is a definite current within the country which seeks to exorcise the spectre of liberalism and which is mounting a massive campaign against foreign influence and liberalisation in the country .
But these things have to be kept in perspective , and it is certainly possible to envisage a continuation of dialogue with Iran .
However , any dialogue , whether we call it critical or open , must be conducted on the clear understanding that Parliament cannot refrain from putting human rights in Iran , as in many other countries , at the heart of its deliberations and that it is duty bound to wage this campaign .
We certainly must also call on the Commission and the Council to keep a very watchful eye on the development of human rights .
Yes , we support dialogue with the President of Iran .
We hope that he will speak increasingly for the whole of the Iranian nation .
But he will only be able to do so if he is strong enough to wage a successful struggle against the fundamentalists and the groups who engage in or condone terrorism .
I therefore hope that the Commission and the Council will see the situation in the same light as this Parliament .
Mr President , after a period of quiet , Iran is once again attracting international attention .
As on this occasion , this is often not for positive reasons .
Over recent weeks a number of critical intellectual writers have disappeared under suspicious circumstances and later been found dead .
In the light of this alarming situation , it is good that Iran has been added to the agenda for this topical and urgent debate .
It is a good thing that Ayatollah Khamenei has condemned this series of murders .
Understandably , a number of others who are possible targets have gone into hiding .
But this is no solution to the present problem .
These attacks bring a great deal of fear for all those threatened and their families .
Unfortunately , these attacks show that the ' moderate ' Iranian President Khatami is not totally capable of protecting his supporters .
Iran 's judicial authorities , secret service and forces of law and order are all under the command of Iran 's highest spiritual leader , Ali Khamenei .
Following last year 's huge election victory , Khatami promised to develop society further .
These murders are taking place against a background of serious political confrontation in Iran between President Khatami and the powerful conservative government .
Nobody has yet been arrested for them .
This resolution calls on the Iranian judicial authorities to investigate the allegations of murder seriously and to protect possible further victims .
It is very important for Iran to take this call seriously .
A democratic country should also value its critical minorities and allow them the freedom to live and to work .
The reality in Iran stands in stark contrast to this .
It is up to the Iranian government to improve the situation .
Child soldiers
Mr President , the international campaign to stop the use of child soldiers deserves the support of this House .
At present 300 000 children from 33 countries are fighting their parents ' wars .
In these countries the children are of course denied any chance of normal development .
We all know the examples of Congo , Somalia , Sudan , Sierra Leone , Afghanistan and elsewhere , but even in the Union the situation is not as it should be , as 11 of the 15 Member States recruit soldiers aged under 18 .
This is contrary to the general rules of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , which sets 18 as the minimum age for adulthood .
How can we morally defend a situation where in parts of Europe children cannot vote until they are 18 but can be sent to war when they are just 15 , 16 or 17 ?
It is incomprehensible that this Convention created such an exception in 1989 .
The UN negotiations on an optional protocol establishing 18 as the minimum age have been dragging on for years .
This is why the Union 's commitment and leadership is so vital in order to get these negotiations moving again .
The Commission must give budgetary priority to the demobilisation and reintegration of child soldiers .
That is the only way we can break the spiral of violence .
Parliament must also play its part , just as it played a leading role in the campaign against anti-personnel mines .
The first amazed reaction was to ask what we thought we were doing by interfering .
Now we have the Ottawa Convention .
We must encourage a group of like-minded countries to establish a moral code and get the blocked discussion at the United Nations moving again .
We learned this lesson from Ottawa .
As we approach the 10th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child it is time we put an end to the press-ganging of children to be used in fighting wars .
Mr President , my honourable colleague Mr Bertens has already given us the horrifying statistic : 300 000 children are fighting in armed conflicts throughout the world .
Some of them are only eight years old .
In the past ten years , two million such children have been killed and six million permanently maimed .
Countless psychological traumas are another legacy of these exposures to violence .
There are even many countries in the European Union which have not signed the protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child which prohibits the recruitment of service personnel under the age of 18 .
Young people under the age of 18 can join the armed forces in France , Germany , Greece , Italy , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Spain and the United Kingdom .
The implementation of this protocol is a political imperative if the European Union wants to preserve its credibility and if the world is to believe the current President-in-Office of the Council when he says that human rights have become a key element in the policies of the European Union .
It would therefore be logical for the European Union to engage in a joint action for the implementation of the protocol in order to ensure that children are properly protected .
There is a particular need for such an example in our own countries , especially since the Cardiff summit adopted a guideline in the code of conduct for arms exports which clearly emphasised that the key role for ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) ... increasing international observance of the protocol on light firearms is particularly essential in those countries where children are used as soldiers .
To these words ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , instead of sharing our children 's joyful anticipation of the festive season , we are dealing today in our resolution with one of the saddest chapters in the history of human exploitation , not to say crime .
I know from my own childhood what it means to send 14- and 15-year-old children into battle as a last resort , and I shall never forget that .
I am sickened whenever I recall the fate of the child soldiers who were sent to war in the Iran-Iraq conflict and in conflicts in other countries in the name of fanaticism .
I therefore believe that we in the European Union should support all the efforts of the United Nations to conclude an additional protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
The EU must act accordingly .
Of course , it is not the practice in our countries for young people under the age of 18 to be sent to war - we should be aware of that - but I am still in favour of setting an absolute limit at 18 .
We in the European Union have dared to abolish war . War is horrific , even for adults , as we can still see today at our borders , but we should also ensure that , in other countries where wars are being waged , children are never made to experience the horrors of war at first hand , to suffer the trauma that will haunt them for the rest of their lives .
So let us commit ourselves in the European Parliament to children 's happiness , to ensuring that they are free from hunger , that they are educated and that they are never used as child soldiers .
Mr President , I am sure all those who have taken the floor today would agree that although any infringement of human rights is a terrible thing , infringements of the rights of children are particularly horrifying . Certain figures have been quoted .
For example , 300 000 children are involved in warfare .
Not long ago a documentary was shown on Spanish television featuring children who were knee-high to a grasshopper but who bore arms and who , from infancy , had become more accustomed to scenes of death and murder than to life , school or peace .
The European Union must therefore make every effort to ensure that no child under the age of 18 goes to war or is employed in the war machine . The European Union should also ensure that its Member States and other countries sign the International Criminal Court 's protocol since , according to one of its articles , the use of children in war is a crime , as is the arming of children .
In my view , Mr President , there is not much future for a world in which 250 million children are involved in heavy labour , 300 000 children are at war and countless millions of children are allowed to die each year .
That is why I believe that we in the European Union must do all in our power to put a stop to this .
Mr President , here in the European Union we are opposed to war toys being given to children at Christmas or at any other time .
The manufacture and marketing of these toys is a development that I regard as a flagrant abuse of children .
May I thank all the previous speakers for their contributions to what will surely be a common position on this matter .
We must endeavour together to take action against this exploitation of children .
However , what we are calling for in the resolution does not really seem to go far enough in my opinion .
I believe this subject is too serious to be relegated to an annex of a convention , albeit a very valuable convention .
My view is that we must press for a separate convention , a separate moratorium on this type of thing , so that we can achieve the same sort of success in this matter as we achieved in the campaign against anti-personnel mines .
Mr President , in Human Rights Week we ought not to forget the youngest human beings and what they face in many countries : ill treatment , forced labour , and also premature drafting into armies which are frequently mercenary .
Too often children are the first civilian victims of war and they should not be made the military arm of factions or nations in conflict .
Nevertheless , the estimated number of child soldiers engaged in hostilities is 300 000 , not to mention those recruited into the armed forces , sometimes against their will , instead of going to school . It is a matter of urgency that we take action against this sickening situation .
Adoption of an additional protocol to the International Convention on the Rights of the Child , banning military recruitment of children under 18 , would be one important stage .
Secondly , we must raise the awareness of governments and urge them to ratify this Convention and take the appropriate steps .
We should therefore ask the UN to apply itself to this matter and step up its action .
FYROM
Mr President , with all due respect to you , we are going to talk about Macedonia .
You know , and I think it needs to be strongly emphasised , that there is a new situation in Macedonia .
A new government has been established and at last there is change in Macedonia . I take this opportunity to thank Mr von Habsburg , who worked towards this and was one of the first of us to understand the situation .
This new majority is not a moderate majority , but the moderates have done nothing for five or six years to solve Macedonia 's problems .
Today we have a majority which calls itself extremist , but a majority , is at last prepared to confront Macedonia 's fundamental problems , including those relating to the fact that the Macedonian majority coexists with an Albanian minority .
The new government is made up of three parties , including the party of the Albanian minority .
Four people were sentenced under rather dubious circumstances , at least from the legal viewpoint , as the matter is on the agenda of the European Court of Human Rights .
We know the new majority wants to resolve this issue that it inherited from the former government , and I think our Parliament can use this resolution to give the Macedonian authorities an excuse , in the best sense of the word , to settle this matter and free the four Albanian leaders , who are still in prison today , having been sentenced to two or seven years .
So I urge all Members to vote for this resolution .
Next January the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy will be receiving Mr Georgievski , the new President of the Council , and I invite you to come to the meeting .
I think he is someone worth listening to .
Thanks to him and to the new majority , I think Europe , the European Union , will be able to make a new start with Macedonia .
Mr President , Macedonia is a young democracy which has set out on the road to the European Union under its new and promising government .
Our resolution is intended to help it along that road , and the Macedonian Government should take it in that spirit , as assistance and support , since the release of the imprisoned local politicians of Albanian ethnic origin would not only be an act of humanity , and indeed a necessary and overdue act of humanity , but would also be an act of prudence - I might even say strength , for I believe that a certain amount of self-assurance and strength are necessary assets in the pursuit of a sound policy on ethnic minorities .
In this respect , I see some very encouraging signals from the new Macedonian Government .
The greatest sources of misfortune for our states are centralism and the denial of minority and ethnic rights .
It is these , rather than federalism or laws based on ethnic rights , that have led to the break-up of various entities .
It is a matter of integrating federalism and the rights of ethnic groups , because if I feel that my dignity and my special identity are respected in the wider community , I shall want to stay in that community because of the benefits I derive from it .
If I feel that my dignity and identity are being suppressed , then I turn to separatism .
That is why I believe that a judicious , foresighted and integrationist policy is essential to weave the Albanians into the fabric of Macedonian society .
Both sides , I am sure , will make conciliatory moves , and an important first step could be taken if the university in Tetovo , which has been rather a bone of contention over the past few years under the old government , could be integrated by the new government into the University of Skopje as an autonomous institute for the ethnic Albanian community by way of a compromise .
That would be a particularly significant move , since the University of Pristina across the border in Kosovo is currently subject to brutal repression .
For that reason , I believe that this particular measure would be a step towards integration , and I would urge the new Macedonian Government to take that step .
Mr President , this new Macedonian Government is led by a party which for many years , and in some respects for several decades , has been striking a stridently nationalist tone and has been pursuing a highly nationalistic policy .
I should be delighted if the hints of moderation that have been discernible over the last few weeks and months actually turn out to reflect the true nature of this new government .
It should be given the benefit of the doubt as well as opportunities to prove itself .
I am in complete agreement with the thrust of this resolution , which is designed to re-establish the freedom of the Albanians , who have been receiving unduly harsh treatment .
Some of us in the delegation have already discussed this on several occasions with the Macedonians .
I myself , along with my colleague Mrs Pack , met with one of the prisoners before he began to serve his sentence in Skopje .
I believe it would be a true sign of strength and vision if these Albanians were now given their freedom .
Mr President , in the context of our motion for a resolution on Sudan , I should like to draw the attention of the House to the tragic situation of two Catholic priests , Fathers Hillary Boma and Lino Sebit . They stand accused of behaviour totally incompatible with their ministry : it is alleged that they took part in a bombing in Khartoum last June .
They have been imprisoned since 1 August . Over the last five months , they have been subjected to torture , and thus forced to confess to crimes they did not commit .
No date has yet ben set for their trial , but it is to take place in a military court and not a civil court .
I believe we should add our voice to the letter sent in November to the President of Sudan by His Eminence Cardinal Daneels , the President of Pax Christi International .
We must request that they be given a prompt and fair trial , before a civil court , with legal representation and in the presence of outside observers .
It should be borne very much in mind that the Government of Sudan has not ratified the conventions against torture and inhuman and degrading punishment and therefore does not comply with them . The latest meeting of the ACP-European Union Joint Assembly unfortunately found it necessary to draw attention to this situation in a resolution .
Mr President , the Commission not only shares the general concern about the various human rights violations referred to during the debate , it also supports - generically as it were - the texts of all the resolutions .
As you know , whenever we have these debates the Commission always insists that the guarantees laid down in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights should be respected without exception .
I would add that this also applies to other international instruments , and in particular the Vienna Treaty , which governs consular protection .
It is not unusual , and I include the United States in this , for some persons under arrest not to be fully aware of their rights and for the provisions of the Vienna Treaty not to be applied , which is a serious matter and could lead to a judgment being annulled .
The Commission 's powers in this area are , as you know , limited , since this subject is normally dealt with at Council level and by other institutions such as the Council of Europe and the United Nations .
Nevertheless , I would like to add just a couple of points : first , the EU 's position on the death penalty was clearly reiterated in June in a directive approved by the Council , to the effect that the European Union as a whole should strive towards the universal abolition of the death penalty .
I would also like to add that , as you are aware , all agreements with third countries now include a human rights clause , which is considered an essential clause in our cooperation with these countries .
As a consequence , the negotiation of a free-trade agreement with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council or with Pakistan could result in the European Parliament 's opinions on human rights abuses being brought to bear with far more weight .
In the case of Sudan , a ceasefire has fortunately been possible , allowing Operation Life Line Sudan to start work . The European Union has contributed ECU 73 million this year alone to this operation .
But the situation in Sudan is serious , as it is in other countries , and I would like to emphasise that we are actively seeking to resolve the problem of the Catholic priests mentioned by Mr Robles Piquer .
Turning now to Iran , although the election of President Katami gives us some cause for hope , we feel that his powerlessness to fight certain extremist forces is all the more justification for the international community to give its determined support .
Concerning child soldiers , we have vigorously supported the action of the UN Secretary General 's Special Representative on the impact of armed conflict on children , and in conjunction with him we are now preparing a joint programme , to be cofinanced by the Commission , in order to put into practice some of the recommendations that he intends to make shortly to the General Assembly .
Finally , Mr President , concerning the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , we also believe that there is some cause for optimism that the interethnic dialogue to which this government at least seems to be committed could help to resolve some of the problems witnessed in relation to the Albanian minority , and in particular the plight of the former mayors Mr Osmani and Mr Demiri .

The joint debate is closed .
We now come to the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
VOTES
Mr President , before we come to the Pradier report , there is something else I have to point out . Today 's voting and the topical and urgent matters were slightly in breach of the Rules of Procedure , because we again had only the joint texts translated and not the original texts .
In theory , we have the right - and we have often exercised it - to reject joint texts and then vote on the originals .
This right , however , is denied us if the original texts are not available in the original languages , as is customary with all other votes . I know that a decision of some sort was probably taken by the Bureau .
I am merely protesting about that decision . It is entirely contrary to the Rules of Procedure , and I ask you to submit the matter to the Rules Committee .
I take note of your protest but thank you for your cooperation on this occasion any way .
Mr President , I would like to make a proposal to replace , in the French version , ' centres d 'hébergement pour les réfugiées by ' centres de rétention ' .
We as a group believe that reception centres for refugees have nothing whatsoever to do with prison policy .
But closed centres for refugees do .
We want to propose that rather than ' centres d 'hébergement ' the wording should be ' centres de rétention ' .
I hope that the interpreters in all the booths can translate this accurately in all the language versions .
That seems to be a translation problem rather than an oral amendment .
Mr President , I entirely support what Mrs Van Lancker has just said .
In fact , detention centres , which operate more often than not under a system where rights are ignored , merit the attention of Members of Parliament and the population as a whole .
Okay .
Thank you .
Are there any objections ?
Mr President , I do not believe it is a good thing to introduce a Belgicism in Dutch here .
It is not ' onthaalcentrum ' but ' opvangcentrum ' in good Dutch .
Let 's not have a debate .
The amendment is clear .
Mr President , if we have a clarification of the word , in Dutch it should be ' opvangtenten ' - ' reception tents ' - since that is the current policy .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
On a point of order , Mr President .
Concerning next year 's calendar , could the President please list his engagements for the week beginning 8 February ?
Does he have some travel plans or is he entertaining some distinguished visitors ?
As they say in the House of Commons , I will write to the honourable Member about that matter .
Mr President , I want to call attention to the situation in Irish prisons where the system is absolutely chaotic and out of line with the detailed Council of Europe provisions on prisons which have been accepted by our state .
The system is in crisis .
Prisons are over-used for non-violent property crime and fine defaulters .
Many are prone to terrible problems of drug abuse .
Those Members who are listening will be interested to know the very sad fact that although Ireland is the Celtic tiger the suicide rate in Irish prisons is one of the highest in Europe .
Mr Pradier 's report makes a number of very welcome proposals such as taking into account the specific needs of women prisoners , the maintenance of the social and family environment , the provision of proper medical services , including special services for addicts , and constructive , humane laws on penalties for young offenders , all of which I welcome .
Some reform is taking place in Ireland 's prisons .
I welcome last week 's decision by the Irish Government to take up the proposal to establish a prison authority .
However , much more remains to be done .
This report outlines a number of possible reforms .
I do , however , reject the suggestion that illicit drugs should be decriminalised in prison .
Decriminalisation is not the way forward and would only worsen our drug problem .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of this own-initiative report on prison conditions in the Union .
There is good reason to turn the spotlight on prison conditions in the Member States .
The prisons are generally overcrowded , and it can be useful to exchange experience as regards preventing criminal activity , alternatives to prison sentences , prisoners on remand and so on .
It is also topical to highlight the fundamental civil rights of inmates in this 50th anniversary year of the UN Declaration of Human Rights .
The report points out that overcrowding in prisons can be relieved by decriminalising the use of illegal substances which harm no one other than the individual in question .
However , the provisions of criminal law relating to narcotics are not a matter for the EU , and it must therefore be for individual Member States to decide whether they will take steps to decriminalise cannabis , for example .
Many of the proposals of a social nature in the report are good ones , for example more ' humane ' treatment of people in prison .
However , it is questionable whether it is really the business of the EU to propose guidelines for Member States ' policies on crime .
Civil and criminal law are national responsibilities .
To suggest that Member States might reduce overcrowding in their prisons by no longer imprisoning people for drug abuse represents an interference in their internal affairs .
On behalf of the Green Group , I welcome this own- initiative report on prison conditions in the EU and the proposed improvements and alternative penalties .
Concern has been growing throughout the EU about the unsatisfactory conditions in many EU prisons , where offenders are serving sentences for offences which are judged differently in different countries .
I welcome the fact that Member States are being called on to fully apply the Council of Europe 's rules in relation to prisons .
The deprivation of freedom of movement should not mean deprivation of all fundamental freedoms - freedom of thought and opinion and freedom of political and religious beliefs , as well as civil rights must be respected .
I also welcome the series of measures designed to improve prison conditions and facilitate subsequent reintegration into society .
The special account given to the specific needs of women prisoners is very important .
So too are the recommendations to protect the social and family environment , medical services , including special services for addicts , and more humane laws on penalties for young offenders .
Exploring the concept of amnesties , alternative penalties and highlighting the importance of training of prison staff and social workers is the direction we should be aiming for in regard to future policy .
It is also very important that we look at the problem of criminalising drug addicts .
This is not going to solve the problem , in fact it ignores the problems of drug addicts who are only harming themselves and contributes to the overcrowding in prisons .
Adopting a policy of rehabilitation for addicts and help to reintegrate into society would be the more logical approach .
As regards Irish prisons , the Irish Penal Reform Trust has made many useful and constructive proposals to the Irish Government and has highlighted some of the serious problems with the Irish prison system .
The Trust has a number of concerns about the treatment of Irish prisoners .
For example :
40 % of prisoners have no access to in-cell sanitation .
They must use a chamber pot , sometimes in a shared cell , and ' slop out ' each morning.- Some prisons are greatly overcrowded .
On 15 July 1998 Cork held 177 % of its design capacity ( 266 inmates in a prison built for 150 ) .- In closed institutions the facilities for recreation are extremely limited.- Medical treatment for prisoners has been strongly criticised by individual inmates , visiting committees and the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture.- Psychiatric and psychological services are limited and widely spread .
This leads to excessive use of padded cells ( resorted to 500 times in Mountjoy prison in 1997 ) .- There is little independent monitoring of prison conditions .
No inspector of prisons and visiting committees are uncritical and lack credibility.- It is difficult for prisoners to maintain family ties .
Contact visits are rarely allowed and correspondence is censored.- Prison officers ' initial training is brief and does not devote sufficient time to human rights issues.- Prison Governors have no control over their budgets or staff rosters .
They are not allowed to govern.In combination the above limitations can create an environment where human rights are not taken seriously .
This means that poor treatment is unchallenged and even becomes acceptable .
In this way low standards become the norm .
Potential ill treatment rarely comes to light because of the culture of secrecy which characterises the Department of Justice .
There is a perception in Ireland that the poor are treated differently by the courts .
Studies of the prison population show a clear preponderance of uneducated , unemployed , drug-addicted , young men .
There is clear evidence to show that the poorest defendants are more likely to be imprisoned than fined , and even if fined they may end up in prison in default .
Also some courts allow a contribution to the ' poor box ' as an alternative sentence .
This clearly favours the wealthy .
Sentencing practice in Ireland is unclear .
If justice is to be done then patterns of sentencing must be analysed and areas of discrimination eliminated .
There is no tradition of criminal justice research in Ireland which means that policies are often based on intuition and expediency and not on facts and principles .
Another problem is that remand prisoners are not held apart from those who have been convicted and sentenced .
As they must be available for the courts , they are held in committal prisons where conditions are cramped and unsanitary .
These people experience the worst elements of the Irish penal system and this is unacceptable in view of their legal status as innocent citizens .
In 1999 a new purpose-built remand prison will open at Cloverhill .
This should be an opportunity to create an environment for remand prisoners which recognises their special needs .
However , the design quality of this institution leaves a lot to be desired .
Despite the fact that international guidelines suggest single cell occupancy as the norm , overcrowding will be a feature of this new prison as soon as it opens .
Inmates will be held in triple cells .
These are small and cramped , measuring only 10.7 m .
The Irish situation is not unique and it is clear that similar problems exist in many other EU Member States .
The report reflects humane values with which I strongly sympathise .
However , I do not think that the issues dealt with , namely criminal law and conditions in the Member States ' prisons , fall within the competence of either the European Union or the European Parliament .
I have therefore not voted in favour of the report in the final vote .
I also object to the fact that the report attempts to interfere in the Member States ' policies on drugs .
That concludes the vote .
Racism and xenophobia
Mr President , may I begin by saying that I am slightly sad to be speaking on behalf of Mr Elliott who , because of the delay caused by the debate on the situation in Iraq , is unable to be here to present his own resolution .
I regret that shift in the agenda meant that I had to replace him .
I also have to confess I was sorry to miss the press conference given by Mr Mégret , Mr Blot and Mr Le Gallou earlier today explaining their current situation in the Front national .

I am normally against war - civil or otherwise - but I make an exception in that particular case .
With respect to the resolution , I wish to draw Members ' attention to a number of points .
Firstly , paragraph 1 states the need for the urgent ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Members will be aware that we have a new Article 13 which will allow the Commission , for the first time , to introduce legislation to organise the fight against racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism .
However , that can only be done once the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified .
I hope that the French , who are the latest in ratifying this Treaty , can do so as soon as possible .
I urge them to take the opportunity to introduce legislation prior to 10 June so that the Commission proposals can be part of the debate around the European elections .
I hope that , as stated in paragraph 3 , legislation will incorporate many of the ideas brought forward by the Starting Line Group which has been working on proposed legislation for a number of years .
What we require in the field of fighting racism is detailed and hard-hitting legislation .
I do not want the Commission to be frightened by the view , expressed by some , that certain Member States will not accept such legislation and such legislative proposals .
We should not forget that it is only fairly recently that the 15 Member States signed up to Amsterdam and I am convinced that , in signing up to Article 13 , they are agreeing to introduce legislation .
I must also draw the attention of Members to paragraph 10 , which argues that in the next Treaty revision , we should seek to introduce qualified majority voting in this particular area .
Paragraph 4 mentions the idea of a code of conduct for political parties ; a code of conduct which makes political parties commit themselves , firstly , not to engage in racism , not to use racist language and not to use racism as part of their political campaigns ; and , secondly and equally importantly , not to associate themselves with parties that breach the code of conduct .
It would be very fitting , in the light of Parliament 's campaign over the best part of fifteen years for legislation at a European level , for such a code of conduct first to be used by political parties in the run-up to the European elections in 1999 .
Paragraph 6 mentions the new European Observatory - the Monitoring Centre set up in Vienna .
Beata Winckler , the Director of that Centre , is actually in the gallery listening to this debate .
I should like to thank her for the work she has already done as the new Director , and the Board of the Observatory , in particular Jean Kahn , who is still recovering from a stroke , for the work they have done in its establishment .
However , I have to say to them that we have high expectations of the Observatory .
We do not expect a dull , desiccated statistical report every year : what we want are reports on what action should be taken at local , regional , national and European levels to fight racism when it arises and to prevent its rise .
We want to use the observatory as a think-tank , to try to make sure that we bring forward the appropriate proposals .
Paragraph 7 mentions a European Network to monitor Racism and Xenophobia .
It is very important that the Observatory uses this .
We do not want them to reinvent the wheel : we want them to draw on the expertise already available in Community groups and other organisations in the 15 Member States of the Union .
Despite introducing Mr Elliott 's resolution , I have to say that personally I have some doubts about paragraph 12 , which calls for small local groups to be supported by the Commission .
It is important for small local groups to receive assistance , but maybe on the basis of subsidiarity this should come from regional and national organisations .
The bureaucratic problems of getting the Commission to reach down to small local groups are too difficult to overcome .
Paragraph 15 rightly mentions our demand that the applicant countries are required to guarantee the rights of minorities .
I have to say to the applicant countries that perhaps some of the justice and home affairs issues may be more of a barrier to membership than some of the discussions taking place on agriculture and the Structural Funds .
I think Parliament will be very resistant to allowing in Member States which do not respect the rights of minorities - whether they are ethnic , linguistic or religious - or , for that matter , people who have a different sexual orientation .
Finally , I plead for cross-European action at the policing level .
This is important .
I should like to give one example : currently there is a growth of racist music around Europe .
There is a band - if it can be called that - with the name ' No Remorse ' , which is short for ' No remorse for the Holocaust ' , whose latest CD is called ' Barbecue in Rostock ' , celebrating the petrol-bombing of immigrant hostels in Germany .
To my shame , it is a British group .
The CDs are produced in Denmark and Sweden and are sold on the streets of Germany and Spain .
If we are to tackle those problems , it is very important to tackle them at European level , because it is clearly a cross-country problem .
I commend Mr Elliott 's resolution to the House .
I hope it will be supported when we vote tomorrow , because it is important that this House maintains the eternal vigilance necessary to ensure that the tragic events of 50 years ago are not repeated in the future .
Mr President , it is good that the Commission is continuing to work on the subject of ' Racism and xenophobia ' , especially now that this is no longer such a popular subject .
Politicians must continue to exert a positive influence on society 's development , even if it is sometimes easier for them to win votes by appealing to feelings of fear and rejection in regard to certain electoral groups .
Another advantage of dealing with a subject of this nature is that it also allows us to take a good look at ourselves and not to avoid self-criticism .
This is why it is such an interesting subject .
The Commission 's action plan is , however , somewhat disappointing as it is not an operational plan , but a strategic one .
We must nevertheless give it our blessing , which leads me to make the following points .
The European Commission rightly sees the fight against racism as a matter for society itself .
Action from above , at the political level , must be rooted in a variety of social initiatives .
The Commission names many organisations which could play a very significant role in this field and I share this view .
Unfortunately the text fails to mention one of the most important of these organisations , namely the churches and religious communities .
At the very time when membership of another faith , or even an exotic religious group , constitutes an extra challenge for integration , we should be talking about mosques , for example , their administration and the Muslim communities .
These too have a role to play in working with us to combat discrimination in our society .
Action taken by those discriminated against is also important .
They are all adults who can and must defend themselves and must try to deal with any problems within their own group , in particular when it concerns integration problems arising from poor knowledge of the language of the country they live in and of the local culture , and which can also in some cases be reflected in increased crime due to the lack of roots in this other society .
Above all we must hope that others too - including the groups directly concerned - contribute to the European Union 's culture .
This is an important point . They are part of a long tradition , as Europe has always had a culture of openness and this is how it must remain .
The emphasis on society is also expressed in support for networks of anti-racist organisations , which are worth cofinancing .
Unfortunately , there is still an element in the text which could suggest 100 % financing , whereas this can actually be quite dangerous for networks of this kind as you are then unilaterally setting yourself up as the official source of the funding .
This can prove an obstacle to rooting these networks and their organisations in society itself .
The basis in society must always be the priority element , which is why it is important for them to be accountable to that society .
100 % state financing can be an obstacle to this .
These networks must therefore be primarily directed at society .
This is what is difficult .
I do not believe it is a good thing for us to subsidise lobby activities directed at the legislator , because as we are that legislator we must surely be best able to do the job ourselves , and also more democratically .
I have therefore made a further attempt to amend a corporatist element which has crept into the resolution and I believe there will be broad support for this .
The action plan rightly calls for the European Union to pursue a coherent policy in all sectors .
This applies , for example , to its own personnel policy , which must reflect our anti-racist convictions , and also in foreign policy where we must prevent or stop in their tracks racial hatred , political manipulation , ethnic disputes and genocide .
I do not believe we should shy away from criticism of our own foreign policy .
It is another sector of policy just like socio-economic policy and cultural policy and here too we must voice our criticism .
Yet in connection with this foreign policy the point must be made that the number of deaths which have resulted from a lack of vigilance in combating ethnic cleansing is of course unbelievable .
This is one of the most serious phenomena which the European Union has had to confront .
When enlarging the European Union the necessary attention must also be paid to this aspect of anti-racism and xenophobia , and in particular also anti-Semitism , as in some countries this evidently continues to thrive .
As long as discriminatory actions of this kind continue to exist in countries seeking Union membership , they can be seen as a measure of the extent to which a constitutional state has been established .
Discrimination , racial hatred and xenophobia are measures of the quality of such a constitutional state .
We must therefore pay careful attention to these phenomena , in present Member States and in applicant countries .
At the same time we must recognise that in some countries it is not at all easy to integrate certain minority groups .
Gypsies are of course a serious issue in various countries , including in regard to their willingness to integrate .
It would be a good idea to view this as a European issue too .
I would point out that we called for the European Union to conduct a study on this subject , specifically in Romania where there are so many minority groups and where many measures have been developed to study how wider integration can be achieved .
This deserves our greatest respect , particularly when we live in countries where these problems are not so troublesome .
Obviously there are various preventive actions worthy of mention in the socio-economic field , including housing , education and cultural policy .
Many initiatives were launched during the Year against Racism .
One of the most important practical measures was to set up the Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna , whose director Beate Winckler is following our debate from the public gallery .
We greatly appreciate this as contact with the European Parliament is of course very important for her and for us .
Mr President , I hope that this subject will not get bogged down in considerations of political correctness and image-building .
These are serious matters with extremely practical consequences for the people who are the victims and for the European Union which is founded on anti-racism and cross-border solidarity .
Following ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam , if we are to avoid confusion we must adopt specific legislation for each type of group discriminated against and for each policy field .
I helped to develop anti-discrimination legislation in the Netherlands and have experience of these issues .
We must recognise that we are dealing here with a genuine European problem , but at the same time that our work can only be complementary as the crux of the matter lies with the Member States and their societies .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment I should like to focus on four concrete themes which are of particular importance in giving rather more practical content to this action plan . Firstly , the opportunities for ethnic minorities to find employment .
Despite the deplorable lack of statistics on this aspect of the labour market it is clear that ethnic minorities face an exceptionally high level of discrimination .
Their high level of unemployment , poor prospects for promotion and precarious work situation cannot all be attributed to their lower level of education .
The European Union recently introduced instruments to take concrete steps to improve the situation by means of employment guidelines .
We are very pleased that the jumbo Council at the beginning of December followed the advice of Parliament and the Commission to pay special attention to discrimination against minorities in the national action plans .
We hope that the formulation can be further refined , with the addition of benchmarks and firm undertakings .
Secondly , the Union can further strengthen the strategy for equal opportunities by means of the Structural Funds and Community initiatives .
We in Parliament have always called for the European Social Fund to pay very clear attention to ethnic minorities .
We hope that the Council will support us in this and also that in future Community initiatives the Commission will also pay greater attention to non-discrimination .
Thirdly , anti-discrimination legislation on the basis of Article 13 .
We hope that the Commission will now quickly come up with a proposal for a directive so that we can really act , if necessary by bringing a case before the European Court of Justice .
I know that this requires unanimity in the Council , but it would be scandalous and incomprehensible for the Member States to oppose legislation of this kind .
We expect the Commission to base its initiative very strongly on the experience already acquired with equal opportunities legislation for men and women , including everything relating to positive action , indirect discrimination and reversal of the burden of proof .
Only then can a directive be a good directive .
Finally , there is the role of the social partners .
European social dialogue would greatly boost its credibility if it agreed a code of conduct on non-discrimination at the work place .
I hope that the European Commission will quickly adapt its action plan to this effect .
I am curious to hear its proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the establishment of the European Observatory for Racism and Xenophobia takes its place alongside the adoption of the anti-discrimination clause in the Amsterdam Treaty as another success in the fight against racism .
The observatory will be of great assistance to us , since the data it collects will give us a clearer picture of the nature and extent of racism and xenophobia .
Comparisons between Member States will also become possible .
Better information makes for greater effectiveness in the fight against racism .
The Commission 's plan of action contains sound measures , such as the promotion of cooperation and partnership at all levels and the development of a mainstreaming approach .
I believe that the promotion of pilot projects and networks is particularly important as a means of encouraging active experience-sharing .
There is a need for innovative anti-racism projects .
Nevertheless , I agree with Mr Oostlander that the plan of action still suffers from a shortage of specific detailed proposals .
The development of hostile attitudes must be counteracted from an early stage in the education process .
Parents and teachers bear a great responsibility here .
During the years I spent working with parents , I always tried to encourage better mutual understanding of different cultures in kindergartens and schools .
Intercultural lessons , projects undertaken by schoolchildren and the active involvement of parents help to nurture the growth of a tolerant intercultural society .
I shall continue to dedicate myself to that aim .
At the European Conference on Article 13 of the Amsterdam Treaty , which I attended in Vienna at the beginning of December , we were explicitly warned against overlooking the threat to Europe from racism and xenophobia .
Both phenomena , it was said , had become increasingly widespread , but the priority given to the efforts to suppress them did not reflect the seriousness of the threat they posed .
The persistence and pervasiveness of racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism in Europe are alarming and make it increasingly clear that action on a European scale is urgently needed .
This means that early ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty is essential , since the Treaty must enter into force before draft legislation for the suppression of racial discrimination can be introduced .
Finally , we can but hope that we succeed in the course of the coming century in creating a continent in which racism can no longer take root .
This remains a vital issue for the future of Europe .
Mr President , the rapporteur is right in saying that the Commission 's action plan is not specific enough .
However , I wonder if we should not be taking a closer look at our own positions when we discuss racism .
We are very quick to condemn it , but I should like to point out that , in some cases , our actions have been quite different .
Let us take for example the Schaffner report , on which we voted today : no doubt there are many Members of Parliament who , for fear of provoking xenophobia , have been unwilling to give voting rights to immigrants .
Furthermore , there have been many instances when we have not given the necessary authorisation to enable citizens of third countries who are legally present in the EU to move around freely .
We have not been very successful in this respect , nor in giving a hearing to the proposal drawn up by Simone Veil 's group , which also relates to citizens of third countries .
This represents a serious failure on the part of Parliament .
With regard to the reference made by the rapporteur in paragraph 8 of the Oostlander report , the Charter of European political parties for a non-racist society is not receiving the support it deserves either at European level or in Member States .
At European level , only the European Parliament through its President and the ELDR Group have signed the Charter , despite the fact that it has been open for signature since February 1998 .
Why are all the other European parties taking so long ?
I am delighted that Mr Oostlander focuses so much attention on the situation of gypsies , not just in the Member States , but also in Central and Eastern Europe .
It should be regarded as a matter of serious concern , both in our dealings with the applicant countries and in relation to our own policies on asylum and refugees .
There are many situations where they are greatly in need of protection .
Finally , I was very glad to note that , by a sizeable majority , Parliament today endorsed a call for all countries to sign the Council of Europe 's charter on regional and minority languages .
I believe this is the first time that anything has been done about a matter which urgently needs our attention .
Madam President , I shall not need all the time at my disposal because much of what I had to say has already been mentioned , and indeed made fairly clear .
We have before us today a Commission communication on the action plan against racism .
Unfortunately , we must admit that action such as this is essential . Racism and xenophobia are experienced every day , in both our public and our private lives .
I therefore feel we must keep up a constant fight against such attitudes . We must tackle them at their root , wherever they are born , nurtured and developed .
As I have said on previous occasions , we must combat racism in the field of social relationships . The authorities must constantly encourage cross-cultural relations , factual knowledge of other minority cultures and links with them .
This will certainly result in social and cultural enrichment , and will never represent a threat to the integrity of the state . What is at issue is learning to truly live together , rather than merely coexisting .
In addition , we must maintain our criticism of the foreign policy of the European Union and its Member States , not that it is always easy to detect such a policy . All too often , it is governed by ethnic prejudices , as in the case of Bosnia and Albania for example , and not by a true spirit of cooperation and development that is independent from the purely economic aspect .
In addition to these general provisions , which should form the basis of any policy implemented within the European Union , we should not overlook the importance of specific measures that help to eliminate racial discrimination .
Positive discrimination must be encouraged in order to facilitate the integration of ethnic and cultural minorities .
The experience gained from positive discrimination in favour of women must be applied to other groups affected by structural discrimination .
Turning to another issue , I would like to take this opportunity to condemn here , in the strongest possible terms , the constant infringement of human rights that is still taking place in police stations when additional information on a crime is being determined . An example of this is where a crime is linked to a cultural or religious affiliation .
It is not unusual for tendentious and openly racist and discriminatory remarks such as ' Arab appearance ' , ' Muslim appearance ' , ' North African appearance ' to feature in press releases or police reports .
This represents a clear violation of fundamental rights and an attack on the dignity of individuals . No means should therefore be spared in combating this .
Consequently , it is absolutely essential to make the legal services that exist under the rule of law available to all citizens as they strive to combat racism and xenophobia . European , national and public institutions should take positive action to spread information on the mechanisms available to bring legal action against practices of this sort .
The necessary economic support should also be guaranteed and promoted for this purpose .
Madam President , as a new Member of Parliament , I had a compilation put together of the debates that have taken place in the House on xenophobia and racism .
Since the French Front National first entered Parliament , the House has had to discuss this issue many times .
The report of the first committee of inquiry on the subject dates from 1985 .
A second committee of inquiry was convened in 1989 because of the arrival of the German Republicans in the European Parliament .
We must continue to examine this problem , even though it has already been the subject of two quite thorough analyses .
Parties headed by gentlemen such as Le Pen , Haider and Frey are scoring considerable electoral successes in France , Austria and Germany today .
Sadly , in recent years xenophobic and racist crimes have claimed several victims in Europe .
Not until Amsterdam did the Member States respond to the repeated demands and reports they had been receiving from Parliament .
Unfortunately , we have wasted a great deal of time since Maastricht .
Be that as it may , we should now draw the necessary conclusions and flesh out the new legal basis for the fight against all forms of discrimination and racism in the European Union .
A policy of equal rights is essential if we are to overcome xenophobia and racism .
For that reason , plans of action to combat racism are not enough .
Harmonisation of the various laws in the Member States against xenophobia and racism should be our next objective .
That is the only way in which we can create the conditions for all Europeans to live together in peace and equality .
Madam President , like the previous speaker I am a new Member in this House but I had the privilege of representing the Committee of the Regions and speaking at an anti-racism seminar earlier this year in Brussels .
I welcome the Oostlander report and this latest debate and demonstration of support by the European Parliament to combat racism .
As MEPs we have a responsibility to promote respect for cultural diversity and human dignity but xenophobia and racism is present , regrettably , to varying degrees in all our Member States .
In June 1997 the Committee of the Regions adopted an opinion on this subject , concluding that ' The only way serious progress can be made in addressing the problems of racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism is initially through the common acceptance that they exist ' .
We and our fellow politicians at all levels must therefore not be afraid to admit that problems exist in our localities if we are to devise and implement meaningful measures to combat racism .
Article F ( 1 ) of the Amsterdam Treaty has introduced the possibility of denying the vote of a Member State guilty of human rights violations .
This is a clear signal that Europe is no longer willing to put up with the human rights abuses which can result in discriminatory practices and racism .
All governments at Member State , regional and local levels have a responsibility to promote and develop strategies for achieving social inclusion in its widest sense through local initiatives and partnerships .
My experience in Scottish local government has taught me how important this work is at all levels .
One positive example of local government initiatives is in my own constituency through participation in the Tayside Racial Equality Council .
Such councils can operate alongside and complement voluntary and statutory bodies and I believe it is essential that we advance the independent work of voluntary organisations and encourage cooperation between national and local government actions , together with the work of civil society .
This afternoon the debate has been positive and the speeches before mine have demonstrated that this House is clearly committed to confronting the problem of racism .
But recognition needs action and we need to do more than to talk .
An aspect which is all too often overlooked is the need to tackle many of the social and cultural problems which are the root causes of racism in our societies .
These are major stumbling blocks and it will take a lot of substantive action if these underlying problems are to be successfully tackled .
One of the most important ways in which we can work towards the elimination of racism is through education which must be regarded as one of the most important avenues to be utilised in reducing and , in the long term , eliminating racism .
This has to be carried out at all levels but in particular at grassroots level .
Moreover , it is imperative if education is effectively to fight discrimination and racism that there be a proper flow of information .
As part of this the Vienna Observatory should be given stronger powers and we as elected politicians should be regularly informed of developments and studies in order that we can properly guide our efforts across Europe .
My party is against the parochial approaches demonstrated by some Member States during last week 's Council Summit .
Cooperation and mutual understanding between all states are prerequisites if we are to have any hope of effectively combating racism .
This will not be done if we forsake these goals to promote inward-looking aims .
Europe needs an inclusive , outward-looking approach if racism is to be combated .
I welcome the thrust of the Action Plan and this report and the proposed resolution .
I hope sincerely that at all levels we can create tangible proposals which can realistically result in some meaningful progress in this battle .
Madam President , I am concerned and horrified by the increased signs of nationalism , and I am convinced that every effort must be made to combat it .
An action plan against racism could be useful here .
But it is my belief that the best way of combating racism is at local and national level .
The different situations encountered at local , regional and national level require a response which is firmly focused on the specific situation .
Of course I accept that the phenomena of racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism are not confined to national borders .
Europe 's Member States must therefore cooperate and increase their citizens ' awareness by exchanging information and experiences .
The Council of Europe can play an effective role as an umbrella organisation in this , as indeed it has done over recent years .
In 1995 Mr Oostlander , the rapporteur , had completely different ideas about the level at which racism must be combated .
At a round table conference on the subject at the time , he said that each country could combat racism in its own way , citing the principle of subsidiarity .
At the time he saw a guide to combating racism as coming at a national rather than European level .
Little remains of this view in this resolution .
What I find hardest to accept are the proposals leading to new European legislation .
Invoking Article 13 of the EC Treaty as amended in the Treaty of Amsterdam , the rapporteur urges the Commission to draw up a directive against racial discrimination .
But the article in question speaks of appropriate measures .
Appropriate measures do not automatically imply a directive .
Furthermore , in my view Article 13 is seen as a kind of constitutional article at European level as it is always used as a point of departure .
Given the way the article is formulated I do not believe this can be the case .
I do not believe we need a European constitution .
All the Member States have already signed the European Treaty on human rights and have their own constitution .
Madam President , it is very necessary to combat racism .
I sincerely support every effort made in this connection at national and international level .
But I believe it is going too far to enact European legislation in this area .
When the vote is taken on the paragraphs relating to legislation in the resolution I shall unfortunately be obliged to abstain .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too must emphasise that the proposals put forward by the Commission in its action plan are correct but inadequate .
In actual fact this phenomenon must be tackled above all by eradicating it at source .
Probably racism is not so virulent today , but xenophobia certainly is .
This is partly because our populations will not put up with migratory flows which have a disastrous effect on their standard of living .
The European Community must therefore become far more proactive in this area .
In my opinion , for example , whereas the Member States should keep a watchful eye on immigration as it occurs , the Community should take initiatives such as organising entry into our territory for those who deserve it and have a genuine claim , whereas those not meeting these requirements should be challenged .
I say so because , otherwise , a form of resistance will develop among the general public and could erupt into outbursts of intolerance against individuals .
So an extremely resolute approach is required : it is no longer enough to let ourselves be overtaken by events ; we must attempt to govern such events .
It is highly likely that the popular consciousness of today has been inoculated against the phenomena of the past .
To be inoculated , however , is probably not enough .
Action is required too , and some action on the Community 's part would certainly be commendable in this context .
Madam President , what is the cause of everyday racism , of the widespread xenophobia that is sometimes concealed and sometimes openly flaunted ?
Is it the cut-throat competition for jobs , is it particular hotbeds of crime , is it dangerous residential environments ?
Why do so many people turn a blind eye when attacks take place ?
Why do so many tolerate acts of racial violence by gangs ?
My speaking time does not allow me to give precise answers , but I do think the Member States would do well to analyse the symptoms , and so would we in Europe .
Under Article K.1 of the Treaty on European Union , as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam , the prevention and suppression of racism and xenophobia fall within the competence of the EU .
In the Commission 's plan of action , which the PPE Group endorses , as Arie Oostlander 's excellent report made clear , discrimination based on race , origin and creed is to be combated more effectively by means of practicable measures .
Pilot projects are to be supported , new networks created and better links established between existing networks , with the proviso that the affected groups must be actively involved .
The Commission should draw up a proposal for a directive against racial discrimination .
One of the articles in the directive should be entirely devoted to the area of social policy and employment , because the effects of racist thinking are felt at the workplace too , as Sue Waddington explains in her persuasive opinion , which the PPE members in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs were able to endorse .
Attempts to integrate ethnic minorities into the labour market have met with varying degrees of success .
In their national plans of action , some Member States propose support measures , while in others even freedom of movement is restricted .
To my mind , there are three important requirements .
Firstly , young people in schools , but young workers too , should be encouraged to assume responsibilities in the fight against xenophobia .
Secondly , an anti-discriminatory code of conduct for workplaces should be drawn up together with management and labour .
We can contribute a great many of our own experiences from the Member States .
Thirdly , we should make every effort to ensure that the initiatives implemented in the framework of the European Social Fund , including ADAPT and NOW , YOUTH , START and URBAN , as well as parts of our EU programmes Leonardo da Vinci , Youth for Europe and Socrates , can be pooled in such a way that they can contribute effectively to the necessary fight against racism .
Madam President , I agree with Mr Ford 's remarks , and in doing so wish in particular to pay homage to the work of the various parliamentary committees of our Parliament and the consultative committee chaired by Jean Kahn .
To such work do we owe a decade of progress in the fight against racism and xenophobia in the day-to-day business of the European Union , as well as the inclusion of that fight in the constitutional principles of the Union .
On that score the Treaty of Amsterdam represents progress worthy of acclaim .
The fight against racism is founded on equality of individual rights , on separation of the public and private spheres , on the fact that no barrier arising from individuals ' origins should stand in the way of their advancement .
Secularism , as practised by some states , is definitely the philosophical bedrock most likely to guarantee equality and the fight against discrimination .
That ought to make us take great care when it comes to positive discrimination , because within it lurks the risk of tribalism and confinement of individuals inside their groups of origin .
It can lead to absurdities such as paragraph 13 of Mr Oostlander 's report , which calls on the Commission to ' submit to the Council and to Parliament a communication on the policy it is pursuing to ensure reasonable representation of racial and ethnic minority groups in its own staff ' .
Madam President , imagine the problems if , one day , an able and qualified person were to be prevented from entering the process of recruitment to the Commission staff because there were already too many Jews or too many blacks or not enough blacks .
Positive discrimination is absurd .
Individual rights must be recognised and the fight against racism and xenophobia must not be used to confine individuals to ghettos of origin .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I shall not try to analyse those issues on which there is general agreement and which others have already touched upon , such as the general nature of the action plan or the limited innovations it contains , the need to launch projects based on genuine and diverse partnerships , the urgent need for an overarching vision of the fight against racism , the need for education starting at school , the urgent need for awareness-raising and information campaigns , or , lastly , the need to evaluate legislative progress made at Member State level or the urgency of guaranteeing proper legal support for victims .
The specific measures advocated in terms of employment , better utilisation of the European Social Fund and a change in housing policy so as to prevent ghettos are all clearly very important . However , they may be of limited effectiveness given that recent studies have confirmed an alarming and highly significant xenophobic attitude , even amongst the people of Europe .
This situation could deteriorate further if we do not recognise that underlying these attitudes are neo-liberal economic policies which give rise to instability , unemployment , marginalisation and poverty .
These are objective phenomena which lead to the proliferation of racism and xenophobia .
To my mind , this question was not covered in the report and this represents a wasted opportunity to identify the real scale of the problem and to attack or defend changes in policies which actually give rise to the underlying causes of xenophobia and racism .
Madam President , I believe Thomas Mann asked the very question that needs to be asked here : what causes racism ?
To that I would add a second question , which has also just been raised .
It was asserted that we had made great progress in combating racism . I believe a great deal more caution is called for , because racism itself has developed .
It undoubtedly remains extremely dangerous .
There is still racial violence on our streets .
Has it somehow been reduced ?
Well , it may be that statistics from an individual country have gone down , but crime statistics depend to an extent on how the number of unreported cases is estimated .
In other words , we really do have to ask ourselves why this problem has reached such epidemic proportions in our European Union .
I believe this actually leads us to ask two more questions .
Is there a connection with mass unemployment , with the policy of diminishing solidarity and fiercer competition that we have been pursuing for the past 15 to 20 years ?
Is there a connection with European history - European history as the history of the colonies , as the history of Europe 's imperialist pretensions , and European history as the history of this century ?
The history of the German wars , of German racism in Europe ?
I believe that unless we remember and carefully examine that history , we shall keep falling into the same trap of adopting a host of minor piecemeal measures which do nothing to solve the problem .
We must not do that !
It is our duty to remember , and it is our duty to get to grips with our problems .
Madam President , your predecessor in the chair wished the Members a happy Christmas .
Christmas is a time when the young people and children should have peace .
This House is under the great delusion that we have peace in Northern Ireland .
But we do not have peace in Northern Ireland .
There is a body in Northern Ireland which is government -sponsored and -financed .
It is called FAIT Families Against Intimidation and Terror .
They issued their report recently , which is a staggering one .
From the day that the Belfast Agreement was signed until now - I am sorry I have not time to read out this report , but it tells us that last month alone 95 children were intimidated , aged from 3 months to 18 years .
They tell us that they have had families exiled from their homes and driven out of the Province altogether .
There have been serious beatings - people beaten with hatchets and hammers ; altogether they report 150 such incidents in the month of November .
These are across the board .
The Loyalist Paramilitaries , the UVF , the UDA and the Republican Paramilitaries , the IRA are all at this .
Why ?
Because we have had accelerated prisoner releases ; and this body has identified that , on the streets of Belfast , orchestrating these beatings , are those that have been released under this scheme that was supposed to bring us peace .
The time has come when the Government and this House have to face up to the reality .
I wish I could say that the boys and girls of my country would have a happy Christmas ; but I know that some of them will be the target of these terrorists .
Madam President , a great deal has already been said about these reports , especially about Mr Oostlander 's report .
He too regretted that insufficient progress was probably being made in the fight against racism and xenophobia .
We should not forget , however , that measures can actually be taken in every domain of our activity in the European Parliament to curb these appalling tendencies .
I believe there is one section in particular in Mr Oostlander 's report - the section in which he deals with foreign policy measures - which is extremely important .
As you know , in our immediate neighbourhood we have a country to which we have been devoting much of our attention recently ; we have talked a lot about helping that country . It is a country in which racism is so rampant at the moment as to be scarcely imaginable .
That country is Russia .
Unfortunately , we do far too little reporting on it here . Yet there are innumerable cases that could be discussed .
At the last part-session here in Parliament , one of the topical and urgent subjects we dealt with related to General Makashov , who is a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party , who based part of his election campaign on the slogan ' Kill all Jews ! ' , who is a member of the Duma and who has never been properly taken to task - as he should have been - for his statements in the Duma .
I find this immensely disquieting when I think that there are minorities in Russia of which many of us have probably never even heard .
Please allow me to highlight one or two of them , because I simply believe it is important to speak about these things here .
One of the examples is the Jewish minority - and I have mentioned them specifically because of General Makashov 's remarks - who still live today in the so-called autonomous Jewish province .
They were resettled there , forcibly in some cases , in 1927 and in the early thirties .
The area where these people live today is known as Birobidzhan or Yevreyskaya - Hebrew - Autonomous Province , on the north bank of the River Amur .
Writers of that time said of the province that it was so bleak and its climate so inhospitable that before the many thousands of Jews were settled there , the entire area of 36 000 square kilometres had only had 1 192 inhabitants - Koreans , Kazakhs and a few Evenki , whose numbers were constantly dwindling because they could barely eke out a living in the harsh climate .
Even today some of the original Jewish deportees still live there , and the main local magazine is one that is still published in Yiddish .
I believe that , especially at a time like this when someone such as General Makashov is making remarks of that sort , we must not forget people like the Birobidzhan Jews , who live in such a remote place and whose existence is truly threatened .
I should like to add a second brief point . This same Russia that allows such things to happen has uprooted other peoples too , not least the Chechens , who have been completely uprooted twice in the last 150 years .
Russia drove them right out of their land , but they kept coming back , and the legacy of that can be seen today .
So our foreign policy is certainly one channel through which we really can take action against this entrenched racism .
Madam President , although in the European Union and especially here in Parliament resolutions have been repeatedly formulated and reports repeatedly approved on preventing racism and xenophobia , there has unfortunately been very little real progress , if any , as previous speakers have pointed out .
So it is high time we acted more decisively and effectively at both national and EU levels to prevent discrimination and increase tolerance .
For that reason Mr Oostlander 's report and the Commission 's plan of action are very welcome as are the plans for legislation following ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The prevention of racism has to be an integral part of the Union 's other policies including external relations and preparation for membership for applicant countries .
I agree with the rapporteur that one single commissioner must be responsible for coordinating anti-racism measures , however .
Similarly I would emphasise , as the rapporteur does , that information and communications are a priority in the strategic fight against racism .
Information must get to the various agencies in specific form .
Anti-racist action must involve all players , in a spirit of very broad partnership .
Many voluntary organisations and their networks are dynamic and creative , and they are really worth supporting in their efforts to promote tolerance .
I believe too little attention has been paid to the immense importance of the European Union educational and youth programmes , when they are at their best , in increasing mutual knowledge and understanding and thus dispelling xenophobia .
As we are now revising these programmes it is important to give emphasis to the importance of interaction and tolerance when the programmes are being implemented .
In my opinion , the Council should support Parliament in its greater efforts to give more young people the opportunity to participate in these programmes , because personal experience , through exchange programmes , for example , is the most effective way to overcome prejudice and promotes the view that differences enrich our lives .
Madam President , I too would like to applaud the Commission 's intention to legislate against racism , and mainly to echo what I heard from Mr Ford and Mr Oostlander .
Let me simply stress two points among those I have referred to , the first of which relates to enlargement .
I think that as part of this effort by the Commission - and by ourselves - particular care should be taken , as we prepare for enlargement , to ensure that during the pre-accession period a serious effort will be made to reduce the problems of racism , xenophobia and other such phenomena in the countries that are applicants for accession , so that we will not later be importing into the Union problems with which we are already familiar , either from refugees coming from those countries or in our own countries .
For example , in Greece we have problems with gypsies and we do not need to import more problems concerning gypsies coming from the Czech Republic and other applicant countries .
I would like to put particular emphasis on that .
A second problem is the Commissioner : I also wish to stress that so far responsibilities between Commissioners have been shared out on the basis of economic considerations or , if you will , in accordance with the Union 's original nature .
The Union is necessarily becoming an increasingly political and social entity .
I think that if we want a serious policy against racism , there must be what our English friends call ' follow-up ' , in other words continual monitoring , with a Commissioner acting as the ' minister ' for monitoring the implementation of anti-racism legislation .
I think that would prove very effective indeed , more so than anything I have heard from the speakers so far .
Madam President , this discussion follows hard on the heels of the debate on human rights and coincides with the celebrations to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the solemn Universal Declaration of these rights , which came into being with the French Revolution and evolved in step with our civilisation .
Amidst the momentous changes affecting contemporary society , there is one spectre hovering over Europe which could have undesirable consequences if not properly handled : globalisation .
This development , which both attracts and appals Europe , despite the wealth and diversity of its traditions , movements and languages , could give rise - and in many cases already has done - to a fear of what is different and unknown , increasing the incidence of racism and xenophobia .
If these are to be overcome once and for all , there is a need on the one hand for a general awareness-raising campaign to make our citizens better informed and , on the other , a major effort to consolidate our culture and underline the value of our European identity .
Therefore , rather than rehearsing here the content of the action plan against racism , of which we are critical , a plan which says very little of substance even concerning its proposed aims or the intended funding , it would be preferable for the Member States to support the battle - now well under way - against racial discrimination , fostering the acceptance of minority groups through a series of political and educational initiatives in respect of employment , education , health , social security , the right to housing and public and private services .
At a time when European society is opening up to new needs and requirements , we can fight and conquer racial discrimination , racism and the fear of what is different , as long as we teach our children that it is not enough to be European merely through our citizenship of this or that European country , but that one becomes European by learning to respect diversity , a value which does the greatest credit to this old continent of ours .
Madam President , I wish to begin by responding to the remarks of Mr Paisley .
As a former politician in Northern Ireland , let me say that I fundamentally disagree with his conclusions about the peace process .
It is the best chance that Northern Ireland has for resolving its major differences and establishing a permanent peace .
However , having disagreed with him in his fundamental approach , I support his remarks about the statements made by FAIT - a cross-community organisation and one in which my own brother is involved - that reports on the terrible activities that continue to be carried out by paramilitary organisations .
I regret that there is a deafening silence from officialdom in Northern Ireland on the activities of paramilitaries , especially in relation to intimidation , punishment beatings and so on .
We should not ignore them
I turn to the report .
In the wake of the Amsterdam Treaty , it is important to strengthen our fight against racism and xenophobia .
I , therefore , welcome both these reports and , in particular , I support Mr Oostlander 's conclusions that the Commission 's plan is heavy on rhetoric but light on concrete action .
I support his proposal for political and educational initiatives to assist the acceptance of minority groups in the societies of Member States .
Every Member State needs this , including my own , where I regret the growth of racism and xenophobia , especially against refugees .
I should like , first of all , to underline the work that has been done by the European Parliament in 1998 and many of the preceding years in combating racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism inside and outside the European Union .
We have made good progress in 1998 in our joint efforts to continue to raise the profile of the European fight against racism .
Allow me to underline some of the main highlights of the year .
In March the Commission presented its action plan against racism ; in October the European Network against Racism .
In 1998 the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia also began work .
Also , the Commission has been working intensively this year to prepare the ground for the entry into force of Article 13 of the new Treaty .
Just two weeks ago an important conference was held in Vienna .
At this conference Commissioner Flynn confirmed his intention to present immediately after ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam , a package of anti-discrimination proposals including a framework directive dealing in a general way with all kinds of discrimination in employment , a directive dealing specifically with racial discrimination and an anti-discrimination action plan , which will have the objective of strengthening cooperation with Member States and civil society with a particular accent on building partnerships and networking and on deepening knowledge and spreading best practice to every part of the Union .
Finally , in the context of mainstreaming advocated by the Commission in its action plan , I emphasise that the 1999 guidelines for Member States ' employment policies , which were proposed in October and endorsed last weekend at the Vienna Summit , call for a labour market open to all and contain an explicit reference to the need to address the particular labour market difficulties faced by ethnic minorities .
Linked to this will be our proposals to be presented next year for a new Community initiative as part of the structural fund reform .
What is planned is a new initiative for human resources focusing on transnational cooperation and combating discrimination and inequality in the labour market .
1998 has been an important year of preparation and consultation in the fight against racism .
Building on this work , the Commission is greatly looking forward to presenting legislative proposals to combat racial discrimination in 1999 .
We hope to continue to benefit from your support .
Thank you , Mr Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Transport of dangerous goods on inland waterways
The next item is the report ( A4-0435 / 98 ) by Mr McMahon , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States with regard to the transport of dangerous goods by vessels on inland waterways ( COM ( 97 ) 0367 - C4-0449 / 97-97 / 0193 ( SYN ) ) .
Madam President , this report concerns the transport of dangerous goods on the Rhine and the Danube .
At the moment the Commission is involved in discussions with the Rhine Commission and with the other Member States in Geneva as part of an international agreement .
The purpose of the legislation which we have before us this evening is to align the national and international rules on the transport of dangerous goods by inland waterways with the similar legislation for road and rail .
My report goes into some detail on the use and operation of inland waterways but I should like to focus on several of the main aspects concerning the regimes governing the operation of this mode of transport .
Currently only the River Rhine enforces binding international rules for inland waterways .
It is apposite that we should be having this debate in Strasbourg as the Rhine , one of the main arteries of Europe , flows through the city of Strasbourg .
The Central Commission for the navigation of the Rhine was founded way back in 1818 - indeed , it was the first trans-national body within the European Union - and it is a model for intergovernmental cooperation .
I visited the Rhine Commission in their palatial building , the former palace of the Emperor Kaiser Wilhelm shortly after the unification of Germany in 1871 .
I was pleasantly surprised to learn of the rules and regulations by which the Rhine Commission operates .
Last part-session I took the opportunity to take a trip on one of the barges carrying petroleum and natural gas .
On this subject , the Committee on Transport and Tourism had a very successful hearing when it involved not just the Rhine Commission but its counterpart on the Danube .
The success of the Rhine in this mode of transport was a recurring theme of the hearing in Brussels .
The clear message given is that the Rhine Commission has good legislation .
Therefore , we should build on the Rhine Commission rules and what it calls the ADNR for the future .
Currently the Commission is negotiating a revision of the rules governing inland waterway transport .
In my opinion the recommendations at Geneva are insufficient and should be similar to the rules which currently apply for the Rhine .
The Commission proposal for a final agreement is still under negotiation and it is true that it will take some time .
It believes this should apply to all inland waterways , not just the Rhine and the Danube but others in Eastern Europe .
This is practical and worthwhile but because the Rhine Commission is the world leader in this field , I believe it should be its legislation which should prevail .
It is my view that when the new ADN Agreement is finally agreed and aligned with the current Rhine proposals , only then will it be possible to provide a coherent , practical and operational set of rules .
We must maintain the success of the Rhine in our attempts to harmonise standards throughout the Community and beyond .
Several amendments were tabled to the report which reinforce this idea .
I was pleased to support the ideas that Mrs Langenhagen put forward .
I understand that the Commission is not entirely happy with the reference to a transitional period .
It is important that we have a transitional period until we get the final legislation agreed .
I would welcome any comments that the Commission might have when it replies to my report .
I do not think there are insurmountable difficulties in this opinion .
Indeed , the Transport Committee was unanimous in fully supporting it .
I do not think any amendments have been tabled by Members .
The committee held several interesting exchanges and I have endeavoured to incorporate all these points of view in the formulation of this report .
These are the main points I wanted to make .
I shall listen to the debate with interest and welcome the comments of the few Members who are enthusiasts for the transport of goods by inland waterways .
It is a growing market .
Indeed , the town of Strasbourg and in particular its harbour has undergone considerable expansion .
Inland waterways are a good method of transporting goods cheaply and environmentally safely , in particular for dangerous cargoes .
Madam President , the purpose of the Commission proposal before us is to create uniform EU provisions for the transport of dangerous goods on inland waterways by means of a framework directive , as we have just heard , and I should like to endorse everything that Mr McMahon has said .
The creation of new uniform EU provisions is necessary , and it would be gratifying if a set of rules could finally be adopted .
Two instruments with limited legal effect have hitherto been used to regulate the transport of dangerous goods by inland waterway . The first is the Recommendation on the International Transport of Dangerous Goods on Inland Waterways .
This was issued by the UN Economic Commission for Europe and relates only to the transport of dangerous goods between Member States and not to transport within the confines of one country .
As we heard , negotiations are taking place in Geneva at the present time with a view to converting this international recommendation into a formal agreement .
The second instrument , which applies to the most important waterway in Europe , the river on Strasbourg 's doorstep , is the Order concerning the Transport of Dangerous Goods on the Rhine , enacted by the Central Commission for the Navigation of the Rhine .
Progress towards greater uniformity involves selecting one of three options .
The first option would be for us to adopt the Commission proposal as it stands , with all its shortcomings .
This is not a satisfactory option .
The second option would be to hold the Commission proposal in abeyance until the end of the negotiations on an international agreement to replace the present recommendation .
The third option , which I have put forward , entails the creation of a transitional arrangement . This is how it would work : during the period until the entry into force of the international agreement , progress must be made in the EU on the harmonisation of national legislation , because the international agreement cannot be expected to enter into force for the next three years - and that is a very conservative estimate .
The harmonisation basis used in the EU framework directive would be the annexes to the Rhine Order with its high technical quality .
These are already the reference basis for the currently applicable legislation in several EU Member States .
Once the new international agreement has entered into force , the Commission will submit a new draft directive to us .
The transitional period would have a number of advantages , one of them being that it overcomes the situation in which two sets of rules apply concurrently , namely the international recommendation and the Rhine Order , thereby eliminating the need for skippers to carry two certificates - a Rhine certificate and a Community certificate .
The transitional arrangement is a means of fully coordinating the two existing sets of regulatory instruments , which is why I ask for your support for the report and the amendments , which were adopted unanimously by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Madam President , first of all let me thank the rapporteur , Mr McMahon , for the sterling work he has put in on this report .
During the past year , the EU has worked hard to make the transport of dangerous goods safer .
It is a vitally important task , partly because the dangerous nature of the goods means that they require very careful handling , and partly because of the major implications in terms of achieving an internal market that works efficiently .
This presupposes that different countries apply the same rules in various areas to ensure that border crossings are accomplished smoothly , otherwise there will be serious border-related problems for many years to come .
In the case of inland waterways , this is to be done in the short term by applying the Rhine Convention , sometimes called the ADNR Agreement , which was introduced in 1972 and revised in 1985 . At the moment , traffic on the Rhine is subject to its rules , but now its scope is to be significantly extended .
Future negotiations will lead to it being superseded by the AND Agreement .
In the course of many discussions here in the House and in the Committee on Transport , we have raised the issue of introducing rules that could also be applied in the case of applicant countries , in other words those which are not yet members , but which we hope will become EU Member States in the future .
We have also made it a requirement that these rules should apply only to traffic to or from a third country .
I have received assurances on this point from Commissioner Kinnock and others .
The same requirements that apply to road , rail and sea traffic are now being extended to inland waterways .
One of the requirements laid down in the pre-accession negotiations is that applicant countries should make the adjustments that are necessary to achieve the same level of safety as that obtaining in the Member States .
I think this is a very constructive move , since as a result , transport in a far larger area of Europe will be much safer than in the past .
Madam President , I support the intention behind the directive .
It is important to harmonise national and international rules relating to the transport of goods by inland waterways , as we have done in the area of transporting by road and rail .
It is important to do this both in terms of guaranteeing safety and of ensuring fair competition .
However , I would like to strongly support the rapporteur .
Mr McMahon is absolutely right in expressing his concern about the multiplicity of certificates that will be required .
This will lead to unnecessary triplication rather than duplication , an increase in bureaucracy and , more worryingly , confusion .
I would therefore like to support his amendments , which are intended to reconcile the different approaches .
I should like to thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr McMahon , for his very useful contribution to the improvement of the Commission 's proposal on the transport of dangerous goods by inland waterways .
The Commission can accept the main conclusion of Mr McMahon 's report which is that the Community legislation has to be based on the future ADN Agreement .
How we get there , however , is where we do not agree .
Whereas in his report Mr McMahon considers that a transitional solution based on the Rhine Agreement is necessary , the Commission believes that this is impractical and indeed unhelpful .
The ADN Agreement could be ready in 2000 which in all likelihood would be well before any implementation by Member States of a transitional solution as suggested .
Of course - and it was raised - the Commission can guarantee that the future ADN Agreement will achieve the same level of safety as the Rhine Agreement because Annex I of the future ADN Agreement will be in line with the Rhine requirements .
In order to guarantee in the future that the adaptation to the technical progress of Annex I of the ADN Agreement - and also of the directive - is in line with the Rhine requirements , the Commission could accept an explicit reference in Article 8 .
Consequently Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 7 , and 8 should be rejected since they introduce a transitional solution and require a new directive for implementing the future ADN Agreement .
However , I am pleased to say that the Commission is able to accept the other amendments , namely Amendments Nos 1 and 6 and , in spirit , Amendments Nos 4 and 5 since these have as their objective the Community-wide application of the ADN Agreement .
Thank you , Mr Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Better law-making ( 1997 report )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0498 / 98 by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on a draft interinstitutional agreement on the quality of the drafting of legislative texts ; -A4-0460 / 98 by Mr Cot , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission 's report to the European Council - ' Better lawmaking 1997 ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0626 - C4-0656 / 97 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of Ana Palacio , my fellow delegation and group member . She is the rapporteur for the report on the Interinstitutional Agreement on the drafting quality of legal texts .
In addition to presenting her report , I shall speak on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party on Mr Cot 's report , ' Better lawmaking 1997 ' , which will also be dealt with in this debate .
Both reports are certainly timely because the European Union and the European Commission are constantly being urged to improve the quality of legislation and to produce less of it .
The need for better law-making is stressed in particular .
It is worth pointing out in the first place that , notwithstanding its apparently technical nature , today 's debate is of great political importance and is very relevant for citizens .
This is because , generally speaking , the complex nature of advanced societies like ours is reflected in legislation as a means of social organisation .
Modern societies are not homogeneous , but riven with conflict and continuously affected by factors of economic , technological and environmental change .
There is an ongoing search for new balances through the democratic operation of these societies .
At the same time , the traditional regulatory forces are becoming weaker . Legislation therefore becomes the dominant social regulator , given the dearth of spontaneous solutions to conflicts .
Legislation can take many different forms and be used in an infinite range of applications .
For instance , legislation may be used to lay down a standard , but it may also determine the creation of a public institution , or provide for government expenditure , etcetera .
Other features of the Community 's legal system , in addition to these general characteristics , are its relative novelty - it is genuinely innovative at world level - and the nature of its operation . The predominantly intergovernmental structure of decision-making within the Council is particularly distinctive .
Herein lies a crucial issue , Commissioner .
The Community 's new system of law is characterised by the different elements borrowed from national systems : the so-called pick and choose method .
The rule of law at Community level can appear as a composite and therefore less comprehensible and less accessible , even for specialists in national law .
The Community legislator sometimes deliberately uses vague judicial ideas or vague definitions so that they can be more readily inserted into national legal systems . The need to produce 11 different language versions of all legislation represents a further constraint .
I should like to emphasise that I find it quite amazing that it is possible to work successfully with 15 countries in 11 languages and legislate for all of them .
The European Union , Parliament , the Commission and the Council perform this little miracle daily . It remains true , however , as was stated earlier , that one of the principal features of Community legislation is , to a large extent , the intergovernmental nature of the negotiations within the Council .
Speeches in the course of the legislative procedure , amendments and so on , can be in 11 different languages .
Even in ideal conditions , and despite the high-quality work produced by the institutions ' translators - who do an admirable job - , that constraint can mean that sentences tend to be longer and less clear , and that there are discrepancies between the various texts and even inconsistencies . Corrigenda to the various language versions are constantly required .
It is therefore evident that both reports were inspired by political concerns , and that both aim to bring legislation closer to the citizen .
I should like to recall briefly , if I may , the main political turning points in the history of Community awareness of the political dimension of the quality of law-making .
Initially , the Edinburgh European Council of December 1992 established a global perspective for the implementation of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
The need for further clarification and simplification of the new Community legislation was also stressed . To this end , guidelines on the quality of drafting Community legislation were to be adopted .
The European Council has also requested that existing legislation be made more accessible , notably through the official consolidation of Community acts .
This is extremely urgent , Commissioner .
I must underline the extreme urgency of consolidating Community acts .
The excellent report Mr Cot is presenting today is in line with the tradition that began at the Edinburgh European Council .
Further to the conclusions of the latter , the Council adopted on 8 June 1993 a resolution on the quality of drafting Community legislation . This laid down guidelines for drafting Council acts .
Later , in October 1993 , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission reached an interinstitutional agreement on subsidiarity . Then , in December 1994 , a further institutional agreement was reached on the official consolidation of legislative texts .
It should also be mentioned that in May 1996 , the Commission launched a pilot project on simplifying legislation relating to the internal market : the SLIM project , now in its fourth phase .
Finally , the Treaty of Amsterdam contains a whole panoply of instruments aimed at improving the quality of legislation . This goes hand in hand with transparency in a Union ' in which decisions are taken as openly as possible and as closely as possible to the citizen ' ( Article A.2 of the amended TEU ) .
The protocol on the implementation of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality is also relevant .
This aims to meet the requirements of the substantive quality of legislation and the simplification of the codecision procedure . There is also the protocol on the role of national parliaments .
It will now be possible for them to play a greater part in the drafting of a Community act . The review of the 1987 Decision on measures for implementing Community law ( comitology procedure ) is now under way .
To conclude , I would refer to Declaration No 39 annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam through which Parliament , the Council and the Commission are urged to reach an interinstitutional agreement on the quality of drafting Community legislation .
Mrs Palacio is certain that both reports respond to a growing concern amongst legislators , and that the House will approve them tomorrow .
An amendment has been tabled aimed at strengthening the position reiterated by Parliament , which remains opposed to unilateral interpretative declarations , whilst allowing the President a certain latitude as to the political expediency of incorporating these .
This is somewhat of a secondary issue to that of the quality of drafting .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in Germany in recent weeks the idea has been floated once again that new laws should have an expiry date .
The Minister of Justice rejected the suggestion , saying that the government and parliament were not supermarkets which are required to mark all egg packaging with sell-by dates .
Mrs Däubler-Gmelin is right ; the quality and future palatability of the contents of legislative packages are not subject to the same criteria as foodstuffs .
That also applies unreservedly to the legislative provisions enacted by the European Parliament , in cooperation with the Council and the Commission .
The rapporteur , Mr Jean-Pierre Cot , whom I am privileged to represent today , has clearly defined the standards that European legislation has to meet .
The form and content of the text must be of a high quality .
We need clearer and simpler legal provisions so that they can be accepted by the general public and properly applied .
Formal and substantive quality would do much to promote the transparency that we have demanded here time and time again .
This is something that we as a Parliament must do ourselves , so that the peoples of Europe will recognise us as their legitimate elected representatives .
It is not enough to demand transparency from other bodies of the European Union .
Allow me to begin by making a few remarks on our directives and regulations .
Please forgive me if I avoid the word ' subsidiarity ' , which is so often abused and which some politicians exploit as a smokescreen to hide their anti-European sentiments .
Our legislation is only credible in the eyes of the public if we deal with matters that really concern us , whether responsibility for them has been delegated to us by the Treaties , whether the solidarity of the Member States requires us to legislate on them , or whether such legislation is merely a matter of expediency .
The principle of proportionality requires the Community to limit its action strictly to measures that are essential to the achievement of the aims laid down in the Treaty .
The people of our countries are particularly sensitive to any disproportionality in European legislation .
If we go too far , our motives will be misinterpreted , and the public will be inclined to see us as purveyors of the so-called Brussels red tape on which a large section of the media loves to hold forth .
It is actually rather trite to point out that the substance of a legal act must include a statement of what it seeks to regulate and what the purpose of such regulation is .
I presume that the European Parliament has a clear conscience in this respect .
I occasionally have my doubts about the Council , though .
I can , however , confirm that the Commission seeks to apply this principle .
For that reason , we must call on the Council not to erode or water down the content of legislation in its quest for compromises .
That too is a dictate of legislative quality .
What is especially important to me is that the Council should refrain from the practice of appending additional provisions in the form of declarations .
It is contrary to all the rules of transparency if a legislative instrument cannot speak for itself .
An explanatory declaration arouses suspicion that something has been concealed in the body of the text .
That is why the Court of Justice rigidly refuses to consider annexed declarations when interpreting legal provisions , unless such declarations are explicitly referred to in the body of the act .
When it comes to the substance of legislative acts , we simply must not blunder into any dangerous traps .
It is up to the Commission and the Council to be vigilant , lest the pretext of simplification should be used to diminish the level of legal protection in the areas of the environment , product quality , public health and the economic and social security of employees .
Parliament is already vigilant in this respect , but the Council and the Commission must pull in the same direction as us .
The subject of the technical quality of Community legislation , which the Palacio report addresses , gives me a headache .
Not that I am in any way indifferent to the technical quality of our legal texts ; it cannot be high enough , as far as I am concerned .
But who lays down the criteria ?
Do we measure technical quality by the cognitive faculties of the general public , or should the technical skills of legal experts be the yardstick ?
I believe we should make laws for the general public .
This view is quite clearly incompatible with the following sentence from the draft of an interinstitutional agreement on the technical quality of Community legislation : ' The role played by the judicial services of the EU bodies , including their legal and linguistic experts , in improving the technical quality of Community legal acts should be strengthened ' .
If we invest services which are supposed to be assisting us in our work with the power to formulate our political will , we are neglecting our duty as Members of Parliament .
When it is a matter of linguistic nuances , we would do better to seek advice from journalists than from the Legal Service , and that does not reflect in any way unfavourably on the quality of our Legal Services .
Please do not misunderstand me !
I should like to finish on a lighter note . Law-making is like angling .
The worm is supposed to attract the fish , not the angler !
Madam President , I wish to confine my remarks to the report by Mr Jean-Pierre Cot on better law-making .
Firstly , I support his view that it was an error for the Commission to deal with all aspects of legislative simplification of both a substantive and formal nature in one communication .
Their inclusion in a single document does not facilitate a comprehensive discussion on how to achieve better law-making .
Indeed , while I appreciate the importance of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality in relation to this subject , I have no wish to become involved in a debate about the detail of either .
The point I want to make is rather a simple one : as a Member of the European Parliament - which unlike other institutions constantly faces the public in a very direct way - I am often the recipient of strong criticism of EU legislation .
Many of the people who criticise it tell me that it is unbelievably lengthy and that the language used is gobbledegook .
Others claim that we legislate too much and that much of the legislation we adopt is often unnecessary .
Others , especially those from the small-business sector , criticise it on the grounds that it creates major problems for them .
They feel that interference in their sector often places employment at risk .
I recognise that , while some of these criticisms are misplaced , others are often justified .
We in this House and in other institutions often talk about bringing the European Union closer to its citizens .
If we want to do that , it is imperative that we produce legislation which is necessary , which is expressed in simple language and which can be understood by those to whom it is addressed .
Bearing in mind that the Commission is the only institution which has the right to initiate legislation , I hope that it bears these points in mind when it addresses the question of producing better laws for the Union .
Madam President , I should like to focus briefly on Amendment No 2 in the Cot report , which calls on the Commission to allocate resources to the ' Fight the fog ' campaign , in other words the campaign for clear language .
The Commission 's English translators have put this across very well .
The entire Commission should support it .
It is particularly important that the Commissioners and the Directorates-General should understand its significance , namely the unnecessary costs that citizens and Member States would be spared if people could understand the brochures and application forms and so on .
A number of Member States , for example the United Kingdom , Belgian Wallonia and the Nordic countries , have been successful in this respect .
We should speak in a way that truly represents our languages , and not in ' Euroslang ' .
It requires a joint effort to provide the means for achieving such an end .
I hope the Commission 's authorities understand that this is in the best interests of clarity and openness , and that they will give their backing to this effort .
Madam President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to thank the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for the attention it has devoted to the Commission 's work on better lawmaking and to the draft interinstitutional agreement establishing guidelines for improving the quality of the drafting of Community legislation .
I am delighted to say that on most of the points dealt with , the rapporteurs ' position is very close to that of the Commission .
This subject is of great interest to us all , as it forms a central plank in relations between the institutions and the citizens of the European Union , as expressed in the legislative acts which determine the rights and obligations of everyone living in the Member States .
In recent years the quality of these acts has been the subject of justified criticism , and the present attempt to re-establish the necessary balance is the direct result of the recognition at the Amsterdam Conference of the need for action in this area .
Concerning Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report , I would like to remind you that the text of the draft interinstitutional agreement is the result of close cooperation between the three institutions and of various discussions which have lasted for over a year .
I would accordingly like to stress the importance of this agreement if we are to achieve the objective of transparency in the legislative process .
I regret that at present I cannot comment on any of the amendments as this falls outside my sphere of competence and the Commission has not yet adopted a position on this subject .
Since the 1997 ' Better lawmaking ' report that we are discussing today , the Commission has already put forward a number of other reports , including the 1998 ' Better lawmaking ' report submitted to Parliament last week , and these have highlighted the Commission 's commitment to better lawmaking .
As part of the drive in this direction referred to in Mr Cot 's report , the Commission has stepped up its monitoring of the grounds for legislative proposals in terms of subsidiarity and proportionality , and even before the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam it has been applying the protocol annexed to that treaty .
In addition , the Commission is continuing to put forward proposals for simplification and consolidation , as well as promoting the consolidation of information and improved access to information on Community law .
We also agree that the principle of subsidiarity should not be applied to areas falling within the exclusive competence of the Community and should not be applied to the detriment of the acquis communautaire .
We also believe that the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality should be applied objectively , but not in such a way as to rule out dynamism and flexibility , the need for which is reiterated in the Amsterdam protocol .
Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to make three small points : first , the fact that the Commission has dealt in a single report with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality in relation to technical instruments for making Community legislation simpler , clearer and more accessible was a purely pragmatic choice , in that we were trying to give an overall view of everything that has a bearing on better lawmaking .
Second , I think you will agree with me that the Commission 's response has been far more focused this year than in the previous consultation .
And lastly , on the subject of framework directives , I would like to say that the Commission has only resorted to such instruments in specific cases , and has always been conscious that they should not lead to disparities in the texts of national legislation .
Thank you , Mr Pinheiro .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.50 p.m. )
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome you to the last sitting of 1998 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I would like to make a comment on the Minutes concerning the Oostlander report .
I congratulate the newly elected Member from Scotland on his contribution to the debate on racism and xenophobia .
However , may I ask whether he would be prepared , along with myself , to condemn those narrow-minded nationalists who continue to utter and perpetrate racist comments within his own party against English people ?
It may be the last sitting before Christmas , but that is nevertheless not on the Minutes , Mr Miller .
Mr Wijsenbeek has the floor .
You need have no worries about saying ' Wijsenbeek ' , Madam President . Your pronunciation is just fine !
And even if Mrs Fontaine does not always manage it , I have long since forgiven her !
( Laughter )
( NL ) That is Mr Goedbloed , to make matters even worse .
Madam President , I am referring to the Minutes , pages 11 , 12 and 13 .
I referred to this yesterday .
Mr Elles , the rapporteur from the Committee on Budgetary Control , and the President both pointed out that they found our Rules of Procedure strange .
May I assume , Madam President , that as a result of this , the presidency of the House , if not the Bureau , will provide us with a proposal to amend Annex V of the Rules of Procedure ?
Should not the Bureau have spoken of this much sooner and therefore have raised it much earlier in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , rather than convening us on a Monday afternoon in a kind of emergency procedure , when we could no longer of course do anything about it .
We take note of that .
Madam President , I should like to endorse what Mr Wijsenbeek has just said .
In the Committee on Budgetary Control , I pointed out at a very early stage that there were incompatibilities here .
But let me say the following about the Minutes : I see that the votes on discharge and the Elles report are minuted , but I cannot find the text of the motions on which we voted and which , in my view , ought to be recorded in the Minutes , because in the event of a referral back to committee , Article 6 of Annex V of the Rules of Procedure requires us to comment at the next part-session on the result of the parliamentary vote .
If the motions on which the House voted are not available to us , we can hardly perform that task in a satisfactory manner .
Great care should therefore be taken to ensure - and I do insist on this - that the motions which were put to the vote are also recorded in the ' texts adopted ' part of the Minutes .
Otherwise I cannot see how we are supposed to comment on them in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
All we have are the results of the vote in Part 1 of the Minutes .
The problem is that there was no final vote .
The texts are always only printed when the final vote has taken place .
So we know the outcome , and the texts in question can be forwarded to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
They stand adopted , and that is what it says in the Minutes .
I suggest that we look again at how we can reorganise the procedures for your work .
Madam President , may I ask that this be done very quickly , because we do have to report back to the House in January ; that is what the current Rules of Procedure prescribe .
I do not consider that possible if the texts which have to be recorded in the Minutes are not there .
This way , I only have the result which is printed in the first part of the Minutes .
This naturally means that certain inconsistencies might occur in the wording .
We shall look into that and ensure that the Committee on Budgetary Control can do its work properly .
Madam President , since I could not raise a point of order yesterday , may I repeat today that this is the last opportunity for Members to sign Mr Martin 's written declaration on the adverse impact of the World Trade Organisation on animal welfare .
I urge all Members to sign it .
That has already been done , and that will be the last time for this year .
Madam President , I refer to the presentation we had earlier this week in celebration of the 10th anniversary of the Sakharov prize .
I took the opportunity of speaking to our President in the corridor yesterday . I made him aware of the fact that it was Lord Bethell who instituted the Sakharov prize .
I felt it was rather inappropriate of Parliament not to have recognised that fact when we had rapporteurs and one or two other distinguished guests here with us .
So , for the record , I think it is worth restating that it was thanks to a great deal of hard work by Lord Bethell , a personal friend of Sakharov himself , that the prize was instituted , and the rapporteur duly took it through Parliament .
Thank you , Mr Provan .
Madam President , I would like to speak regarding page 12 of the Minutes , where there is a record of the various speeches made on behalf of the groups before the vote on Article 23 , that is , on the mechanism for discharge .
It is said that , on behalf of my group , I indicated that we would also table a motion of censure if the discharge were granted .
This is evidently the opposite to what I said .
I said before the final vote that , for us , there was a very clear link between the refusal to grant discharge and the tabling of a motion of censure , and that we would table a motion of censure - and we will , as we already have the signatures for it - if the discharge were not granted .
I would therefore ask you to rectify this .
That will be corrected .
Madam President , I would like to make a remark with regard to page 33 of the Minutes concerning the dispute that I had with Mr Jean-Pierre Cot , who presided over the sitting , over his systematic refusal to allow any explanations of vote on the Elles report .
His interpretation of the Rules of Procedure was totally despotic , and we contest it .
Moreover , I went to the Sittings Service after the closure of the sitting , and a considerable number of explanations of vote from Members had piled up or had arrived by e-mail .
The most obvious interpretation of the Rules of Procedure is that , when it comes to a vote that is so important politically , Members must be able to explain their positions .
As I said to Mr Cot , yesterday we wrote to the President of the European Parliament to ask him to refer this problem to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Of course , this was not a referral back to committee in the usual sense of Rule 129 , but a referral back in accordance with Annex V , which was in fact a side-effect of the negative vote on the Elles report .
It was therefore a case of referral back to committee that was entirely different from those we are used to .
Mr Berthu , the legal position does not seem to be entirely clear .
That will have to be examined and then dealt with accordingly .
Madam President , I was intrigued by what Mr Berthu said about explanations of vote coming in by e-mail .
I am all in favour of modern technology , but I thought Members had actually to be present to give an explanation of vote .
I wonder whether I could have an e-mail facility as well .
Written explanations of vote do naturally have to be given in writing , Mr Ford .
Since we have some very modern Members , they are also bound to use modern means of communication .
I would say that this is actually quite an advantage .
Madam President , the Socialist Group tabled a motion of censure against the Commission with a view to giving it a vote of confidence .
May I ask you to instruct the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities to examine the admissibility of that motion .
In my opinion , while the motion may not breach the letter of the EC Treaty , it is certainly contrary to the spirit of the Treaty .
That is why I would ask you to have the Rules Committee examine the motion , thereby preventing the dilemma that might otherwise face us in January .
( Applause )
We take note of that , Mrs Müller .
However , you have just said that you would like this to happen before January .
Today is our last sitting before Christmas .
I cannot imagine that the House would agree if we were to say that Members had to meet over the Christmas period .
Madam President , I meant before the part-session in January , so that we do not find ourselves in a dilemma then .
Thank you , Mrs Müller , that makes things clearer .
Madam President , I am really surprised at the last speaker , because this institution is on the horns of a dilemma , so I do not really know what her problem is .
As you will know , the motion of censure was correctly tabled according to the Rules of this House .
However , I wanted to refer to yesterday 's Minutes .
You will note that in Item 7 on the discharge , in the second paragraph after The following spoke during the vote : , the Minutes are quite explicit in describing various people 's accusations of blackmail and , in one instance , in accusing my Group of blackmail .
However , they do not correctly report that I accused those who were so accusing me of hypocrisy .
If the word ' blackmail ' is going to be used in the Minutes , my word ' hypocrisy ' must also be used against those who accuse me .
We shall check that , Mrs Green .
Madam President , on page 12 of the Minutes , a small change should be made to my statement .
After highlighting the unfortunate way in which the Commission declaration was phrased , I did not indicate that my group would vote in favour of granting discharge , but that my group was divided and that , personally , I would vote in favour of granting discharge .
I did , however , indicate that my group was divided .
That should therefore be made clear .
That too will be corrected .
Madam President , at the risk of ruining everyone 's Christmas , I heard this morning in the hairdresser 's ...
... that there is talk of industrial action in the airports .
I wonder whether you could confirm that flights are leaving from Strasbourg airport , or if there is any problem ?
That may not have anything to do with the approval of the Minutes , but I am glad that , like the rest of us , Mrs Banotti likes to pay a visit to the hairdresser in order to look her best .
Madam President , I should like it to be recorded just how good Mrs Banotti 's hair is looking .
Thank you , Mr Martin .
I think we are all already in something of a holiday mood , but we must now proceed with our work .
( The Minutes were approved )
VOTES
We object to the conclusions reached in this report regarding EU legislation and , in particular , the subsidiarity principle .
The subsidiarity principle , as laid down in the Maastricht Treaty , should be a mechanism for delegating decision-making to the right ' level ' and ensuring that the EU does not embark on legislation which it would be more appropriate to adopt at another level .
It ought not to be a way of maintaining that EU legislation is right and should not be called into question .
In particular , we object to recital B , which states that the principle of subsidiarity should not be applied to areas falling within the exclusive competence of the Community , and the highly contradictory recital C , which states that the principle of subsidiarity should be applied in such a way as to preserve the acquis communautaire in its entirety .
This runs completely counter to the subsidiarity principle as laid down in the preamble to the Maastricht Treaty .
We have voted against the report as a whole , since in our view , the intention behind the subsidiarity principle is to prevent the EU having a hand in legislation that is best carried out at a lower level of decision making , for example national , regional or local government , or in some cases even at international level , for example through the OSCE , UN or Council of Europe .
In our opinion , we would have better legislation if that which is adopted by the EU were kept to a minimum , if it were intelligible and if the system of annexes and explanations were abolished on the grounds that it leaves everything open to interpretation and , in principle , makes EU legislation generally incomprehensible .
Tempus III
The next item is the report ( A4-0464 / 98 ) by Mr Evans , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting the third phase of the trans-European cooperation scheme for higher education - Tempus III ( 2000-2006 ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0454 - C4-0554 / 98-98 / 0246 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , on behalf of my Group I welcome this Commission report and hope that it is accepted today with my proposed amendments .
Firstly , I wish to apologise to my colleagues on the committee and to the Commission for being unable to be present in the committee when the amendments were taken but at the prescribed time I was sitting on the tarmac in an aeroplane at Heathrow waiting to take off and there I sat for two hours .
I am , to say the least , surprised that the Council seems either to be ignoring the role of Parliament or not to have been anticipating this debate .
It seems that they drew up their common position on 4 December .
Their new text , in French , came to me only yesterday .
This is not a satisfactory way to proceed .
It is arguable that the report should be sent back to committee so that we can reconsider the new text , although on reflection I will not propose this course .
I will , however , in the light of the paper that I got yesterday , withdraw Amendments 10 , 11 and 12 as they are now covered .
Tempus is more than just a worthy programme .
It plays , and will continue to do so , an essential part in the development of the countries of Eastern Europe : countries that were for too long closed off to the West .
When these new democracies were emerging , it was assumed that a university was a university , be it in Prague or Paris , Budapest or Birmingham .
The reality proved to be rather different .
Education , like so many aspects of life in the eastern bloc countries had suffered .
The Tempus project sought to bridge that gap and to build an educational bridge to the 1990s : a bridge built on the foundations of EU finances , grants to help academics to travel and share experiences , and grants for joint projects and initiatives of mutual benefit .
The Tempus project was also the provider of new and up-to-date equipment , enabling students and their teachers to be connected to the very best of educational opportunities .
Indeed , I have seen some very dilapidated buildings in Romania , for example , housing excellent modern computers provided by EU Tempus money .
The individual institutions that are recipients of Tempus grants , acknowledge freely the debt they pay to this programme and to the Union in general .
In a wider frame , education plays a crucial role in developing economies and regenerating industry and whole regions .
To build a successful country you need a thriving economy and to get that you have to invest in education at every level .
Tempus helps and encourages those countries that need help to improve .
Without it there would be serious deficiencies in their education system and we , the people of Western Europe and the more prosperous nations , would undoubtedly suffer the knock-on effect .
The new Tempus proposals build on the experiences of the last few years .
Many of the previous recipient countries are no longer eligible as they are now involved in Socrates or Leonardo .
My amendments to the Commission document ask for the new programmes to be linked in with Socrates and Leonardo , amongst other measures , in the hope that all the valuable work and the links that have been built up have not been lost .
But the new recipient countries , the former Soviet States , Mongolia , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Albania and former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will now be recipients of Tempus money .
I know and have seen how Tempus has helped other countries develop their educational systems and we must now ensure and do everything we can to make certain that Tempus helps these new and continuing recipients .
I also propose in my amendments that a special effort is made to involve more students from ethnic minority backgrounds , linking people from minority cultural , linguistic and ethnic backgrounds with similar people in other countries .
This would be an excellent way of building a people 's Europe .
It is also essential , as I have said in another amendment , that no group of people is disadvantaged .
We must make sure with Tempus and with all European projects that they are as inclusive as possible and do not exclude any group of people .
Especially those projects that are based on education and young people must bring people together and include as many sections of society as possible .
The recent Auditors ' report was critical of the way some Tempus money was spent .
It is true that some academics are perhaps more concerned , understandably so , with the educational aspects and are not quite so concerned about the minutiae required under the grants and accounting procedures .
I hope very much that , in the light of the Auditors ' report , we will ensure that recipients of Tempus money give accurate answers , to make certain that we are seen to be transparent and that we can account for the money that is spent .
But it is money that is being spent wisely and well , and although I have regrets about the way the Council have presented their new paper , I very much hope that Parliament this morning will support this report .
Madam President , as the rapporteur Mr Evans has just explained very clearly , this programme essentially helps education to become an economic benefit in countries with a great need for it .
From a purely financial standpoint , like the previous phases , Tempus III does not have a separate financial framework , nor any separate financial package .
The funding of its activities depends on the two programmes PHARE and TACIS , and consequently its implementation relies on a combination of the resources available for those two programmes , always providing they continue to exist and develop .
And that is something we must bear in mind when we assess the way in which this programme is implemented .
A second point concerns estimating the level of funding .
That , of course , cannot be based on the funding of the earlier phases because , as has already been said , the states involved are different .
Other states were involved before and others are involved now .
But the objectives too are different .
Of course , this assumes that some resources will be available , and it is essential for the Commission to ensure that the financial information which is unfortunately missing in the statements it has made , will be provided .
From now on that information will have to be available so that we know exactly where we stand .
That will ensure the necessary transparency , all the more so because there is as a rule a double source of funding and this creates a problem : operating expenditure comes from PHARE or TACIS , while administrative expenditure comes from the Foundation for Vocational Training .
On that point , I should like to say that the Committee on Culture and Youth carries a heavy responsibility to monitor the implementation of those programmes so as to avoid any repetition of what happened in certain cases during previous periods .
There must also be greater flexibility and adaptability , always of course taking care to select activities that can be carried out .
That too was very rightly explained by Mr Evans , and it is important from the financial standpoint .
Cohesion and additionality with other actions must also be ensured in order to maximize the effectiveness of combining different activities towards a specific objective .
Madam President , on behalf of my group I should like to express my warm congratulations to Robert Evans on his reporting and to re-emphasise the importance of the Tempus programme .
For the new democracies in the East in particular , it is very important that cooperation should take place in the areas of education and culture .
These are certainly two fields in which we can truly cooperate as equal partners with the new democracies and the future members of the European Union .
That is why I particularly emphasise the importance of this programme .
Madam President , it being the last day of the pre-Christmas season , Mr Evans will be happy to hear that we are totally in agreement with him .
This is the first I have heard about the common position arrived at yesterday and I absolutely agree with his point that it simply is not good enough .
In supporting totally Mr Evans ' report , I would like to make a couple of comments .
He rightly states that education is an essential part of the development of these countries .
Some years ago I saw how parlous the state of the equipment was , particularly scientific equipment , in many of the countries that have been helped .
We are spreading our net a lot wider this time , hopefully not too thinly .
If nobody knows what we are doing , except one or two in a very vast area and a number of countries , the value of the programme will be lost .
One area remains to be addressed and that is our knowledge of what is happening in the educational systems of these countries .
We have seen the dramatic affect the Socrates programme has had in our own countries .
That is why we are deeply upset - particularly in my group - about the very small budget we are being given to try to implement what is , in fact , one of the great success stories of the Community .
I hope , in the context of Mr Evans ' report , there will be some way in which we can hear - preferably directly from the people who have been helped by this - precisely what the effect of the Tempus programme has been on their countries .
There is a saying of the Chinese that if you love your child send him on a journey .
We have not had too much experience of journeys to us as oppposed to our students going to Eastern European countries and that is an area where our education could be considerably improved .
We are pleased to support all Mr Evans ' amendments and we wish him and all those who benefited from the Tempus programme a very happy Christmas .
Madam President , I too wish to congratulate Mr Evans for his excellent work , which I support fully .
Throughout the 1990s the Tempus programme has been a very important and effective tool for the growth and improvement of university education in the central and eastern European countries , and later the newly independent countries .
From the point of view of the central and eastern European countries this programme has significantly improved the conditions for universities and colleges to participate in the Community education programmes which later became available to them .
From the year 2000 the Tempus III programme now proposed by the Commission will aim to provide support under the PHARE and TACIS programmes for those partnership countries that cannot participate in the other Community programmes .
The focus of this activity will be the administrative reorganisation of the universities and educational developments that will involve opening doors to the world of business and enterprise .
The importance of universities in economic and social reform in recipient countries can hardly be stressed too much .
As funding under the PHARE and TACIS programmes is , however , limited , as has been said here , it is absolutely vital to ensure effective coordination with other Community action , so that the greatest possible benefit may be derived from the programmes .
In this I agree with the rapporteur 's main arguments , including the need to pay special attention to opportunities for students from different minority groups to participate in exchange programmes .
Complementary action includes language courses and courses in cultural background , which must be given priority support .
With the new Tempus programme a clearer policy will emerge with regard to attempts to stabilise the recipient countries zone .
Tempus will also be a tool for regional cross-border cooperation between the present applicant countries and the non-associated countries .
It is important that the areas this programme focuses on are suited to the priorities of the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
Through education the programme will thus be helping to promote reforms in the economy , democracy and government .
The programme 's recipient countries cover a vast and very diverse area .
Consequently , we need separate tailor-made strategies for the various countries and country groups involved .
By giving more weight to European research we will be able to bring these countries closer to the Community and , furthermore , learn from the effects of integration .
Madam President , I liked the remark by Mrs Ryynänen about many political hues , and here is a political Hugh giving his speech this morning .
I welcome this report by Mr Evans for a number of reasons .
Firstly , as an old academic of 25 years ' standing , I like to see lots of money going to my old friends to keep them in employment , just in case I have to rejoin them next year .
Of course that will not happen , as Mr Evans well knows .
Secondly , I would like to welcome it because Tempus I was run - Mr McMahon tells me - by a good woman from Ayrshire , Leslie Wilson .
Clearly the success of the programme is attributable to the fact that it was originated and administered by a Scot .
As the number one for the Scottish Socialist Party for the forthcoming European elections which will ensure my return next year I welcome that in particular .
Thirdly , I welcome it because it is from my friend , Mr Evans , who is a tribute to higher education himself .
He tells me he has two degrees from London University and an honorary doctorate from Brunel University .
That raises a question mark about the quality of that particular university , but I am sure it is a good participant in the Tempus programme .
I welcome it because it spreads education throughout the European Union and connects it to the incoming states .
But I have question marks over the amount and scale of the resources required , as Mr Evans does .
We need more money for this programme and all education programmes to make them a reality , for the new Member States in particular .
I welcome it because my friend , Mrs Müller , who is the scourge of the Commission , tells me that this is a fairly well run programme and that Mrs Cresson 's dentist does not have any part in it .
Therefore we should be confident about its administration .
For all these reasons we should support this programme .
But like Mr Evans I have to say that the Council is rather insulting when it adopts the common position without even taking account of Parliament 's position .
I suspect this is a breach of the rules of the interinstitutional agreement .
It would be nice if we took back our opinion , Mr Evans , and held it for a further six months .
We do not want to penalise the universities just because the Council has behaved badly but we should certainly communicate our displeasure to them .
Madam President , the type of cooperation envisaged in Tempus will open up entirely new regions to the European Union .
As far as the current Tempus III programme is concerned , I believe it is especially important that the greatest of care should be taken to match the various priorities very closely with the national needs of the target countries .
The Commission must ensure , in the light of the criticism expressed in the evaluation report , that the new programme is implemented far more efficiently .
Precisely because the measures in the realm of tertiary education have a really vital role to play in the integration process , a huge responsibility falls on the Commission and all other players in this field .
I am right behind the rapporteur when he says that the mobility grants should also be available to students .
Not only are they by no means a ' quantité négligeable ' , as he says ; they are in fact the software around which the whole system revolves .
Madam President , the Tempus programme has been successful ; it has made a unique contribution to the third-level system of education in the countries of central and eastern Europe .
Given the major changes in the political context in which it operates , especially as the enlargement process gains momentum , it is time to evaluate and update elements of it as we prepare for its third phase .
It is particularly important , as these countries make the transition to free-market economies , that we assist the development of the curriculum to respond to the new economic situation and especially to provide the necessary skills for entrepreneurial activity .
In addition , curriculum initiatives should provide the opportunity for academics and students in third-level institutions to learn more about the ethos of the Union , its role in the world , our policy priorities and the responsibilities of European citizenship and membership .
The Jean Monnet programme has been successful in achieving some of these objectives within the European Union itself .
We could learn from it and we could apply the best elements of it to Tempus III .
I congratulate the rapporteur and look forward to the response of Parliament and the Council to the way they have badly treated this in relation to the decision they took yesterday .
Madam President , the Evans report under discussion is about redesigning the European Union 's youth and culture policy .
Up to now Parliament has had its first debates on the new legal basis for the Socrates and Leonardo programmes as well as the youth programme and the framework programme for culture .
Now the issue is the continuation of the Tempus programme .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media has done an enormous job in the organisation of these programmes in preparation for the challenges of the next millennium .
For that reason we must recognise its hard work , and I would like to thank Mr Evans for this report .
University and college education and research are the basis for a new society .
Over the centuries they have been international as , with human progress , they have helped us to accumulate knowledge which served the common good .
It is therefore only natural that the European Union should lay such great store by developing cooperation among universities .
The Tempus programme , which concerns the central and eastern European countries , began in 1990 and has since continued uninterrupted .
The geographical area involved in the programme now under way is much larger than before , because many of the countries that have applied for EU membership are already involved in the Socrates and Leonardo programmes .
It is especially important to make youth , and university students in particular , aware of the importance of international involvement .
Today 's university students are the founders of tomorrow 's society .
Although the time spent studying abroad might be short , it opens up a totally new outlook on the international community and international relations .
Though the priorities might be the furtherance of knowledge and skills , student exchanges open up a whole new approach to international issues and problems .
Obviously , student and teacher exchange programmes and improved administration and educational methods will also bring with them new direct benefits .
Levels of knowledge and skills will be broadened and strengthened .
But we in the European Union in particular have to realise that we will by no means always be just the provider , we will also be the recipient .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , Tempus is a product of the political will expressed by the Heads of State and Government during their meeting in Paris in November 1989 , and later here in Strasbourg in December of the same year .
The backing and cooperation of all the institutional bodies , Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee , led very quickly - on 7 May 1990 - to the decision to establish the Tempus programme , in other words the legal framework for adapting the results of the experiences gained from the Community educational programmes Erasmus and COMET to the special conditions that prevail in the eastern countries .
As has been demonstrated by the numerous appraisals and annual reports you have received , from the time of its implementation - in 1990 in the PHARE countries and 1994 in the TACIS countries - and in the various phases of its development , Tempus has been successful in contributing towards the restructuring and modernisation of tertiary education systems in the beneficiary countries .
We can therefore say with certainty that it lived up to our expectations .
Tempus was directed at initiatives by universities , within a defined framework of priorities and always in agreement with the national authorities .
In that way , we responded effectively to the specific needs of our partners .
Thus , most of the associated countries in central and eastern Europe who are taking part in Tempus have progressed , since it started , to a new phase in their relations with the European Union countries , to full and integral participation in the Community programmes Socrates and Leonardo .
However , the non-associated countries of central and eastern Europe and the newly independent countries of the former Soviet Union and Mongolia have been slower to benefit from the programme .
In those countries there is still broad scope for Tempus , the only instrument with the potential at present in those areas to support the university sector in adapting effectively to the new social and economic circumstances .
And the Tempus III proposal is directed precisely at those countries .
In reply to the question asked by Mrs Banotti , I should like to say that the Commission is preparing a report on the impact we have had on the educational systems in beneficiary countries , and of course that report will deal with each country separately .
Madam President , I would like to give particular thanks to the rapporteur Mr Evans for the quality of his report , a quality that has been evident at every stage and which highlights the important objectives of the programme we are debating today .
As regards the amendments tabled by Parliament , the Commission considers that many of them enhance and clarify the original proposal still further , and it can therefore accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 17 which were tabled by the rapporteur Mr Evans on behalf of the Committee on Culture , as well as Amendment No 14 .
In contrast , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 6 on the financial circumstances , which the Commission cannot foresee .
The sums earmarked for Tempus will be decided each year when the budget allocations to beneficiary countries for the PHARE and TACIS programmes are being determined .
In its explanatory report the Commission indicated the sums made available for Tempus in previous years , but it cannot prejudge what will be provided for Tempus from the aid programmes after 2000 , since no financial planning has yet taken place for the new rules that are to be applied in those specific countries from 2000 onwards .
The Commission also cannot accept Amendment No 16 , which concerns the nature and role of the committee that will assist the Commission in implementing the programme .
From that standpoint , we are waiting for the new decisions to be taken in relation to comitology .
Yet , the Commission would like to abide by the text of its proposal , which it formulated in accordance with the proposal on comitology it approved on 24 June 1998 .
Furthermore , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 13 on the definition of a degree of flexibility in the management of projects , nor can it accept Amendment No 15 on the addition of conditions whose indirect result would be to restrict both the flexibility called for and the exchange of information about all the initiatives .
The Commission understands the spirit of those amendments - which is quite evident - but we consider that the initial proposal of Amendment No 15 amplifies and clarifies the scope of the text .
Finally , as for Amendment No 18 on the introduction of a series of activities and structural measures , the Commission considers that it is inappropriate to include these additions .
Indeed , the definitions of the structural and supplementary measures , how exactly they are to be worded , is a matter for the Tempus committee which will be set up pursuant to the decision .
These measures are closely related to the priorities agreed each year with the relevant authorities in the countries concerned .
The Commission will shortly submit to the Council an amended proposal on Tempus III , which besides incorporating Parliament 's ten amendments that have been accepted , will take serious account of Parliament 's other wishes , to an extent of course that enables us to submit our own proposal to the Council .
Thank you , Mr Papoutsis .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I should like to thank the rapporteur for his work in preparing this report .
The Tempus programme is a trans-European cooperation scheme for higher education . It makes a significant contribution not only to higher education , but also to strengthening democracy in non-member countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union .
With reference to countries that are participating in the Tempus programme and where democracy and civil liberties and rights are still disregarded by the regimes in power - for example Belarus - I should like to point out the importance of the programme 's objectives of reinforcing the independence of higher education , improving its administration and demonstrating its crucial role in economic , social and political reform .
Participation of Hungary in Community audiovisual policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0467 / 98 ) by Mrs Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of Hungary in a Community Programme within the framework of Community audiovisual policy ( COM ( 97 ) 0562 - C4-0637 / 97-97 / 0311 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , the question here is whether or not to include Hungary in our Community MEDIA II programme .
Coming after the decisions in the education , youth and culture sectors , which have enabled some CEEC countries , including Hungary , to participate in our programmes , this decision relates to another area that is of paramount importance for pre-accession strategies , namely , the audiovisual sector .
This is a sector that is undergoing enormous change and is particularly interesting owing to the very significant technological advances it is making , and it remains a powerful medium of expression , inter alia of identity and citizenship .
That is , at least , the aim behind establishing this European audiovisual area .
It should also be noted that the MEDIA II programme is but one part of this European audiovisual policy , the main thrust being provided by the ' Television without Frontiers ' directive , although the two of them share many aims .
It is therefore clear that participation by the applicant countries in MEDIA II is dependent on them making advances in harmonising legislation or aligning it with European directives .
It is worth asking whether the procedures for implementing the decision , with its fairly significant political implications , are capable of meeting the challenges in question , and whether they are likely to ensure that the specified aim is achieved .
We should remember the principle of association .
Hungary will participate in all actions forming part of MEDIA II in accordance with the conditions laid down by the programme and applicable in all Member States .
Nevertheless , Hungary is required to set up appropriate structures at national level .
To that end , Hungary will have to establish a ' Media Desk ' in cooperation with the Commission .
On the financial front , it will pay an annual contribution to cover the cost of its participation in the programme .
Its contribution will be around ECU 650 000 for the 1998-2000 period , but it has been authorised , as provided for in the additional protocol , to use PHARE funds for 50 % of its budget .
Nevertheless , we must be aware that the harmonisation of Hungarian legislation with European audiovisual texts and , in particular , the famous ' Television without Frontiers ' directive , still poses a problem and will therefore have to be subject to strict coordination between the European Union and Hungary .
In fact , the development of Hungary 's audiovisual sector is still fragile and somewhat paradoxical .
The ending of the State monopoly in the media came out of the political upheavals of 1989 , as one of the main aims of reform , but it took no less than seven years , with the promulgation of the Law on the Media in 1996 , for a start to be made on achieving that aim .
It was not only a question of endorsing a principle , as the monopoly on information , production and distribution had to be ended and the audiovisual sector reorganised .
This new mechanism , which places Hungary among the Eastern European countries best equipped to guarantee the freedom of information , has so far mainly benefited the public service sector as , being outside the scope of public service , satellite broadcasting and cable services are not subject to any regulation .
Nevertheless , if there is too much freedom , it could divert Hungary away from expressing its national identity and benefit only non-European productions .
Within the framework of current legislation , timid efforts are naturally being made to encourage the local film industry and a new , more specific law on films is being considered .
Moreover , the 1996 law needs to be amended to conform to European requirements .
This is what caused the difficulties that at first led to the vote on this association plan being delayed in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
In fact , in the spring , when Hungary was already engaged in the pre-accession process and had already expressed its desire to take part in the MEDIA II programme as a full partner , it took the decision to authorise the installation of the HBO broadcasting company , a subsidiary of the American company Time Warner , broadcasting to Poland by satellite .
This was against all European regulations and represented unfair competition for European companies , which themselves were respecting their obligations .
I will not go back over the various levels of negotiations that followed .
I went to Hungary myself in October , at the invitation of the Secretary of State for culture .
Those few days in Budapest , where I met Hungarian leaders , convinced me that the Hungarian authorities were full of good intentions and aware that they had to adapt their legislation .
However , perhaps they were not aware , or did not have a sense of urgency , and in solving the HBO problem , they were also serving their own interests .
It was not just to please the European Union and ensure that it became a member .
Unfortunately , I think that there are still some misunderstandings .
I was therefore pleased to note that Hungary has promulgated the Council of Europe Convention on Transfrontier Television , which will give their regulatory body , the ORTT , the opportunity to investigate and take the necessary measures .
With regard to legislative harmonisation , the plans for development are still somewhat vague and contradictory in places , and a certain level of rigour would be welcomed here .
In the light of these events , I must say that I wonder a little about the method involved in associating applicant countries with the MEDIA programme from the outset .
We have already seen this in the past .
For certain Central and Eastern European Countries , the Tempus programme was , in some way , the precursor to joining the Socrates programme .
For the audiovisual sector , one could maybe have considered some sort of half-way house to help the countries to progress in that field .
Once again , I regret that the PHARE programme no longer has the task of funding cultural activities .
To conclude , I would like to say that I believe Hungary has achieved a great amount of progress in the audiovisual sector , and while it is a country with a great culture , notably in terms of cinematography , it needs to show more clearly its will to adhere to our common cultural values and to provide itself with the resources to keep the promises being made to us concerning legislative reforms .
In particular , it should respect the timetable that it set for itself , to which it unfortunately does not seem to be fully adhering .
This is why , while supporting the association of Hungary to the MEDIA II programme , I have tabled amendments - I am thinking here , in particular , of Amendments Nos 1 and 3 - that place some conditions on that association .
I hope that the Council and the Commission will support me in this approach and , Commissioner , I would also like you to give me the Commission 's opinion .
We do need to give out a strong political signal .
Let us not forget that Hungary will thus become the first country to join the MEDIA programme .
Let us not forget that other applicant countries are also engaged in this delicate process of legislative harmonisation .
They are watching us , they are watching what is happening in Hungary and Poland .
Let us not allow them to become the Trojan Horses of American audiovisual interests in Europe .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur for her work and the excellent report she has presented to us this morning .
It is important that it flows on from the previous Tempus report .
It is very important that everything in Hungary and the other countries is brought into line as soon as possible .
Participation of Hungary in a Community programme on media is very important because , as we all know , free media are crucial to a democracy .
Of all the emerging states in Eastern Europe , Hungary is the most advanced and most ready to participate in the MEDIA II programme , because its administrative and technical structures are at a more advanced level .
I was in Budapest recently and , by comparison with the other Eastern European countries , Hungary is certainly doing very well .
It is also in a position to contribute towards it financially .
Of course we welcome that .
Further , it is equipped to guarantee the freedom of information .
We are always interested and concerned to make certain that freedom of information is guaranteed .
The report points out that such freedoms could divert Hungary away from expressing its national identity .
This is a serious point about which we ought to be concerned .
To my mind , too often in Hungary , and in some of the other countries as well , we hear Western European songs and we see that the films are mainly American or from other countries .
It is not in interests of building a stronger , more united Europe to suppress the culture , language or identity of applicant or Member States .
This is why I welcome very much , in particular , Amendment No 7 by the rapporteur , which states that Hungarian can be used as a language of communication .
I personally would prefer it went further , because I do not believe the way to welcome new countries into the European Union - whether it is in the MEDIA II programme or any other programme - is to say that : ' you can come in as long as you speak one of the languages we are using ' .
I know that it creates problem to say that about Hungarian .
Any new language creates problems .
But a successful Europe cannot be built if the language or cultural identity of any country is suppressed .
I realise that is a challenge but it is one we must work towards .
Of course Hungary 's involvement in the MEDIA II programme is important but it will also help the implementation of the Television without Frontiers directive .
We have to look at why the audiovisual industry is so important and the rapporteur has brought this to the fore .
In today 's society we are all aware that the audiovisual industry plays a huge role and it is important for economic reasons and job creation because it is a communication tool .
A point which our committee has made several times in this and other reports is that the audiovisual industry also plays a huge role in the cultural aspects of life and cultural development .
It also helps the national identity to be preserved .
If it is used properly , it makes room for and respects minority languages and cultures and people from ethnic minorities within those particular countries .
I am pleased to stress , because it is important , that we must make absolutely certain that we do everything to welcome new countries into the European Union through the MEDIA II programme , which is just one example , to make certain that they not only respect their minority cultures , languages and religions but that they do everything to encourage them , because a Europe that is built on a background of successful cultures and respect for other people 's cultures and minority languages will be a more prosperous and successful one in the future .
With those remarks , I welcome this report very much and I congratulate the rapporteur on her presentation .
Mr President , my interest in this subject stems not just from my membership of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media but also from my membership of the Joint Parliamentary Committee with Hungary .
I think that there is a role for the joint parliamentary committees in monitoring programmes such as MEDIA II and other Community programmes where the pre-accession countries are already participating .
That is a role for the JPCs .
We all know that Hungary has been seeking membership of the European Union since 1989 .
But the point is very strongly made by Hungarian Governments , Hungarian politicians and Hungarian people that Hungary has been part of Europe for ever and what it is seeking now is simply accession to the European Union .
During the last ten years we have witnessed a remarkable transformation in that country and through change of political systems and socio-economic reforms it has already achieved the political and economic basis for accession .
The European Union must do all it can to encourage and promote Hungary 's accession to the Union and participation in these programmes in advance of membership is a very important step forward .
We are , however , at a crucial stage in preparations for accession and the importance of opening doors for candidate countries to participate in the Community programmes , as well as encouraging them to adopt Community regulations , is paramount .
The inclusion of Hungary in the MEDIA II programme is something that I certainly support .
I am in favour of the proposal and join in the congratulations to the rapporteur for her report .
The role of the audiovisual sector as a whole in fostering the development of civil society , in particular in the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe , is crucial .
We know that audiovisual programming is not easy inside the European Union .
So it is certainly not going to be easy in the new countries seeking membership .
The main thrust of European audiovisual policies is being provided by the Television with Frontiers directive .
I share the concerns that countries are helped and encouraged to maintain their cultures . I just happen to believe that this is done not by rationing , quotas or controls but by encouraging and helping the promotion and production of local programming .
I hope the MEDIA II programme will be able to assist in that .
Having said that , I wish to join my colleagues in calling for enhanced efforts from the Community and from the candidates to make sure that they acquire the full audiovisual acquis .
When that is achieved , we can all look forward to Hungary joining the Union and having a good audiovisual sector as well .
Thank you very much , Mr Perry .
Ladies and gentlemen , could you please wait another moment as the Green Group has still not spoken .
Due to an administrative problem , it was not included .
Therefore , before I give the floor to Mr von Habsburg , allow me to give the floor to Mr Kerr for two minutes .
Mr President , clearly new Labour are trying to write me out of the pages of history in the cultural debate .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate Mrs Leperre-Verrier on another excellent report .
Actually I suggested she should do this report in the coordinators ' meeting when she was not present because I knew she would do an excellent job .
I note in particular her concerns about monitoring and it is very important that we keep an eye on all the issues she mentions .
I note the point she makes about a pre-accession programme which could have been a useful idea .
I also wish to take this opportunity to note that the question of resources is very important .
I have just been informed that the Dutch have agreed to only ECU 90 million for the cultural framework programme , which is a gross insult to Parliament which requested ECU 250 million for what is a very important programme .
Indeed the Commission agreed ECU 167 million and the amount agreed by the Dutch is a disgrace .
This shows the importance of underlining resources in meeting these programme needs .
The MEDIA II programme has got rather more resources than this .
This is an important issue .
The question of the strength of the media within Hungary is very important .
When I was growing up , film societies in Britain recognised that Hungarian cinema was a very important part of European cinema .
As Mrs Leperre-Verrier has pointed out , that was funded by the old state machine which of course has been dismantled as indeed have many other aspects of the old state machine in Hungary .
We have to try to assist , replace and revitalise Hungarian cinema , which would be a great contribution to European cinema within the EU .
I welcome the report and I will , like Mr Evans , finish within my time to show the spirit of Christmas .
A Happy Christmas to everybody .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by adding my own thanks to Mrs Leperre-Verrier for her report .
It is an excellent report , and we do not have too many excellent reports .
You can be proud of it .
I should like to dwell on one or two points from this report , because I believe they are crucially important .
The development process in Hungary - certainly in this particular domain - has been rather encouraging , especially since 1996 , when the new legislation on the media was gradually set in motion .
There were great difficulties , because , as you know , the media are very important politically and therefore tend to set the political parties at loggerheads - and thank goodness we have these political arguments in Hungary now instead of orders from above .
The arguments held things up , but then the process began to move again , and all is well now .
I should just like to point out that the progress achieved has a distinctly liberal vein , which gives us good reason to speak of genuine progress in Hungary .
And then I have a special word of thanks for the rapporteur for pointing out in the context of this development how dangerous it is when a particular smaller national culture dies out .
In Hungary , as the previous speaker rightly said , the film and media culture has been developed for a long time .
My memory stretches slightly further back than his - he was probably still a small child when this culture was developing .
During the Second World War , for example , when I attended gatherings of the Hungarians in Hollywood , virtually all the great film stars were there , but we did not speak English . We spoke Hungarian , because they generally spoke English in such a way that I preferred to speak Hungarian , so that I could understand them .
There is still a great deal of talent in that country which could play a magnificent part in fostering the general development of European culture .
For that reason , I should like to thank the rapporteur for referring , in very friendly and diplomatic terms , to the international competition in that part of the world .
That competition is inconceivably ruthless .
Literally millions of dollars are being invested in bids to seize control of the entire media structure in all these new democracies .
There are some countries where these elements have actually achieved their goal .
I need only cite the example of the Czech Republic , where practically all aspects of the media are controlled from overseas , although they are private companies .
In Hungary , thankfully , that has not happened , for the majority of the largest television network and largest private television network is in Hungarian and European hands today .
That is a healthy situation if we want to preserve European culture .
This is an area in which we must make strenuous efforts , for there are other countries where the threat is enormous .
For instance , when I look at present developments in Croatia , I see that every possible means is being used to concentrate the press , television and the various other media in the hands of US corporations .
I am not blaming the government for that ; these are private corporations which are trying to establish such a monopoly and use it for their own ends .
We cannot deny that there is a certain danger involved here .
I believe this is one of the most important issues .
We surely do not want quotas , as has rightly been said here , but we certainly do want to strengthen our people in such a way that they can develop their talents and compete in the marketplace .
Finally , I should like to add one more observation .
We have various amendments here with this report , and I must say that they are generally good , but I should like to express distinct reservations about Amendments Nos 1 and 6 , because of the unrealistic nature of Amendment No 6 in particular but also , to a certain extent , of Amendment No 1 .
People cannot be expected to produce full reports every six months .
Anyone who has anything to do with television and the other mass media will know it is impossible .
We should therefore go back at these points to the wording that was originally proposed by the rapporteur .
The original text is good , because it takes us along a more realistic path .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Before the vote on the draft legislative resolution
Mr Robles Piquer has a point of order .
Mr President , I would like to ask a question , because some of my colleagues tell me that these Friday votes are subject to the same rules as those on the other days with regard to participation in roll-call votes for the purposes of the payment of our salaries .
I would like to know whether this is the case .
If this were the case , today there has only been one roll-call vote .
Some of us were unable to take part in it due to other commitments , and it would seem reasonable to hold another roll-call vote which would at least give us the opportunity to show that we are here .
Mr Robles Piquer , the votes on Fridays have exactly the same status as those on any other day .
With regard to the status of roll-call votes , Mondays and Fridays are exceptions .
Therefore , in this respect , it is not necessary to hold another roll-call vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , we shall now proceed to the vote on the legislative resolution .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
My congratulations to Mrs Leperre-Verrier .
Mr Hallam has a point of order .
Mr President , I would just like to remind the House that we must be better behaved on Fridays from now on as we are being televised for the first time for a long time .
Mr Hallam , I do not know about you , but from my point of view as President , I must say that I am very satisfied with this and every Friday .
I do not in any way think that there has been any behaviour today that does not correspond to the normal running of the House and , above all , to the sense of friendship and familiarity with which I am glad to say Friday mornings are conducted , these being exceptional days .
Single market scoreboard
The next item is the report ( A4-0402 / 98 ) by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Single Market Scoreboard ( SEC ( 98 ) 0889 - C4-0444 / 98 ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr García-Margallo y Marfil .
Mr President , I am going to present the ideas of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the Commission document , the second single market scoreboard , which relates to the progress made in building the single market and - more importantly -the obstacles and challenges that we have to face from now on .
As you will recall , the 1985 White Paper , the famous White Paper on the single market , was almost complete on New Year 's Eve , 31 December 1992 .
However , there were still some measures to be adopted and , above all , new requirements had arisen that it had not been possible to fulfil .
What was the Commission 's response to these inadequacies and these new matters to be dealt with ?
In 1993 , it created two committees to inform Parliament and the European Council on the progress made . But the Commission soon realised that this information was insufficient , and in 1996 a further step was taken .
It published a communication entitled ' The impact and effectiveness of the single market ' , which was the basis and impetus for the Action Plan for the Single Market approved by the Amsterdam European Council of June 1997 , which covers a very crucial period in the construction of Europe , that which ends on 31 December 1998 , the date of the introduction of the euro .
What did this plan involve ?
What were its aims ?
It aimed to achieve a single market similar to a national market with the following elements : a single currency , a harmonised tax system , integrated infrastructures , free movement of persons and , last but by no means least , instruments to enable businesses to survive in that context , and I am referring here to the European Company Statute .
How were such ambitious objectives to be achieved ?
How is the plan laid out ?
Firstly , a clear definition of the strategic objectives was established , because - as a Spanish poet says - no favourable wind will blow for he who does not know where he is going .
Secondly , specific action was planned according to a precise timetable and , thirdly and finally , a procedure was set up to allow the monitoring of progress made and of any shortcomings that might become apparent .
That is the origin of the scoreboards , the third of which we are discussing today , and which I believe to be especially important as we are only a few days , in fact less than 10 days , from the completion of the Action Plan .
What does the Commission document reveal ?
In my opinion , from the Commission document and from the progress that has been made , we can make four important observations .
The first is that a significant number of the objectives set out have been achieved , and I would like to highlight two of them here today : the liberalisation of gas supply and the protection of technological inventions .
The second observation is that the Commission believes that other objectives will soon be achieved , and here it draws attention firstly to the Directive on collective investment funds , which is of capital importance for the new capital market - excuse the repetition - which will enter into force on 1 January and , secondly , to the Directive on authors ' rights in the information society .
The third observation is that other matters have not made as much progress .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy - and I hope Parliament also - therefore expresses its sadness and regret at the fact that not enough progress , or at least not the necessary progress , has been made with regard to the free movement of persons and tax harmonisation .
The fourth and final observation is that Parliament notes with concern that almost 15 % of the legislation on the single market has not been transposed or incorporated into the internal regulations of the Member States .
What conclusions can we draw from this ?
What is to be done , as Lenin would say ?
Firstly , Parliament calls for a new action plan to cover the period from 1 January 1999 to 31 December 2002 , which is a period that , as the President will confirm , coincides with the introduction of the euro .
Secondly , it establishes two phases .
In the first phase , in 1999 , the outstanding , delayed objectives will have to be completed , and in the second stage , in 2000 , the free movement of persons must be established .
It proposes that , when there is a legal basis , the methods chosen should be regulations and not directives - in order to prevent delays in transposition - , and qualified majority voting rather than unanimous voting .
I will conclude , Mr President , by wishing a Happy Christmas to all those who believe and a happy winter solstice to those who do not .
Mr President , only very peripheral sectors and very specific interest groups can now question the enormous advantages that the opening of borders has brought for the majority of European citizens and companies .
Output and trade have grown continuously , prices have fallen and there has been an extraordinary increase in the variety of goods and services on offer .
We now have the largest integrated market in the world , with 370 million consumers , and they alone account for 1.1 % to 1.5 % of GDP growth within the European Union , and thus play a key part in economic convergence and in reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various Member States .
70 % of these fifteen countries ' trade is carried out within the area of the Community , which will have a common currency in two weeks ' time .
The signatories of the Single European Act have good reason to be satisfied when we come to take stock of European integration .
However , Parliament should sound the alarm whenever there is dissatisfaction .
We need to shine a light into the murky waters of carelessness and inactivity , and that is just what Mr García-Margallo is doing here .
We need to attack the delay in applying important measures envisaged in the White Paper back in 1985 and others that have become vital since then .
We also need to attack the delay - and even obstruction - on the part of Member States in transposing Community legislation into national law , ignoring Commission views , and even disregarding decisions of the Court of Justice , so that 220 legislative texts , or 15 % of the total , remain to be transposed .
Fines could be levied on recalcitrant Member States in such cases , but we believe that the most effective sanction would be to publish a list of delays and the offenders , so as to shame them for their feeble European performance in the full public gaze .
Parliament should denounce the delay in the evaluation panels which the Commission should have been holding biannually since June 1997 , which is in turn due to the delay in putting its own action plan for the single market into practice : of 62 undertakings , 39 have overrun the deadline envisaged .
There is still a long way to go to eliminate market distortions and to make all four freedoms of movement accessible to the entire population of the Community of Fifteen .
We believe that fiscal policy is a key issue at this point if immediate progress is to be made in completing the single market .
And the latest direction taken by the Council , the third way , is not very reassuring .
Only yesterday we were talking about fiscal harmonisation , but now there is talk about some vague coordination of fiscal policies .
We are even taking steps backwards , as has just happened at the Vienna European Council in the case of the scheduled expiry of the fiscal derogation applying to duty-free sales to intra-Community travellers .
Deferring the implementation of a decision taken in 1991 is a real attack on the single market .
It sets an extremely dangerous precedent , and amounts to scandalous protectionism in favour of a privileged sector with an active , powerful and apparently effective lobby .
Even if there is no will to go any further with fiscal policy , at the very least a new harmonised fiscal system for VAT and greater fiscal consistency with regard to capital are absolutely essential .
Mr President , this report deals with the implementation of EU directives in the Member States .
It is commendable that such an evaluation has been carried out .
However , it reveals that only 23 out of 65 undertakings have been fulfilled , which is naturally disappointing .
I should like to know why the directives have not been transposed .
It could be due to the fact that Member States do not or cannot support the resolution , or that the decision-making process has taken place so quickly that public opinion in individual countries has been unable to keep pace - in which case it is doubtful whether extending the qualified majority is the right solution .
I think we should look more carefully into the reasons why the resolution is not being implemented .
I have misgivings about imposing fines on Member States that do not incorporate EU legislation .
We could look at the issue in another way : there have been occasions when the opposite course of action has been taken and the EU has granted exemptions to Member States during their membership negotiations .
For example , Sweden was granted a four-year exemption period during which it was allowed to retain its ban on antibiotics in animal feedingstuffs .
The EU then stipulated that other Member States should raise their standards to meet those of the Swedes , which has been happening , although on a very limited scale and extremely slowly .
Alternatively , would the problem be solved by the imposition of fines ?
Everyone knows that that would not really be the answer .
This excellent report concludes by saying that the resolution should , of course , be implemented since it was adopted jointly .
However , more light needs to be shed on the reasons why this has failed to happen .
Cooperation and confidence building are better ways of achieving results than fines and coercion .
Rules are far more satisfactory if they are well supported in the Member States , since this makes their application more effective .
Mr President , I am standing in for Mr Wolf this morning but , with my infinite knowledge and flexibility , I will attempt to comment on the single market .
In fact , I am very glad to be speaking on this because it is something very dear to the heart of my Prime Minister Mr Blair .
When he takes a moment off from bombing Baghdad , he might care to look at this resolution and report .
Despite being so enthusiastic about the single market , he will find many things which he cannot agree with .
For example , there is the question of the single currency which , quite rightly , the report says is important for the completion of the single market .
Britain of course is not yet allowed to join by Mr Rupert Murdoch .
The matter of harmonisation of taxation is currently horrifying the whole of the British media because of the notion that somehow we should share a little sovereignty on the harmonisation of VAT .
Clearly that is necessary for a single market .
I want to stress politically the importance of the free movement of workers and the protection of workers within the single market .
This is not stressed enough in this report .
The market has two sides and we must protect both .
Finally , I wish everybody a Merry Christmas and a happy New Year .
Mr President , the single market scoreboard is a useful instrument .
Every six months stock is taken of the progress achieved in implementing legislation on the single market .
The transposition of European directives into national legislation commands particular attention .
The scoreboard makes it possible to quickly check which Member States are doing their job and which are lagging behind .
Member States must of course honour their undertakings .
The peculiar thing about it is that these are tasks which the Member States have charged themselves with because it is the Council of Ministers which determines European legislation , in cooperation with the European Parliament or otherwise .
The motion for a resolution fails to take sufficient account of the particular nature of decision-making at Union level .
If all Member States have to agree , it may take rather longer before a decision comes .
That is a disadvantage .
However , lifting the unanimity requirement implies even more obstructions at Member State level and even more infringement procedures .
It seems a clever move to resort to a regulation .
But what then remains of the principle of subsidiarity ?
This is not the way to bring decisions closer to the public .
Paragraphs 9 and 10 make a completely erroneous suggestion .
I can be very brief about the call to introduce a common VAT system based on place of origin around the year 2000 . The costs of introducing such a system and the administrative charges for conversion are so high that this plan must remain on the back burner for now , unless the Commission has a vast secret reserve .
If that is case , I should like to hear it from the Commissioner .
Finally , it is unrealistic to expect the single market to show all the characteristics of a national market within three years .
Priority must go to reinforcing existing measures .
The single market will work better if we appreciate our cultural diversity at the same time .
Mr President , I wish you and all your colleagues a merry Christmas and all the best for 1999 .
This also goes for the Commission and the Council , despite paragraph 5 of the resolution which calls for as many objectives as possible to be met by 31 December 1998 .
Commissioner , feel free to take a couple of days off .
Mr President , when economic and monetary union is introduced in a few days ' time in the 11 participating states , a fully functioning single market will no longer be a desirable goal but a real necessity .
The indiscipline of Member States which do not fulfil their single market obligations must be tackled even more systematically after the introduction of the single currency .
After all , total transparency and comparability mean that distortions of competition will now have a greater impact than ever before .
Although successes have been achieved , national efforts are still plainly inadequate .
If you start something , you have to see it through . The same governments which implemented tough austerity programmes so that their budgets could meet the convergence criteria must submit to an intervention mechanism designed to eliminate barriers to trade and must be prepared to harmonise their taxation systems so as to banish the fear of unhealthy concentrations of capital and businesses .
Mr President , since we have been talking about indiscipline , allow me to indulge in that vice myself by exceeding my one minute of speaking time to wish everyone a happy Christmas !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for many years the goal of our European integration efforts was a common economic area without frontiers .
The idea of creating the single market was even , in a sense , the master plan to realise the ideal of peace for the European Communities .
Today we are going a stage further .
To a great extent , the single market has become a reality .
The great goal that awaits us now is the path leading to a European domestic market .
At this stage , the second single market scoreboard affords us a welcome opportunity to assess the progress that has been made in the quest for economic integration within the European Union .
When we embark on the third stage of monetary union in less than two weeks ' time , we shall have attained a new level of integration .
We have also implemented or launched a number of projects which are essential to the creation of a European domestic market .
First the electricity market was opened up , then the gas market also became a European market .
Legislation was adopted to guarantee the protection of biotechnological inventions .
We can all remember the detailed discussion here in the House .
Yesterday , we voted to create a system of European warranty law by adopting the directive on certain aspects of the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees after the second reading . In addition , the directive on late payments is currently being discussed by the Council , having been adopted by Parliament at first reading .
I personally hope for a comprehensively satisfactory outcome to these negotiations as soon as possible .
That is particularly important to small and medium-sized businesses , since late payments , especially by public authorities , pose a huge problem and result in the loss of numerous jobs every year .
Other projects are still in the pipeline .
Early next year , we shall consider the harmonisation of copyright law as well as dealing with certain aspects of environmental legislation , such as the directive on old vehicles .
We still await an agreement on the European Company Statute .
That is an important basis for the efficient operation of larger companies in Europe .
In the future , we shall also have to give more serious thought to how many legal instruments we intend to apply and the levels at which they should operate .
Deregulation on the one hand and subsidiarity on the other have been concrete demands for some time , and are coming to fruition at this very moment in specific projects such as the SLIM initiative .
Just this week , when we had the vote on the statistical system , several speakers said that it was absolutely essential to implement the SLIM initiative in that area , and we also wish to have a green paper on the subject .
And now it is my turn to express my sincere thanks to the Bureau and the parliamentary staff , and to wish you all every success in the coming year and , as this year draws to its close , a Merry Christmas !
Mr President , Parliament 's report on the Commission 's establishment of a single market scoreboard reveals a very disciplinary concept of European cooperation .
On one hand , in order to prevent delays in transposing directives into national legislation , it advocates that more use should be made of regulations , which are directly applied , uniform and decided by majority . This seems to me to contradict the calls for flexibility and subsidiarity that are regularly heard from various quarters .
On the other hand , it once again calls on the Commission to consider the possibility of imposing fines on states that have not fulfilled their transposition obligations .
In our opinion , it would be entirely illegitimate and undemocratic for an administrative body to be capable of imposing such penalties on sovereign states .
Moreover , there is no legal basis in the Treaty to allow the Commission to act in this way , and the Council could not even delegate such rights to the Commission , because it does not have them either .
Only the Court of Justice , under Article 171 of the Treaty , has certain powers to apply penalties , and even those are , in our opinion , excessive , as they are not subject to appeal and cannot be suspended by a democratically and formally expressed national will .
These considerations did not prevent the Commission from recently asking the Council to give it authorisation to implement a compulsory intervention mechanism in order to eliminate certain obstacles to trade .
The Council sternly rejected this , and rightly so .
However , the Council itself has accepted the establishment of multilateral surveillance systems , first of public deficits , and now of employment , which are also disciplinary in nature .
This shift is the result of a double error , which is repeated in the report we are discussing today .
Firstly , Brussels would have more power than the nations , and secondly , the single market would become a domestic market , that is , a completely integrated internal market that is like a national market .
This double error evidently contains the seeds of the denial of any scope for manoeuvre for the nations , and therefore , the denial of all national sovereignty , on any issue .
The Council would save itself and preserve its honour by putting an end to this once and for all at the next opportunity .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish you a Merry Christmas in a Europe that is not yet entirely disciplinary in nature .
Mr President , I welcome this report .
Some of the rapporteur 's conclusions are very disturbing .
He highlights the fact that 15 % of the legislation adopted on the single market has not , as yet , been transposed in all the Member States .
Additionally , he is strongly critical of the fact that proposals on the free movement of people and tax harmonisation have not been adopted .
Like the rapporteur , I welcome the Commission scoreboard to measure the state of implementation of the action plan for the single market .
I hope that the Commission examines it very carefully .
The political zealots in the Commission and in the Council , who support the abolition of duty-free , tell us that the continuation of duty-free is inconsistent with the single market .
I would urge them to read this report ; to analyse in detail the Commission scoreboard , and when they clearly see that the single market is still a very long way from being completed , especially in the field of tax harmonisation , they might change their minds , especially in the wake of the decision at the Vienna Summit to carry out an impact study into the effects of abolition .
I believe that when this study is completed , it will confirm the worst fears of many in this House that 140 000 jobs will be lost throughout the EU , that air and ferry fares will increase and that EU tourism and regional policy will be undermined .
Presented with this information , I hope that ECOFIN and the Commission will be sufficiently persuaded , at the very least , to extend duty-free beyond the 30 June next year .
That would be the best Christmas box that both the Commission and Council could give the citizens of Europe .
In conclusion , let me , along with other Members of this House , wish you , all members of Parliament staff , the Commissioner , all members of Commission staff , and all who serve this Parliament a very happy and peaceful Christmas and a prosperous New Year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I thank you for your positive assessment of the scoreboard whose third edition was published last October .
Let me also thank the rapporteur , Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , for his excellent work .
The six-monthly scoreboard has two purposes : first of all , to give a picture of the current state of the single market , and secondly , to assess the extent to which the Member States , the Council , Parliament and the Commission are fulfilling the stated objectives about which we are all in agreement , namely the action programme for the single market .
The scoreboard is therefore an administrative tool with a clearly defined political aim , namely to improve the operation of the single market .
By publishing objective information about the performance of the single market , we can help to address the obstacles that still remain before the market is fully completed .
The most striking finding to emerge from the scoreboard concerns the incorporation deficit , in other words the proportion of directives that have not yet been implemented in one or more Member States .
According to the latest figures presented at the Internal Market Council on 7 December , today only 13 % of the directives are not in force throughout the Union , and that must be compared with the much higher proportion of 35 % we had only a year and a half ago , in June 1997 .
In addition , the incorporation of laws in the Member States has greatly improved .
The deficit now ranges around low levels , from 0.7 % in Finland , closely followed by Denmark , Sweden , Spain and the Netherlands , the highest proportion being in Portugal at 5.5 % .
Despite the progress achieved by most Member States , it is clear that not all the remaining directives will have been implemented by the end of 1998 .
There is some urgent catching up to be done .
The Member States must keep up the pace of the last few weeks in relation to the notification of directives implemented at national level .
If this happens , then by the middle of next year , by next June , the single market will at last be able to overcome this major obstacle and will then clearly be able to operate completely and correctly .
The Commission will continue monitoring the situation closely with the single market scoreboard , notwithstanding the imminent lapse of the action programme at the end of the year .
Another positive factor is that there are further new developments in the implementation of the action programme on the single market , in both the legislative and the non-legislative fields .
I should like to stress the Council 's recent publication of the regulation on the operation of the single market in relation to the free movement of goods in the Member States , and the regulation codifying the procedures for state aid .
The European Parliament also rendered its opinion on the Green Paper on patents , making it possible for the Commission to publish a statement before the end of the year .
The action programme also called for an effort to address the weaknesses that exist in some areas : public contracts , mutual recognition , European models , compliance labelling , patents , building materials , the modernisation and more consistent application of value-added tax , and the implementation of the Customs 2000 programme and the measures to reform transit transport .
As you know , a lot of work is being done in those areas .
In some cases , indeed , statements have already been published presenting further programmes for work during the coming years .
In other areas , however , such as digital signatures , copyright in the information society , the residential rules applicable to workers and credit service telesales , discussions are still in progress both in the Council and in Parliament .
In contrast , the failure of the Social Affairs Council to reach agreement about the issue of worker participation means that very little progress has been achieved in relation to the proposed directive on the articles of association of European companies and the related proposals in the area of company law .
There has also been significant progress in improving the administrative and feedback instruments that aim to increase the effectiveness of the single market 's rules .
This includes , for example , speeding up the procedures for intervention by the Commission , the creation of coordination centres in the Member States to speed up problem-solving , the creation of points of contact between companies and citizens in the Member States , and commencement of the dialogue with companies and citizens .
On that point I wish to assure you that we attach great importance to the dialogue with companies .
It is an activity which my colleague Mr Monti and I , working together , will begin in the next few days .
Our aim is to improve the information of companies about the single market , especially small and medium-sized enterprises which do not always have all that is needed to obtain the necessary information .
It is an absolutely user-friendly system , one based on direct contact via the Internet and by telephone .
In fact , the first phase of developing the system will begin in just a few days , next Monday , 21 December .
As a two-way system , it will also provide the possibility of feedback from the companies about the problems they encounter , and I believe that will make a valuable contribution to our efforts to improve the operation of the single market .
Granted that in most but not all cases a great deal of progress has been achieved , which is what the action programme was intended to do , in the Commission 's view the action programme can now be regarded as a complete success .
The single market scoreboard will continue being used to monitor progress towards all the objectives not yet achieved .
Ladies and gentlemen , the action programme for the single market is now in the last few days of its implementation .
We can justifiably claim that in a few weeks the single market will move into the era of the single currency in a much better condition than it was 18 months ago .
However , there is no room for complacency .
The European Commission will draw up a discussion paper in February 1999 to review the situation and present its thoughts about overall strategy for the single market .
The opinion we debated today includes specific proposals about how to address the disadvantages of the single market , which the Commission will be considering in detail over the next few months .
However , other discussions must take place in the coming months , so that a definitive proposal can be submitted in good time for approval by the European Council in Cologne at the conclusion of the German Presidency .
Mr President , let me now express my best wishes to you personally , to the honourable Members , to the interpreters , to the staff of the European Commission , the Council and of course Parliament , for a most enjoyable and happy Christmas and a healthy and prosperous New Year .
Thank you very much , Mr Papoutsis .
Allow me also , on behalf of this Parliament , to offer our best wishes , not only for the festive period but also for the coming year , and to say that we hope that we will continue to work together .
Therefore , best wishes to you and to your family .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , there is one more wish I should like to express on the single market , namely that we continue in future to fight fraud and crime with the same efficiency as we have done to date , and that we set a good example of security in our own European house .
Thank you , Mr President !
Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on the single market scoreboard , but I would nevertheless like to make a few clarifications .
We are still a long way from a perfect single market , without distortions of competition .
In my opinion , it is unacceptable for Member States not to apply the directives that have been adopted , and I do not agree with Mr Berthu when he says that penalties are not necessary .
Penalties are needed for Member States - including my own - who do not apply the directives , as that leads to distortions of competition .
With regard to distortions of competition , I would like to say something about an aspect of the single market that is really not working : I would like to talk about the exclusive contracts for the delivery of certain goods , contracts of which retailers in my country are the victims .
I had addressed a written question ...
( The President asked the speaker to conclude ) One moment , Mr President , be a little flexible , this is very important !
I had addressed a written question to the Commission .
Mr Van Miert , who is Belgian , answered that exclusive contracts , which force retailers from Luxembourg to go through a Belgian general representative who charges commission , are compatible with the single market .
I cannot believe this , as the retailers in Luxembourg are supplied at a higher price than that offered to consumers in nearby areas .
If this is not a distortion of competition , I do not know what is , and I demand that this situation be rectified .
Mr President , if you will allow me to say one more thing , I would like to mention tax harmonisation . I am of the opinion that we do not need across-the-board harmonisation , because in a single market , healthy fiscal competition is also needed .
Look at what happens in the United States or in Switzerland , where the taxes are not the same .
We do not want harmonisation that means standardisation , and we want healthy fiscal competition in the single market .
We do not want VAT to be harmonised along with the euro .
It is antisocial .
I insisted on saying all that because I voted in favour of the report , but as the report contains passages that may imply that I am in favour of harmonisation , which I do not want , I had to make these clarifications .
Thank you , Mr President , for being so considerate .
Of course , I wish you , and all my colleagues , a very happy 1999 , which will definitely not bring the tax harmonisation advocated by Mr Deprez .
This report highlights a problem without really addressing it . The completion of the single European market has turned out to be a far more complex political regulatory task than was envisaged in the original strategy , which essentially relied on the automatic apolitical functioning of the deregulated market forces .
We certainly know now that it will not be possible to find a sustainable solution to this problem without a new beginning in political terms , to provide a basis for an adequate fundamental consensus among the Member States of the EU on social policy and an efficient Community regulatory framework .
The change of government in Germany has made this possible within the EU .
All that has to be done is to seize this opportunity resolutely and not squander it by engaging in disputes over short-term interests .
Mr García-Margallo y Marfil 's report , unfortunately , is still too heavily based on a technocratic damage-limitation mentality to serve as a means of grasping this key political opportunity ; parts of the report even reveal vestiges of the illusions of free-market radicalism regarding the ' self-generation ' of the single market .
That is regrettable .
But nothing in the report is absolutely mistaken either .
For that reason , our group will abstain from voting .
Parliament has now come to the end of its agenda .
Adjournment of the session
Ladies and gentlemen , this is , in fact , the last sitting of the year and also the last day of this part-session .
It should therefore be said that , despite all the difficulties - as we think we know which way the wind is blowing - we have used this year well : we have worked from day to day , patiently , like good craftsmen , and I think that , overall , we can be pleased with ourselves .
It should also be said that this week , ladies and gentlemen , has been one of hard work and great responsibilities : hard work both for you and for those working with us .
At the end of this week , when greetings of peace are being offered , we unfortunately have to think of them more as a wish than as a reality . It is wish that we want to promote .
We also want to promote - and this week has been very significant in this respect - complete respect for human rights , and we demand , as our President said , the release of all political prisoners who defend their ideas in a peaceful manner .
I think that these are statements that enable us not to end one year , but to start work for the next year .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me - as I do every Friday in Strasbourg - to express today , in particular , our thanks to all those who work with us .
Allow me to mention each of them . I would firstly like to thank the ushers , our ushers , who are pleasant and discreet , and whose presence is scarcely noticeable but very effective .
I would also like to thank our interpreters , the friendly voices that we almost recognize .
We often do not put a face to them , but we do identify these friendly voices that help us so much .
I would thank , too , the translators , whom we have mentioned many times , and also , ladies and gentlemen , those that day after day put together the ' Rainbow ' , as well as those that rigorously and efficiently draw up the reports on the daily sittings .
I have left until last the staff that help us during the sitting , the staff , headed up by Mr Rømer , who , as I have said so many times , prevent many mistakes that we would otherwise make on top of those that we already make .
However , ladies and gentlemen , this sitting has another characteristic , of which you will be aware : it is the last sitting of this legislature before Christmas and the New Year , and these members of staff also represent a certain degree of continuity for the future .
Political continuity is embodied in Parliament , and this will be represented by those that remain in Parliament and those that will arrive .
However , continuity involves daily work and these staff members provide a certain amount of assurance for those of us that are leaving that this will be carried on .
I would therefore like to offer them a special word of thanks .
And to you , la