Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 24 April 1997 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , I rise under Rule 3 .
I regret to have to raise a matter concerning the immunities of this House and a serious contravention of Article 9 of the European Convention for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Article 9 relates to religious freedom .
Last week a Belgian Government Commission presented a report to its Parliament on the question of religious sects and various cults .
In a particularly lurid and ill-informed chapter on the Pentecostal movement , reference was made to the Christian fellowship active within this Parliament in Brussels .
The reference was clearly intended to place that fellowship within a pejorative context .
The Christian fellowship referred to is apparently a group run by my own research assistant in Brussels .
It only meets on parliamentary premises .
It is ecumenical rather than pentecostal , although Pentecostalists would be welcome .
Research assistants who are Baptists , Catholics and members of other denominations regularly take part in its meetings .
It meets weekly in my office in the Belliard building , or a room booked in my name , and includes the assistants of Members from political groups other than the PSE , such as the PPE and the EDN .
It normally meets in my absence but I accept full responsibility for its activities .
I am now astounded that the religious practice of my research assistant and his friends in my office has apparently been subject to surveillance by the Belgian State .
The Belgian Government has not given me , as the Member responsible , any opportunity to hear or respond to any of the charges implied in its report .
I have no idea precisely what information is being collected , who authorized its collection or how it is subsequently being stored .
I would ask you to seek from the Belgian Government an undertaking that citizens of the European Union , including research assistants of Members of this Parliament , will be free to exercise their religious beliefs free from surveillance , harassment and defamation .
Mr Hallam , the best thing for you to do is to write to the Speaker of the Belgian parliament , asking exactly what has happened .
As we all know , the European Parliament 's buildings enjoy extra-territorial status and as such cannot be subjected to any form of surveillance .
I must recall that in principle I support the right of any parliament to take an interest in matters affecting European citizens .
I also defend the European Parliament 's rights , but I must also respect others ' rights .
That is why in this case the wisest thing is to ask the Belgian Parliament directly .
Mr President , on 24 April a lorry from Murcia driven by Mr Antonio Antolinos was attacked in France , between Marseille and Avignon , while the French police looked on without intervening and even encouraging .
I should like to express the indignation that this attack occasioned and the need to tell the French authorities that they are obliged to respect the freedom of circulation of goods and persons .
When there are problems or differences in respect of the common agricultural policy , they must be resolved in Brussels or here , not by attacking workers or goods from other Member States .
Mr Marset , you know that the European Parliament is not the Community institution with responsibility for this nor does its President have responsibility .
It is for the Commission to ensure the implementation of Community law. it is also for the Petitions Committee of this Parliament to deal with this matter and to urge the Commission to take action .
Mr President , I have to return again to the difficulties which Members experienced in getting here to Strasbourg for this plenary session .
This morning , for some unaccountable reason , for the flight by Air Inter from Heathrow to Strasbourg , a plane inadequate to take more than about two-thirds of the people booked , was put on .
As a result there were tremendous problems and one or two Members of this Parliament were unable to secure a place .
This is totally unacceptable .
Whatever the reasons were , it ought to have been put right .
The ground staff at Heathrow were very apologetic but somebody clearly did not realise the importance of ensuring that a plane was available to bring all the Members and other people to Strasbourg .
I would ask , Mr President , if we could do something .
It ought not to be necessary really but given the inefficiency of some of the airlines it might help .
Could Parliament remind the airlines that the flights on the Monday morning of the Strasbourg session will need to take a large number of Members of this Parliament , not just from Heathrow but from other places as well .
This would ensure that they do not forget this and substitute some inadequate plane that is unable to take everybody .
We have had problems of this sort in the past and managed through pressure to get some improvement .
I can remember the time when we were taken back to Heathrow via Dublin .
Dublin is very nice but it is not the right way to go .
Mr Elliot , the Secretary-General will remind the airline of this . Of course , every time I meet the French authorities , I also remind them of difficulties involved in getting to Strasbourg .
Mr President , the European Parliament , this House , has announced that calls for tender are to be invited for furnishings for the bars and restaurant of the Leopold building in Brussels .
In the Netherlands this was announced in a leading daily newspaper .
A Dutch company subsequently indicated to the Bureau in Luxembourg that it was interested in bidding and would like to receive the documents .
A fax was sent on 11 April but there was no reply .
On 16 April another fax was sent . Again no reply .
Finally a letter arrived , in French .
The company then telephoned to ask if this letter and the document were available in English .
The conversation with the Bureau in Luxembourg was conducted entirely in French and although there was a Dutchman close by he was not prepared to come to the phone .
The company was thus obliged to make do with documentation in French only .
This is now being translated by an agency .
But the copies are so poor that the translation agency cannot read them .
Consequently the company in question is not able to bid .
I ask myself , Mr President , is this really an open procedure or is it one in which the choice has already been made in advance and everyone is just going through the motions ?
Is this an example of an open procedure with transparency and equal opportunities for European firms ?
It is the European Parliament we are talking about here , and I think the European Parliament should set a good example .
How , Mr President , is the man in the street to take us seriously if we do not treat our own people and our own companies seriously ?
There is now to be a visit on 20 May to the site for those intending to bid .
Will that tour be conducted only in French as well ?
Or perhaps in another language ?
There are complaints amongst small businesses , the driving force behind jobs in the Union , that European tendering procedures are not efficient .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , these questions should be addressed in writing to the Bureau for a useful reply .
I cannot answer you off the cuff .
The services concerned will study this matter and I shall then give you a full answer as soon as I can .
If our Secretary-General is going to raise the question of travel to and from Strasbourg , I too have a complaint about the train service from Brussels to Strasbourg .
Normally it has an excellent restaurant car .
That makes it very attractive to take this train .
Here too no provision is made for MEPs .
Will you ask the Belgian railways no to discourage people from using public transport by constantly downgrading the service ?
I gather from my colleagues that we have a broad base of support in the House for urging Belgian railways to preserve their present standard of service .
Very well .
We shall take note , Mrs Eisma .
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents , pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Sittings of 12 to 16 May 1997 at Strasbourg
Monday :
The EPP Group is asking for referral to committee of the report by Brendan Donnelly - on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure - on amendment of Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure concerning split voting ( A4-0089 / 97 ) .
I give Mrs Oomen-Ruijten the floor to move the request for referral back to committee of this report .
Mr President , the EPP Group is totally in favour of amending the Rules of Procedure to make voting time shorted by no longer holding split votes .
We fully endorse that objective .
But the overwhelming majority of our group believes that if we approve this report it will mean a huge increase in the number of amendments so that in fact we do not achieve our objective .
This is why we are asking the House , through you , to refer Mr Donnelly 's report back to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure for reconsideration and to see if abandoning split votes will enable us to cope with the large number of amendments which we expect to be seeing .
Mr President , I have taken note of the request by the EPP Group to refer the Donnelly report back to the committee .
As far as I know the Socialist Group is not against that referral , but i should like to ask the EPP something : could we not hold the debate and then send it to committee before the vote ?
That would give our Assembly the opportunity to give its guidelines and opinions .
The donnelly report has not been amended by our colleagues .
I therefore propose holding the debate and then , if our colleagues agree , refer it back to committee prior to voting .
Mr President , I think we are happy to agree to the suggestion of the chairman of the Rules of Procedure Committee and so withdraw our request , but we should agree to refer the report back before the vote to take another look at its implications .
I remind the EPP Group that it will have to make its request again , after the debate , for agreement .
Tuesday :
The EPP Group is requesting that the Mosiek-Urbain report - on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights - on the supplementary supervision of insurance undertakings in an insurance group ( A4-0157 / 97 ) be referred back to committee .
I give Mrs Mosiek-Urban the floor to move the request .
Mr President , may I once again emphasize the importance of this request by my Group .
When it was voted on in the Legal Affairs Committee there was consensus on many individual points .
But in the final vote it failed to achieve a majority .
This report deals with a very complicated technical subject .
The absence of any amendments to this report indicates the large measure of agreement amongst various political groupings that the best and most appropriate course of action is to refer it back .
I thus urge the House to approve that request .
( Parliament approved the request for referral )
Wednesday :
The Green Group has requested the withdrawal of the Titley report - on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy - on the challenges facing the European defence-related industries : a contribution for action at European level ( A4-0076 / 97 ) .
Mr Telkämper has the floor to move the request .
I believe we should debate this Titley report briefly today .
First of all I must compliment Mr Titley and the British Labour Party on their election victory .
My warmest congratulations on that .
But Mr Titley is trying to rush things with this report of his .
It represents a qualitative change in EU foreign policy .
We have not been able to discuss this change sufficiently in the groups , at least not in certain groups , and in particular there has not been enough discussion in committee .
The committee vote was 31 to 30 , though a colleague told me he did not know what he was voting for or , with the wisdom of hindsight , he would have voted differently .
The question , in view of 240 proposed amendments , is whether we ought to vote now at all ?
This report is not entirely complete , and positions on its are not yet clear .
If my information is correct , the Socialist Group will not be discussing the amendments until tomorrow evening .
In our Group , as in the committee , we have not yet reached agreement .
The common foreign and security policy is on the agenda for Maastricht .
Mr Henderson as the British representative is now saying things quite different from what the British representative said a month ago .
We should postpone this report for a month or two until we have the results of Maastricht II and Parliament has formed an opinion on these matters which is soundly based and has been thoroughly debated .
This is why we put down this request .
I give Mr Titley the floor to reply to Mr Telkämper .
Mr President , I am not sure which report Mr Telkämper is speaking about .
There are only 36 amendments to my report , and most of them have been tabled by the Green Group in any case .
Secondly , my report does not deal with the foreign and security policy architecture - that is left to Mr Tindemans ' report , which we are discussing .
Thirdly , this was going to be on the agenda in April but was put back to May in order to allow the groups to set out their positions .
So all the matters which Mr Telkämper has spoken about have already been dealt with .
We have delayed it in order to get this description .
There are not many amendments and I can see no reason at all for delaying any further this report .
( Parliament rejected the request for withdrawal )
The Green group has requested the addition to the agenda of Council and Commission statements on progress in the work of the IGC .
May I remind the House that the Council requested that these statements not be kept on the agenda and the Conference of Presidents agreed unanimously to that request . It was difficult to obtain sufficiently detailed information , given the current situation of the Conference , but that obviously does not deny the Green Group the right to move another request on this issue .
I give Mrs Aelvoet the floor to move the request .
Mr President , it is true that Parliament as a whole originally asked for a debate this week on progress at the Intergovernmental Conference .
All of us here in the chamber know that the proposals put forward by both the Irish and Dutch presidencies , to the extent that they are known , are light years away from what the majority of Parliament defined some months ago as the bottom line .
There is thus every reason for Parliament to send a clear message about what has to be done .
Last week in the Conference of Presidents it was said that essentially the Council thought that a debate , a statement by the Council , would be untimely in view of the forthcoming elections in France .
Well , we know full well that the French elections will hinge on European issues , so how can a debate in this House , reviewing the progress achieved , saying what else can be improved and what absolutely must be improved , be detrimental to the elections in France ?
That really is turning things topsy-turvy .
We think it is intolerable that Parliament should not hold a debate when it needs to , and putting it off to June is too late .
We thus insist on a political assessment of the position to date and we want a debate now .
Mr President , as you pointed out , there was , I believe , unanimity in the Conference of Presidents that this item would not be debated this week but at the Brussels plenary following the special European Council on 23 May .
And if I recall correctly , we shall have a statement from the Council in Brussels on 29 May , after the special European summit , and it will be much better for us to debate it then than this week .
We can then have a properly informed debate based on what has been discussed at the special European Council .
The Conference of Presidents thought it far more sensible , intelligent and politically expedient to do this on 29 May in Brussels .
( Parliament rejected the request for inclusion )
Thursday and Friday ( no change )
Sittings of 28 and 29 May 1997 in Brussels
( no change )
Legal protection for encrypted services
The next item is the report ( A4-0119 / 97 ) by Mr Anastassopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission Green Paper : Legal protection for encrypted services in the internal market - Consultation on the need for Community action .
Mr President , if in the information society still more commercial services which are also offered to a selected public , piracy will also spread .
On behalf of the Economic Affairs Committee I entirely agree with the rapporteur that some kind of regulation is needed .
It is of course possible to try to prevent piracy by technical means , but I suspect that this will end in a race which the pirates will win .
I proposed in the Committee on Economic Affairs that the regulation will be needed , not merely a directive , because this would undoubtedly be an effective means of regulation to put into practice .
I do , however , understand the rapporteur 's point of view when he says that this is a very courageous idea . It will not be very easy to get it accepted in the Member States .
For that reason I too can say that a directive of this kind providing a minimum set of rules is now the least which is needed .
This issue also raises very difficult questions relating to the compensation and sanctions to be laid down for uses not complying with the cancellation arrangements .
This can of course lead to provisions of criminal law , but in view of the fact that the Member States are rather unwilling to harmonize criminal law , compensation under private law could also of course be used .
But before we take the step of introducing such legislation , I think it is essential that we answer the questions raised by the Environment Committee , which were put to us a moment ago .
The Environment Committee wishes to know how the prevention of the use of encrypted services would lead , for example , to their being cut off .
We are talking about an awareness industry , and this is by no means a small matter .
I think that the Commission has perhaps not quite answered these questions satisfactorily .
Mr President , the Anastassopoulos report was approved unanimously in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
It is a first report referring to a consultation on the Commission Green Paper on the legal protection of encrypted services in the internal market and it is just part of a whole set of legal regulations worked out by the European Community on the protection of telecommunications and the media in general .
I believe that we are dealing with a new right . It is a new right in that the European Community is at present playing a vanguard role .
I must congratulate the Commission on the pioneering work which it is carrying out in this area and hope that the Commission appreciates how much the European Parliament is working with it at every stage of this process .
At the moment we are at a stage of offering legal protection to this type of situation .
The problem is that legal protection , especially criminal legal protection , is a national competence .
Since it is a national competence , if we opt for Community regulations , that would presuppose involving the Commission in an area where so far it has been fairly limited in its activity . Therefore I think that the rapporteur 's recommendations that we opt for a directive seem far more appropriate .
I think it is important to determine the exact form for this type of law - as has already been done jointly by the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council in Community provisions .
For example , Directive 93 / 83 on the Protection of Intellectual Property in Relation to Cable Television and Satellite Television was a milestone in this matter - but we must remember that four years have gone by since that directive was adopted and no serious difficulties in its application have so far been detected .
Recently , the European Parliament and the Council , with the efficient cooperation of the Commission , have reached agreement on revising the Directive on Television without Frontiers and , at the same time , Directive 95 / 45 on Rules for Broadcasting Signals which is also being applied .
I really believe that all of these legal rules are a completely new approach ; that the European Parliament supports the Commission 's initiative ; that the European Parliament is calling on the Commission to keep taking this approach which , in practical terms in this case , means that the right way is to opt for directives rather than regulations .
Mr President , I am happy to say that this is a report which the Legal Affairs Committee approved unanimously .
The rapporteur has made all the points concerning protection for encrypted services very clearly , notably the fact that piracy in all its known forms is flourishing .
Non-approved decoders are being manufactured , marketed , bought , installed and above all , used .
Furthermore , piracy-related services are being offered .
These services are being advertised and their purpose is to circumvent existing safeguards .
Piracy is a cross-border phenomenon and it also infringes the intellectual property laws .
The Green Paper addresses only the aspect of unauthorized reception of encrypted services .
Analysis of the legal position in the 15 Member States shows how fragmented Europe is as a legal area .
Some countries have legislated specially for this subject , whilst others base themselves on earlier existing laws , and others again have no protection at all .
The inference is obvious : we need harmonization , as the rapporteur himself concludes .
The question is , do we need a directive or do we need a regulation ?
The reporter - and the Legal Affairs Committee agrees with him - advocates a directive , because the Member States can apply that more flexibly .
And , as he himself admits , a greater degree of consensus would be needed for a regulation .
In this context I would remind the House of the Slim report , approved recently , in which Parliament once again complains that too much ' soft law ' is being enacted .
Consistency would thus suggest that we had a regulation here too .
In any event it is no doubt more realistic - at least unless we decide differently after evaluating the open debate on the Green Paper - to go for a directive to begin with .
Abandoning attempts at harmonization on the grounds that piracy would quickly get round any rules because of the rapid pace of technological development would be tantamount to an admission of powerlessness .
On the contrary , this argument must be a pressing reason to get legal safeguards put in place as fast as possible .
Mr President , I shall make just two points .
It is essential to counter piracy and the pirate industry but it is not just the rights of operators which must be safeguarded .
The consumer interest must also be upheld and this lies in the price and quality of the services offered .
A well-regulated and liberalized market of the kind we want must benefit the user , so that everyone is able to obtain information , even if they have to pay for it , because the right to information must not remain a privilege of the elite .
A second point is that we must take care to ensure that European measures against piracy do not simply move the problem elsewhere .
The problem of piracy is indeed an international one , so initiatives are needed at international level .
Lastly , this is not just a matter for WIPO ; it is an important reason to hold further negotiations in the World Trade Organization .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Anastassopoulos .
As you know the Green Paper was presented by the Commission in March 1996 .
The findings of the consultation confirm the need for a Community legal instrument and the Commission observes with satisfaction that the European Parliament shares its point of view .
Over these months the Green Paper has been discussed in depth by four European Parliament committees , the quality of whose work is well reflected in the wide-ranging report presented by Mr Anastassopoulos .
As for the approach to be taken in following up the Green Paper , the Commission shares the opinion expressed in the draft report that the most appropriate legal instrument would be a directive .
The Commission has already made a clear promise on the principle of making a legislative proposal in the 1997 work programme , presented by President Santer at the plenary session of October 1996 .
Following the approval of the report by the European Parliament , and bearing in mind the positive outcome of the consultation , the Commission is now ready to present a proposal which should satisfy the legitimate expectations raised by the Green Paper .
Finally I should like to thank you for your very clear support and repeat the Commission 's promise in its respect .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Application of the subsidiarity principle
The next item is the report ( A4-0155 / 97 ) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission reports to the u Council :
on the application of the subsidiarity principle 1994 ( COM ( 94 ) 0533 - C4-0215 / 95 ) , -entitled ' Better Law-making ' - on the application of the subsidiarity and proportionality principles , on simplification and on consolidation - 1995 ( CSE ( 95 ) 0580 - C4-0561 / 95 ) , -entitled ' Better Law-making ' - on the application of the subsidiarity and proportionality principles , on simplification and on consolidation - 1996 ( CSE ( 96 ) 0007 - C4-0015 / 97 ) and-on the interim report on the application of the subsidiarity and proportionality principles ( CSE ( 96 ) 0002 - C4-0355 / 96 )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the documents to which this report refers come , formally , at least , within the framework of the order received by the European Commission from the European Councils held in Birmingham and Edinburgh in 1992 to establish every year a report aimed at the European Parliament and the Council on application of the subsidiarity principle .
On this score , we should first of all highlight the difference between the 1994 report and the later one . What stands out from the 1994 report is its classical methodological approach , which makes it possible to appreciate the foundation of Community measures vis-à-vis those for which , on the contrary , the Commission has no legitimacy to take , because the criteria of Article 3B are not met .
The 1994 report also underlines quite clearly the problems which the application of the subsidiarity principle came across in practice : in particular , the Commission explains how the attitude of the Member States vis-à-vis the analysis of subsidiarity often responds to questions which have little or nothing to do with Article 3B . It is also worth pointing out the accurate analysis of the difficulty inherent in the lack of a clear line distinguishing exclusively Community competencies from shared competencies .
As for the other reports , the 1995 and 1996 reports , references to subsidiarity , proportionality , simplification and consolidation , under the generic label of ' Better law-making ' , reveal the different approach and perspective taken by the Commission .
I must openly confess that , despite a careful reading , I have been unable to draw a clear conclusion on the application of the subsidiarity principle over this period .
On the contrary , the continuous reference to different initiatives ( Molitor and Slim , to quote only two ) , the confusion of legal principles and technical principles and the welter of rhetorical declarations , paradoxically produce the situation where we are faced with an institution which has lost any real impetus , which is on the defensive and which is only using these reports on subsidiarity , not to explain how it exercises its responsibilities , but as an opportunity to attempt to justify what it does as a whole .
The reports being presented to the plenary session received the unanimous support of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , in that it has very much taken into account the focus of discussions in the Intergovernmental Conference and , in particular , the protocol currently being worked out by the Dutch Presidency , and it is focused on the following considerations : first of all , the subsidiarity principle , which has as its aim the notion that certain decisions should be adopted as closely as possible to the citizens themselves , and this undoubtedly has a clear political dimension .
However , the inclusion of the principle in the Treaties gives it an important legal weight of constitutional import , and regulates the definition and execution of Community actions in accordance with competencies attributed by the Member States without affecting in absolute terms the division of powers within the Member States themselves .
The Community after all is based on the explicit share-out of power .
However , it is incumbent on the institutions of the European Union to take all of the necessary action to carry out the mission , achieve the objectives and execute the obligations which the Treaties impose upon them .
This has been the Assembly 's doctrine since the reports by Giscard d 'Estaing and Martin , and the resolution abides by that .
Secondly , the subsidiarity principle is active on two fronts : when the Commission plans to take an initiative which goes beyond the exclusive competencies of the European Community , it must demonstrate the legitimacy of its action by explaining , in particular , that the matter has a Community dimension , that it must be taken , that it would add to the efficiency of Community action in general , compared with the action of Member States individually .
This is undoubtedly the corollary of the subsidiarity principle , because we must also insist on the fact that applying the subsidiarity principle cannot stand in the way of the legitimate exercise by the Community of the shared powers which have been allocated to it by the Treaties . Perhaps we should even call into question areas of activity in which the Community has exclusive power .
To put it another way : application in accordance with the Treaties of the principle of subsidiarity may in no way be translated into a weakening of Community law or an undermining of the acquis communautaire .
By the same token , the resolution which we are proposing expresses concern that , over the period under examination , 1994 to 1996 , subsidiarity has often been referred to in order to block the development of initiatives taken in the framework of new policies , in particular in the sectors of culture , the audiovisual industry , energy or research , to mention only a few .
The third axis of the report is to ' act less in order to act better ' , to use the slogan of the Commission which we share and applaud .
However , nonetheless , we are concerned at the profusion of preparatory documents in 1996 , to mention that year alone : thirteen green papers , two white papers , plus countless reports , communications and action programmes .
We can only fear that this investment in time and resources by the Commission might be to the detriment of legislative activity , in which it holds the monopoly of initiative .
This seems to consolidate the Commission trend to present , when more ambitious initiatives fail and / or as a consequence of the Council 's policies , framework directives and codes of conduct .
It is therefore the responsibility of the European Parliament to denounce the risk of creating in this way , in some cases , a more uncertain type of law , a less secure type , so-called ' soft law ' - which is less binding and which can be translated into a sham harmonisation and an uncertain transposition into national laws and regulations .
Finally we should also recognise the influence of the situation which - let us be quite clear - can bring about a use which is contrary to the Treaty of the subsidiarity principle , in the lack of progress over the period 1994 to 1996 in vital aspects of the internal market .
Finally , we should refer to the confusion of legal principles with criteria of good legislative practice .
We denounce the fact that the Commission , as has been made quite clear , has felt it appropriate to extend its latest reports on subsidiarity , entitled ' Better law-making ' , to measures already planned for in the areas of simplifying and consolidating Community law . The resolution which we are proposing highlights the confusion which arises from this decision and insists on the vital difference between simplification and consolidation - and clarity as a natural corollary of both of these principles , which are criteria of good legislative practice vis-à-vis the legal nature of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
I conclude , Mr President , Commissioner : monitoring by the European Parliament of respect of subsidiarity in both of its aspects , ie not to do as well as to do , when it is necessary , and exercise by the European Parliament of the analysis of subsidiarity in various Community acts on which it has to give its opinion , should be maintained and even intensified .
To paraphrase the introduction to the 1995 report , as rapporteur , I doubt whether in reality this report , ' Better law-making ' , demonstrates - and I quote - that ' the Commission performs the task incumbent on it ' .
Where I have no doubt however , is that this is a shared responsibility - and I quote again - ' with the other institutions of the European Union and the Member States ' .
Commissioner , Mr President , the European Parliament is aware of its responsibility and will exercise it on behalf of the people it represents .
Mr President , Commissioner , subsidiarity and proportionality are binding rules of a constitutional nature which regulate the exercise of competencies shared between the Community and the Member States .
These rules may in no way represent an obstacle to the development of the internal market nor call into question in any case the acquis communautaire .
A distinction must be made between the legal principles of subsidiarity and proportionality on one hand and simplification and consolidation on the other .
The former referred to the effectiveness of management and the latter to the techniques of transparency .
Both these spheres are complementary but in no case may they be confused .
That is why it is incorrect to extend these principles to the techniques of simplification .
First of all we must assess the need to take action and , after that , actually take action .
The Commission 's proposed slogan ' Act less to act better ' implies the need to take action and , consequently , the need to know how to act .
Is the effectiveness of Community management compatible with working out and producing rules and documents preparing for legislation in the general or institutional framework ?
The rapporteur hit the nail on the head and quite rightly referred to this very serious problem .
These actions pose a double risk : first of all , they could lead to a situation where the general public is inundated with paper , documents , acts , only adding to the bewilderment which currently exists and , secondly , could actually be detrimental to legal security .
How do these acts become part of the European Union 's regulatory system ?
Throughout the Intergovernmental Conference there has been an analysis of the way in which the institutions operate and the balance struck between the different powers of the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .
That is why we must prevent the European Parliament from giving into three temptations : using subsidiarity to renationalise the exclusive competencies of the Community ; to use codes of conduct and agreements to neutralise proportionality ; to approve Community consolidation in order to introduce substantial changes to the text and if possible modify the legal bases .
The European Parliament must exercise a supervisory role over these temptations .
The work carried out by the rapporteur has been extraordinary in dealing with an especially difficult and complicated report . Her work is not only enhanced by the talents that she has demonstrated in parliamentary negotiations , but also because she has drafted a report which is a model of simplicity and clarity .
Madam President , if we look at the statistics in the report the situation looks good but as the rapporteur has stated this is not the whole truth .
There have been fewer legislative initiatives but instead the Commission has introduced control through other initiatives .
It is not certain that this procedure increases subsidiarity .
The new procedure also shifts the balance of power between the institutions .
When we are considering subsidiarity I think that we should also look at individual regulations in every draft law ; this , I think , is the spirit of the Treaty .
Is this particular regulation really useful or necessary at EU level ?
Our present work does not include such investigationeither into draft laws or in the House .
Here it is often individual interests which win the day , something about which our group is concerned .
Secondly , I share the rapporteur 's concern over the reports which we are discussing today .
I do not think that history will show them to have contributed a great deal to promoting subsidiarity .
It is my opinion that we must give more vigour into the debates on the principle of subsidiarity .
We can do this by including regulations and sections on subsidiarity in the Commission 's legislative programme .
We also need better investigations into specific draft laws on subsidiarity .
Despite a directive from the Commission 's leaders , investigation into specific draft laws leave much to be desired .
But the real problem lies with those regulations , the individual implementation statutes , which are at a lower level than parliamentary and Council decisions and where there is a lot of scope for improvement .
I recommend that the Commission adopts a time limit which means that any regulation which is not renewed within five years expires and no longer exists .
This would reduce the level of bureaucracy and increase people 's faith in the Union .
Madam President , all of us sitting here share a desire to work towards increased democracy , particularly at local level , as close to the people as possible .
That is why we are here .
The principle of subsidiarity ought to be the tool for carrying out this work as it was intended .
Unfortunately , however , it is not working at present .
As the rapporteur has stated , subsidiarity is clearly one of the fundamental standards within the EU .
What is less clear is how it is applied , how it ought to be applied and how it will be applied in the future .
The way the Commission has started to introduce another legal principle , the principle of proportionality , and issues concerning the technical level of legislation etc. into their reporting on the application of the subsidiarity principle does not make the situation any clearer at all .
One thing which must be clarified is the basis and the criteria to use for determining when an issue is to be regulated at Community level and when it can and must be dealt with at National level in accordance with the principle of proximity and as close to those involved as possible .
If the principle of subsidiarity is only applied to the so called ' softer issues ' , such as environmental issues and consumer protection , we could begin to suspect that this is not a case of respecting subsidiarity but misusing it instead .
If we wish to permit better and tighter environmental regulations for example , it is possible to decide that tighter national safeguards will be allowed .
It is also possible to use Article 100a , where values other than the purely financial are respected alongside the internal market .
The people 's attitude to and confidence in the EU and in democracy in general depends closely on well run local and national democracy and a principle of subsidiarity which works .
So we hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will tackle the issue and finally give the principle of subsidiarity a proper footing and real substance .
Madam President , first of all I wish to express our support for the work carried out by Mrs Palacio because we can also conclude from it that the correct application of the subsidiarity principle should mean bringing European citizens closer to the decision-making process in initiatives leading to the development and consolidation of the European Union .
Along these lines , Madam President , our attention is drawn in particular to the lack of references to the important role to be played by regional powers and , above all , those which have legislative powers .
The encyclical Quadragesimo Anno refers to the injustice of taking away from minor communities what they can do for themselves .
In that we are doing away with the sensation among our fellow citizens of the so-often criticised centralisation of Community institutions and succeeding in establishing appropriate channels so that they can be given appropriate and necessary information - showing them that their problems directly affect the various Union institutions , we shall reach the situation in which we strike the necessary and fair balance in applying the principle of subsidiarity .
It is our responsibility as members of the European Parliament to make sure that the Commission , when it considers it appropriate to put the subsidiarity principle into practice , assesses its own effectiveness in Community terms and its positive effects on sectors which are important for ordinary citizens , such as employment .
These are areas in which regional authorities must assume dominant positions because they are much closer to the people being administered .
It would also be a good solution , a good way of achieving these aims , to strengthen the legislative powers of the European Parliament since , as the most directly representative institution for the ordinary people , it would then be given a greater role in the application of the principle of subsidiarity , increasing its relations with the ordinary people as well as internal democracy in the Community institutions .
Madam President , ' Europe must do less to do better ' .
This was a slogan adopted by the European Commission at the beginning of last year , with the aim of reducing the number of legislative proposals and improving their quality .
Looking at the Commission documents on today 's agenda , the Commission has taken that to heart .
We welcome it .
The number of legislative proposals is significantly down on previous years .
Clearly the subsidiarity principle does more to help that than is generally realized .
This is borne out by the fact that the Commission withdrew 48 legislative proposals in the period 1994-1995 .
In the Palacio report we read that the subsidiarity principle is a legally binding rule and to some degree a warning is given that it must not undermine the powers which the Community has been given by the Treaties .
And I believe there is no danger of that .
Experience shows us that it is more the other way round , with the subsidiarity principle still not being fully enforced .
The reasons for this is that the principle is not a purely legal concept , but includes political and economic aspects too .
When applying the principle it is difficult to distinguish between these aspects .
As a result , use of the principle is determined partly by the vision people have of aspirations for European unity .
Those in favour of a United Europe see the application of this principle as part of this political objective .
But in so doing they forget that the Union is a cooperative association of sovereign states .
That means that the authority of the Member States comes first and that of our supranational institutions comes second .
It must also be borne in mind that the subsidiarity principle , as interpreted at the Edinburgh summit , is emphatically designed to resist centralization and keep the decision-making process as close as possible to the people .
I thus cannot endorse those paragraphs in the Palacio report which say that the subsidiarity principle is wrongly invoked as a way of opposing European measures in the areas of culture , audiovisual services , health , employment and so on .
These policy areas are , after all , mainly a matter for the Member States
In addition to cutting down on legislation , the Commission also stresses in its reports the need to simplify and improve legislation .
We should give our approval to this too .
With an eye to proportionality , the amount of legislation and its degree of detail should be kept as small as possible .
But this effort must not be confused with the legal framework of the subsidiarity principle .
Mrs Palacio rightly makes that point in her report .
But these measures to simplify things are no less important if the European legislative process is to work well .
The widening gulf between European administration and the citizens of our Member States means there is every reason to limit the Union 's remit and resist centralization and bureaucracy .
This need will be all the more pressing with further enlargement of the Union and increasing diversity among Member States .
The Irish presidency 's proposal to add a protocol to the Treaty setting out the operation of the subsidiarity principle is a good idea .
But I am sure that enlargement will force us to reduce still further the responsibilities which the Union discharges at present and to allow the Member States more freedom .
Madam President , it is perhaps helpful to remember , first of all , that Article 3b on the subsidiarity principle did not appear in the Maastricht Treaty out of nowhere . It came in response to a legitimate concern on the part of a lot of people in the European Union .
Those people are very worried about what they perceive as ever-increasing meddling by Europe .
Not to beat about the bush : no sensible person objects even to far-reaching forms of co-operation and debate at European level , but more and more sensible people are wondering about certain manifestations of over-harmonization , excessive European interference in regional or national matters .
I think the imposition of the so-called ' European electoral law ' for local elections is a typical example of this - though regrettably not the only one .
The Maastricht Treaty brought a sensitive extension to powers at Union level , among other things in the form of ' new policy measures ' .
But the counterbalance to this expansion of powers , the express inclusion of the subsidiarity principle in the Treaties by Article 3b now seems set to become a dead letter .
Proper application of subsidiarity means that normally the so-called ' lower echelons ' consider which powers they wish to abrogate to the higher echelon .
But this report shows once again that precisely the opposite approach is being followed in Europe : in the best case , the European authority is asked to think about which powers it perhaps does not want to have ; and in the event of a conflict of powers another European institution - the Court of Justice - will decide .
All that seems to me a politically perverse reversal of the subsidiarity principle .
In conclusion I would also say that this debate would really be unnecessary if everyone respected the fact that the European Union is not some kind of embryo federal state , but an ' association of states ' , as the ruling of the Karlsruhe Court , the famous ruling by the German Constitutional Court , made plain .
That is the nub of the matter .
As long as a majority in Parliament - I say Parliament because I have the feeling there is some improvement in the Commission - clearly refuses to acknowledge this reality that we are an ' association of states ' , to my mind debates like this one have little point .
Madam President , I should like to begin by saying that in our view the principles of subsidiarity model and characterise the decision-making process of the Community 's institutions . Consequently these are constitutional principles , binding on the respective partners and of very great importance for the construction and integration of Community institutions .
From our point of view , at this stage this institution - which we regard as constitutional - must , above all , provide a framework for the balance of powers , between the Community and the Member States whose powers should be maintained , at the present stage , in the intergovernmental sphere .
We feel that the principle enshrined in Article 3B of the Treaty on European Union should not be altered in any way , worked upon or deepened in the negotiations being carried out at the IGC .
We feel that what is at stake is verifying in what terms and in what way the principle is used by Community institutions .
The Commission , on this score , in its most recent report , adopted a fundamental rule according to which it would act less in order to act better .
We fully go along with this fundamental rule .
However , it should also be pointed out that , from our point of view , we really must decide what the vital content of the principle of subsidiarity is .
There should be criteria such as the need and efficiency to determine cases and conditions in which the Commission must , when it shares powers , take action which are proven to be appropriate in order make progress towards aims which must have been common ones .
The definition of what should be seen as a common objective should in our view be worked out on the basis of the principle of proportionality which is also enshrined in the last part of the same constituent precept . Therefore we would say that subsidiarity and proportionality are concepts which are interlinked and complementary .
All measures consequently should be made dependent on objectives of common interest to be pursued by Community institutions .
There are areas such as the environment and the fight against fraud which should however be subordinated to the subsidiarity principle .
To give a few examples in the area of fighting tax fraud , agreements on mutual administrative assistance , agreements on transfer prices , directives on mergers and splits , directives on the payment of dividends , common rules , also , on simultaneous verification schemes or coming under the definition of what should be understood by common action subordinated to the principle of proportionality and worked out in agreement with the criteria which I referred to a little while ago , namely necessity and efficiency .
Another important point to be included in this matter is a discussion about the role of national parliaments in the process of working out decisions coming under the principle of subsidiarity .
We feel that the national parliaments should play an important role in the stage leading up to a decision and also in later stages , through the respective political control and supervision of the way in which actions are carried out in compliance with the principle of subsidiarity .
Finally , in respect of the possible replacement of current legislative forms by what is designated by the Commission as something permanent , we feel that this process should be limited to the adoption of consultation procedures and discussions before any decision is taken . This should not be regarded as a regulatory decision .
In our point of view it should continue to be regulated by regulatory forms and , by the same token , bound by the respective targets of those rules .
Mr President , the principle of subsidiarity has become like apple pie .
Everyone is in favour of it but everyone means something quite different by it .
A concept that was developed in the European Union context by this Parliament when it prepared the Spinelli draft treaty on European Union is now actually used by opponents of European Union , who allege that the European Union is becoming over-centralized , that there is a danger of a centralized superstate .
When you think about it , the Union spends only 3 % of public expenditure .
Its bureaucracy is the same size as that of an average medium-sized town in Europe .
There is no real danger of over-centralization in the long-term future .
For the Union to adopt legislation , we should not forget that it first needs a legal base in the Treaties - treaties which have been ratified by each and every national parliament .
Then , to adopt any significant legislation , the approval of the Council is needed , amongst other things .
And who sits in the Council ?
National ministers , who are part of national governments , accountable to national parliaments .
Not people who are predisposed to handing over powers to the European Union where this is not necessary .
Next time a minister returns home and blames Brussels for interfering , remind him or her that it is national ministers sitting in the Council who have approved the legislation in question in the first place .
Even then , should they overstep their powers , it is possible to go to the Court to seek to verify whether the principle of subsidiarity has been overstepped or not .
That option is available to any government in the European Union .

We should reject the fear stirred up by the likes of Mr Vanhecke just now , by the likes of John Major , by the likes of John Redwood , by the likes of Michael Howard , by the likes of Mr Le Pen , by the likes of William Hague , who would like us to believe that there is a threat to all our countries from over-centralization in Europe .
This is not the case .
There is no real danger of that .
We should have the courage to say that sometimes European legislation is necessary to provide fair rules of the game for the single market , to make sure that there is less regulation by having a single set of regulations for companies instead of fifteen sets of divergent national regulations for them to adapt to .
Yes to subsidiarity .
No to using it as an instrument with which to attack the European Union .
Madam President , I must begin by complimenting Mrs Palacio very warmly on her report and of course the Commission too , in the person of Commissioner Oreja , on the progress achieved .
But I think it appropriate in this debate on the subsidiarity principle to emphasize that this very principle stems from Christian social thinking and should thus be applied with this in mind and not , as is so often the case , as a means of helping people to help themselves .
Subsidiarity means nothing more than not allowing a larger unit to do things which the next unit down the scale can do perfectly adequate .
But this shows quite clearly too that subsidiarity must be built from the bottom up and not from the top down .
Subsidiarity must operate equally between municipalities and regions , just as it must operate between the institutions of the European Union and the Member States .
Mrs Palacio 's report makes the point very clearly at the beginning that the subsidiarity principle has a political dimension : consequently questions concerning the subsidiarity principle should also be resolved by political means and , where possible , not by the Court of Justice , precisely because the objective should be for Community decisions to be taken as closely as possible to the people .
But as close as possible to the people means that decisions in this decision-making pyramid should be pushed down as far as possible towards the pyramid base .
For me the logical conclusion of this is that we must , beneath the municipal level , also consider the family level , since this is the bedrock of our society and needs to be strengthened accordingly , also on the basis of the subsidiarity principle .
But it is vital too that the subsidiarity principle should on no account be abused to weaken the force of Community law .
Systematic mention of it in the context of the new polices sounds somewhat suspect here .
But overall , this extremely enlightening report shows us that there is still much to be done especially in the matter of defining subsidiarity .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for trying to create a little more clarity as regards the principle of subsidiarity , which was focused on seriously in Edinburgh in 1992 following the referendums held on Maastricht , in which it dawned on Europe 's governments that the EU was not exactly a popular project .
In my opinion , this is one of the things that the subsidiarity principle should be used for - to ensure that our citizens have as much influence as possible on the decisions taken , that they have as much opportunity as possible to decide for themselves , and that in any case they are enabled to understand what is going on .
But the subsidiarity principle is still not clearly defined , and is therefore not understood in practice .
I would therefore call for the discussions to be continued here in Parliament , in the Commission , and elsewhere . And as well as urging the Intergovernmental Conference to address the definition of this concept seriously too , we should perhaps ask DG IV to draw up a more fundamental report on what the concept has actually become in practical terms during the period in question , and how it can be specifically defined with a view to applying it in future .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent and succinct report .
However , Article 3b of the Treaty does not actually define subsidiarity .
I am glad about that , because , as Mr Corbett has rightly said , in the past the concept of subsidiarity has been used as an excuse to repatriate , and I thoroughly oppose that idea .
Let me give a specific example : in the last parliamentary term the Commission , in its wisdom , thought it necessary to protect animals in zoos by coming forward with a proposal for a directive on the position of animals in zoos .
As a result of the notorious Edinburgh Summit , where a number of worthy proposals were put on a bonfire by Mr Major , that particular proposal was withdrawn and has now come back to this Parliament as a mere directive .
In my view , that is a retreat : it will not serve the interests of animals in zoos and amounts to a weak excuse for what we should be doing as parliamentarians .
Therefore , when recital F in this report refers to subsidiarity as a ' dynamic concept ' , I think we should add the word ' pragmatic ' , because , as recital G says it is ' an appropriate legal technique ' .
I do not think this presents major difficulties at all .
All we need to do is to ask : what is the objective of any given piece of legislation ?
And then we need to ask simply at what level will this legislation be most effective ?
That is a pragmatic test , and sometimes it will be more effective at Community level and sometimes it will be more effective at national or regional level .
That is simply a question of the application of a pragmatic principle , and we should not be lulled into the belief that somehow subsidiarity is to be equated with only doing things at national level .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mrs Palacio for her dedication , with the skills for which she is known , to the Commission 's work on the application of the subsidiarity principle .
I should like to tell her how much I have valued the observations which are both precise and to the point made in her report and by what she had to say this afternoon .
I am also pleased to note that the position taken by the rapporteur in many ways is very close to that of the Commission .
For example the Commission , just like the rapporteur , feels that the subsidiarity principle does not intervene in matters of exclusive competences since , in such cases , it is impossible to call into question the acquis communautaire and , at the same time that differences over subsidiarity should be resolved preferably in the framework of the normal functioning of the institutions , in accordance with the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1993 , without excluding , of course , possible proceedings before the Court of Justice .
Just like the European Parliament I should like to say that the Commission , as you well know , has not asked for a revision of Article 3B in the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference .
We are satisfied by Article 3B and we think that it is important for all of the institutions to apply it in practice .
I should like to take this opportunity - if you will so allow - to specify the Commission 's position in respect of some of the points which have been mentioned .
In respect of our reports entitled ' Better Law-making ' I should like above all to calm your fears . The Commission in no way confuses the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality with technical instruments making Community legislation simpler , clearer and more accessible or , in practical terms , simplification and consolidation .
The Commission makes the distinction between these different concepts and in no way confuses or mixes them up .
The Commission 's approach is a purely practical one .
Community legislation is a whole set of rules and we need to have an overall view of the whole legislation - something which should be made easier by what we have chosen to call ' Better Law-making ' .
The Commission has made a promise , and you all know very well that we have applied the subsidiarity principle .
But it is always obviously possible to improve and in particular in those areas which are discussed in the Palacio report .
For example , what the Commission does plan to do is to step up everything concerning the assessment of the consequences of proposed action .
It has already provided for machinery for this purpose and intends to put it into practice and modernise it as far as possible .
Another point which I would like to mention is that which refers to the previous consultation of Green and White Papers .
If this is to be continued , it is obvious that we shall have to do so in a more practical way in the future and in a more specific way .
Consequently , I should like to tell Mrs Palacio that we are aware of this and we have taken note of the remarks she makes on this in her report .
We also feel - and this is a practice which has been pursued over recent years , especially the last two or three years - that , in respect of the practice which we used to have of legislating immediately , now , through the Green Papers and the White Papers , we are consulting society as a whole .
The Green Paper actually asks questions .
In some cases we have had to do so twice : we have had a first consultation , and if we were not satisfied with the responses that we received then we have issued a second Green Paper .
For example , we took quite a long time over the subject of pluralism and concentration of media .
Why ?
Because we did not really have a very clear idea of what the sector wanted and what society wanted for that sector .
In other words this approach , which is closer to the citizen , is quite different from what used to be done in the past . First of all , we used to go straight to legislation .
Now we try to find out with greater accuracy what the various positions are .
However , in any case , I would like to insist that we have taken note of the observations made by Mrs Palacio and we are going to try to do something about them .
There is another point where I would like to thank Mrs Palacio for the caution she has shown in respect to particular issues .
However , I would like to calm her fears in terms of framework directives .
As you well know , framework directives are a subsidiarity instrument , recommended by the Edinburgh Summit and adopted by the Commission in certain cases , in specific cases , but it is not going to affect the unity of Community law if it is used in situations where it is justified .
I would just like to tell Mrs Palacio that the Commission makes sure that that is the case .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for all of the remarks that she has made about the progress made by the Commission in the area of informative consolidation .
To conclude , the Commission is still convinced that it is appropriately applying the principle of subsidiarity which makes it possible to adopt appropriate legislation at the appropriate level - and in response to some of the remarks which have been made for example by Mr Corbett , which are along those lines , we agree that this approach brings the legislator much closer to the citizen .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Amendment to Rules ( code of conduct for lobbyists )
The next item is the report ( A4-0107 / 97 ) by Mr Ford , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the code of conduct for lobbyists .
Madam President , Members will recall that we first debated my report on lobbyists in January 1996 .
The Socialist Group and the Christian Democrats fundamentally failed to agree , and the result was that the report was sent back to committee .
The public reaction to our failure to institute regulations was very negative and the result was that by July 1996 I produced a new , amended report taking into account some of the considerations and concerns that Members had about the initial report which was adopted by this House with only one Member voting against , if I recall correctly .
That was essentially a framework document to be filled out and it was agreed that there would be three further reports at least : a first report , on a code of conduct , which is what we have in front of us today ; a second report , on the control of interest groups , which my colleague , Mr Spiers , is drawing up and is currently before the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities ; and a third report , on Parliamentary assistants , that Mr Lehne is drawing up , which is also under discussion in the Rules Committee .
This then is the first of these three reports , further elaborating the report that was adopted in July 1996 .
I am tempted in this context to give the same reply as the apocryphal doctoral student who , when asked to explain his thesis , said : ' It is self-evident ' , but I shall not succumb entirely .
The main parts were approved all but unanimously by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
It states that lobbyists shall state their interest or the interest they represent when meeting with Members of Parliament , staff or officials , shall not claim any formal relationship with Parliament in any dealing with third parties , shall not circulate for profit to third parties copies of documents obtained from Parliament and shall comply strictly with the provisions of Annex I , Article 2 , second subparagraph which states that Members shall accept no gifts - ie. lobbyists may not henceforth offer any gifts to Members .
The lobbyists also need to satisfy themselves that any assistance provided in the context of these provisions is declared in the appropriate register .
There is an amendment here by Mr Donnelly which I shall be accepting , to tighten up that provision , but it does give them some responsibility to ensure that their actions are appropriately reported .
It also says that they need to comply , when recruiting former members of the institutions , with the provisions of the Staff Regulations .
At the moment the Staff Regulations in this regard are an empty vessel .
There are provisions in the Staff Regulations requiring certain categories of former employee to seek the permission of the institution to take jobs in other sensitive areas , but currently there are no members of staff so designated .
This may , however , be something that will change in the future .
The same applies to Amendment No 10 in which we ask lobbyists to observe any rules laid down by Parliament on the rights and responsibilities of former Members of the House where I understand the Quaestors are looking into this matter .
It also says that if a lobbyist wants to employ a Member 's assistant , he has to seek the permission of the Member concerned .
That seems selfevident .
Finally , it concludes that any breach of the Code of Conduct may lead to the withdrawal of the pass issued to the person concerned and , if appropriate , his firm .
It is only if Parliament is willing to use this sanction that we shall actually be able to tighten up the provision .
There are two further amendments which are likely to encounter some opposition in the House tomorrow .
One is Amendment No 12 which requires lobbyists to submit each year a report on their activities , with a view to securing the extension of their passes .
There is some concern that this is going to lead to vast reams of paper being produced .
I understand that there are groups in this House that will not be supporting it .
If we were going to support it , I would probably recommend Mr Ephremidis ' amendment which asks that lobbyists state what particular assistance they have given to Members ; however , the reference in that amendment to ' gifts ' is inappropriate , because we have already seen that gifts are illegal under our current provisions .
The final point is with respect to Amendment No 1 which says that only registered assistants working exclusively as assistants shall have access to Parliament under the same conditions as staff of the Secretariat or the political groups .
At the moment our Rules state that Members ' assistants have privileged access .
The Socialist Group would like to see the immediate closure of this loophole which actually leads to a situation where Members ' assistants can simultaneously work for lobby groups or even lobbyists themselves , but I understand that the PPE would prefer it to be included in the Lehne report which deals with the entire issue of Members ' assistants when that is voted on .
We expect them , if that is the case , to deliver that commitment , otherwise we shall create not an obstacle to misuse but a fast track for it by allowing lobbyists to short-circuit the system by employing our own assistants to do work that we are preventing them from doing .
I commend my report to the House and hope that it will be supported tomorrow .
Madam President , let me briefly congratulate Mr Ford on a truly excellent report and on what I believe is a significant and lasting contribution here in Parliament .
We now have two reports which lay down rules for lobbyists .
We must remember that this is an issue which deeply concerns many of our voters . I do not think that it is an exaggeration to say that the unregulated lobbying , which has previously been allowed here in Parliament , has been very damaging to our reputation .
So I think that Parliament should be very grateful to Mr Ford for introducing these rules now .
There is one point which I consider to be particularly important .
This concerns the obligation on lobbyists to submit an annual report on their activities .
This is an important point because I think that journalists and researchers , Mr Wijsenbeek , will be able to follow an issue , after it has been dealt with by Parliament , and see which lobbyists have influenced which members and in so doing see which members have possibly been pressurised and which have not .
In this respect , I would really like to have gone one stage further and agree with Mr Metten 's original proposal in its entirety as it also stated what should be in these annual reports .
Now this is something which the Quaestors must decide .
Sometimes we are not successful in everything .
But I think that this is a very important step in the right direction .
My group will be very pleased to vote for this report .
We also hope that once we have more experience we can go further and draw up rules which are perhaps even more clear-cut .
Madam President , like the previous speaker I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Ford on what is basically an excellent report .
I should like in particular to thank him for the constructive and open tenor of the debate which he led in our Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
The report he has produced by and large reflects the conclusions of that committee .
Rightly - and I congratulate him on his telepathic powers - he has anticipated two particular amendments which cause us difficulty .
I refer to Amendments Nos 1 and 12 .
As far as Amendment No 1 is concerned , our objection is largely procedural .
We think this is a slightly complicated area which it would be useful to look at in rather more detail .
Mr Lehne will be coming out with a report and I would like to take this opportunity of stressing that I see the problem Mr Ford is pointing out .
There are people who are neither flesh nor fowl , neither purely assistants nor people who could be regarded as third parties and lobbyists .
There is a problem and we should work with Mr Lehne and in the committee to ensure that problem is sorted out .
The second matter is more substantial .
It concerns Amendment No 12 .
It is something we have already looked at and last year we decided that we did not want to have that double accountability .
We did not want to have reports both from the Members and from third parties .
The Group of the European People 's Party continues to have reservations about this idea .
It might be disproportionate to any political benefit which accrued , and equally we have a sense that underlying Amendment No 12 is the idea that contacts between Members and third parties or interest groups is something so suspicious , so intrinsically shabby almost , that it needs to be monitored and controlled as tightly as possible .
We do not share that view and we are perfectly content that there should simply be obligations on Members and not on third parties .
With those reservations , we commend Mr Ford 's report to the House and we shall be voting for all the amendments in his report apart from Nos 1 and 12 .

Madam President , the subject to be dealt with by this report , and by the other , supplementary and additional ones still outstanding before the relevant committee , is truly important but at the same time difficult .
The difficulty is evident from the fact that the subject has been debated since 1994 , and in January 1996 in a well known incident when , the report produced by Mr Ford at that time was referred back to committee by decision of Parliament and has now come back before us today .

It is clear that we must debate it with a sense of particular responsibility , because whether we like it or not , there are forces which deliberately or carelessly always wish to slander collective bodies such as Parliament , and their members such as our own membership , by alleging that in one way or another they are bribed , financed or influenced by organized interests .
That must be repudiated in a categorical and secure way .
But granted the situation , I have the impression - though I appreciate the efforts by Mr Ford and the Committee , of which I am a member - that today 's report does not go far enough to be convincing .
I will make only two comments .
The first is that we are defending certain lobbies that speak for special interests which are clearly economic and commercial .
These will have access and enjoy a privileged status .
Of course , with very many protective measures , but that will not stop their status from being privileged , while there are social groups of working people and others who do not have that privileged status that ' entreé ' , that opportunity for discussion both with various bodies and with MEPs themselves .
And it will then be necessary for those groups to entrust the lobbies to defend their interests , while in many cases those lobbies belong to groups with opposite interests .
This , then , is a form of unequal treatment .
My second comment concerns Amendment No 8 , which seems to have been accepted but which I categorically reject .
Madam President , it slanders both Parliament and its Members , and the report itself . Because this is what it says : ' Members must declare the assistance ' - a fine expression - ' that they receive ' .
The problem is not whether or not I declare it .
The problem is that I am receiving a bribe - in kind , money or services - and that is not changed by declaring it .
The stigma will still persist that I am a receiver of bribes .
And finally , Madam President , since I too have tabled an amendment , I would like to explain the idea behind it .
This exactly is its point : what kind of assistance can Members ask for from lobbies or anybody else ?
Facts , arguments , information .
Not bribes , not services , or any other kind of material provision .
It is in that sense that I intend the amendment .
If its meaning is not clear , then I declare that I will withdraw it .
Madam President , going on from what the previous speaker said I should point out that this is a second report by Mr Ford , not the first one .
The first one was indeed referred back to committee but was subsequently adopted by the plenary , and this is a further continuation of it .
By and large we think that clear progress has been made in shaping this code of conduct for lobbyists . Greater clarity is demanded in the sense that stipulations are made of everything that has to be entered in the register , more specifically that lobbyists must state the interests they represent , that they must never be allowed to exploit their parliamentary links as a way of achieving certain goals , and they must not circulate for profit documents which are normally documents freely available within Parliament , etc .
All these are very positive things which have now been clearly stated thanks to this report of Mr Ford 's .
Regrettably one thing is missing , and we put down an amendment about it in committee .
It was our view that the parallel approach originally shown between the Ford report and the Nordmann report , dealing with MEPs ' interests and the need to declare those interests , should also apply to lobbyists .
We put down an amendment to that effect in committee , but sadly it was not approved .
We thus find it most important that the Ephremidis amendment , also one of ours , we put it down together in the plenary , that this amendment should be adopted , so that we have a clear understanding of which gifts , of whatever kind , lobbyists can give to MEPs or their assistants .
If this amendment is approved we shall vote in favour .
If not , regrettably we shall be unable to do so .
Of course we fully agree too with Mr Wijsenbeek that it is a bit daft in a kind of regulation to say something like : don 't do anything which may help someone obtain information dishonestly . That sounds so ' holier than thou ' that it will get you nowhere .
But for us the most important thing is that the amendment put down by Mr Ephremidis and the Greens should be approved .

Madam President , at a time when in every country of the European Union the credibility of politicians and politics is being called into question , I believe that the report by Mr Ford and especially the effort behind it - to bring out into the open the function and activities of those who represent interests - is indeed laudable , and I believe that it will make some contribution towards upgrading the way we work .
The actions of those who represent interests in the European Parliament often seems uncontrolled , and indeed I have frequently felt surprise and , I will not deny it , even anger , at the fact that lobbyists have access to documents and information before ourselves , the MEPs .
Very often , they have documents to hand which take a long time to get to us .
For that reason , I think Amendment No 1 is very important , and I would ask all the Members , on all sides of the House , to reconsider their attitude towards it .
It is not enough for us to say that we wish to monitor the activities and function of lobbyists .
We must also find the way to do it , and I think that Amendment No 1 is a first mechanism in the direction of monitoring the activity of lobbyists .
Of course , we are all aware that the effort being made with this report by Mr Ford will not deal effectively with the problem and create conditions of absolute transparency , something which I think all of us here want .
It is , however , a bold step in the right direction and what is needed once it has been adopted , is that we should all co-operate to ensure that the bare letter of this report will become a reality in our everyday operations in the European Parliament .
Madam President , previous speakers have already dealt with the essence of the Ford report .
The proposal requires lobbyists to behave fairly and honestly .
Greater transparency is to be desired here .
The only question is how best to ensure it ?
Amendment 1 is certainly not consistent with the rules of the code of conduct .
In formal terms alone , it relates to Article 2 and not Article 3 , and it should be debated n the appropriate context , that of the Lehne report .
We can at that point look at a precise definition of what a lobbyist is .
Regarding Amendment 12 , which calls for a report on lobbyists , I would say that this amendment is not clear , because it does not say what is to be reported on and , above all , who is to evaluate the substance of the report .
Apart from this , I have further reservations about this amendment , because it gives outsiders only an imperfect picture .
If - as Mr Wibe has intimated - this report is meant to enable journalists , for example , to find out who has been in contact with whom , it is obvious that this information will be incomplete and thus wrong .
Let me repeat the example mentioned earlier .
The report on the scrutiny of insurance groups would then say that talks were held with insurance associations .
It would not say that talks were also held with the supervisory authorities , the Commission and government spokesmen .
Only if all these people , who are lobbyists in the broadest sense of the word , were named , would the picture be complete and accurate .
For this reason too I think this amendment is not appropriate .
But I am anxious to make the general point that our debate here has created a wrong impression amongst the general public .
We need lobbyists to give us comprehensive information on the various facets of various issues , and this activity must be pursued as part of transparent cooperation which can be verified by anyone .
Compliance with the code of conduct will help in that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Amendment of Rule 116
The next item is the report ( A4-0089 / 97 ) by Mr Brendan Donnelly , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on amendment of Rule 116 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure concerning split voting .
Mr President , let me begin by saying that tomorrow before the final vote I shall be asking for my report to be referred back to committee .
Some new points and arguments were put forward and , while I would have been happy personally to vote on the report tomorrow , the general consensus is that we should refer it back after the debate , during which we hope that some useful indications will emerge as to how , if at all , it will be possible to improve it .
My proposal in this report is a simple one : it is that in future it should not be possible to take split votes on amendments in the plenary .
I put forward this proposal for three reasons : one is administrative , the second philosophical and the third is political .
The administrative reason is a question of time-saving .
In this Parliament we vote too much and in the wrong way .
What I am hoping to do by my proposal is save time and make the voting that takes place more transparent .
We have been talking about subsidiarity , legislating less but better .
Perhaps my proposal is in the same tenor : to vote less but to vote better .
One or two colleagues have put to me the idea that my proposal would not reduce the amount of time spent in voting .
It might simply be the case that everybody would put forward more amendments in order to cover all the possibilities that might arise in the course of a debate .
I rather doubt that .
At the moment , under our present system , what happens is that shortly before the vote takes place all the coordinators in the various groups look at the ingenious proposals of their colleagues from the other groups and then they ask themselves : can we vote on the first three words of Amendment No 3 , let us abstain on the next three words and then we will not participate in the vote on the last three words .
This is a sort of Glass Bead Game , which is time-consuming and which administratively can be shortened .
My second reason is a more philosophical and more systematic one .
It is not the work of the plenary to turn itself into a drafting committee consisting of 626 Members .
The work and role of the committees should be to ensure that when we come to the plenary we do not simply repeat what ought to have been done in the committee .
In this context , perhaps I could refer you , Mr President , and your colleagues via the Vice-Presidents and the President , to Rule 115 , which is not sufficiently severely and rigorously applied .
It is made clear in Rule 115 that the normal case should be that voting takes place in blocs on the basis of a recommendation from the competent committee .
I , and I am sure Mr Fayot , as chairman of our committee , will be a little more vigilant in future in trying to encourage the application of that principle .
It is with that thought in mind that I suggest that we would be better advised not simply to duplicate the work of the committees .
My third reason is perhaps the most important one , and that is the impression and impact that we as a Parliament make on the people sitting in the tribunal , the people watching us on television and looking at our work .
I have spoken - as I am sure many Members have - with groups of constituents , of academics , of journalists , of people who have come to our Assembly and have been very surprised at what they regarded as the excessively detailed and nuanced voting , for instance when we vote on the insertion of a particular word or the possible deletion of a particular phrase , and do so not just once or twice but all morning .
That is something which lessens very substantially the positive impact that we as a Parliament can have .
Any parliament has to strike a balance between its internal procedures and the impact it makes on the outside world .
But I genuinely think that we in this Parliament , perhaps for understandable reasons , get too engrossed and too excited by our own internal debates and internal procedures .
In going down the road that I am suggesting we will perhaps lose some nuances which are particularly important and beloved of one or two coordinators , perhaps of coordinators throughout all the groups .
But the reward that we would gain , if we follow my proposal , would be that we would have a more transparent , a more legible set of procedures and it would be easier to convince those watching us that we are concerned to make a favourable impact on their welfare and political and social circumstances , rather than introvertedly concerned only with our procedures .
Obviously , from the reaction of some colleagues this is an idea that needs refining .
But my intention in putting forward this proposal was to set a political signal that this is a Parliament which is open to the outside world , a Parliament which is extroverted rather than introverted .
I certainly stand by that intention and I hope it is an intention that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities will be able to refine and implement , either in my report or in some other form , so that we can look at the whole question of voting on amendments and voting in general in this Parliament .
Mr President , everyone in the European Parliament complains about the long voting sessions , in which many members often vote without knowing exactly what about , respectfully following the recommendations given by their group .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure has looked into this problem of the length of votes on many occasions , which often gives rise to a large number of complaints from our colleagues .
Chapter 14 of our Rules of Procedure is therefore one of the most important , and you probably recall that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure has made a number of proposals to try to shorten voting sessions .
May I for example recall , in reply to Mr Donnelly , that our Committee has often insisted that the President make use of Rule 114 .
I am thinking in particular of the recommendation for a vote by the chairman of the relevant committee and by the rapporteur in the plenary session and , of course , block voting .
Unfortunately these recommendations are still a dead letter .
I must therefore insist on the importance of Rule 114 .
Mr Donnelly 's report therefore refers to split votes , i.e. Rule 116 .
I should like to congratulate Mr Donnelly on the work he has done to consider this problem and the way in which he has won over the Committee on the Rules of Procedure which has overwhelmingly approved his report .
If we agree to refer this report back to committee before the vote , a few things should be pointed out .
Mr Donnelly is proposing two things .
The first is unquestionable : the time limit for requesting a split vote .
The second concerns the ban on split votes on amendments .
In fact , requesting a split vote on an amendment is in effect tabling a new amendment , i.e. tabling an amendment on an amendment .
Whereas those who table amendments must follow a whole procedure , requesting split votes is rather an easy option .
Members are therefore called to vote on parts of sentences which differ from one language to another and they are often unable to grasp exactly the meaning of what they are voting on .
Personally , I do not think that Mr Donnelly 's proposal is going to lead to more amendments , as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten said earlier when she spoke on behalf of the EPP .
Of course , Parliament has to be given every possibility to express itself , but in a reasonable and above all predictable way .
That is what Mr Donnelly is proposing , with the benefit of an inventory : I have not heard any other proposals and I do not think that there are any other solutions at this time .
But we can always continue to look for solutions if that is what the European Parliament wants .
Mr President , I would like to correct an incorrect allusion that I made to a Rule a moment ago .
I referred to Rule 115 but , as Mr Fayot said , I was in fact thinking of Rule 114 .
I hope that can be corrected in the record .
I would also like to say that the question of the EPP 's attitude to my report was fully discussed in the group .
It would be unfair to imply that this was simply a frolic of her own by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
It is nice to know that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten obeys instructions sometimes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , regarding the Minutes of yesterday 's sitting , which have been distributed to us this morning , I should like to point out that my name does not appear on the attendance register .
I am sure it 's just my forgetfulness - I expect I forgot to sign the register - but since I was here , as can easily be established , I would ask that my name be added in the Minutes to the register of those who were here yesterday .
Mr President , it is the same point as Mr Vecchi 's : my name does not appear in the Minutes and I was here yesterday .
Mr President , to clarify the Minutes .
Yesterday you might recall that I raised an issue under Rule 3 about the immunities and privileges of this House .
According to the Minutes : ' the President suggested Mr Hallam write to the Speaker of the Belgian Chamber of Representatives asking for an explanation of this matter ' .
According to my memory and also to this document , which is produced by the Session Services , the President undertook to take up my complaint .
I would certainly wish the President to take up the complaint on behalf of Parliament and me as a Member , rather than me as an individual .
Mr Hallam , I take note of your comment .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr Colom i Naval , I take note of the matter .
We will see the Commission and at Question Time we will be able to clarify it .
Mr Ephremidis , the Bureau desires , but also has a tradition of making every effort to answer any Member concerning all the problems raised .
I will of course ensure that this happens in your case too .
Decision on urgency
Mr President , as you just said , the committee has concluded its deliberations on this report , and Parliament can approve the request for urgent procedure .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
Welcome
I would like to welcome 23 prizewinners of the inter-school essay competition on the subject ' Europe against racism ' , who are now in the European Parliament 's VIP gallery .
The prizewinners come from the Union 's 15 countries and the competition was held under the aegis of the European Parliament and was organized by the Centre for Information and Documentation in the context of the European Year against Racism .
I welcome the young men and women so distinguished , and wish them a pleasant stay in Strasbourg .
Organic production of agricultural products
The next item is the debate on the report by Mrs Barthet-Mayer ( A4-0156 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Commitee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) supplementing Regulation ( EEC ) No 2092 / 91 on organic production of agricultural products and indications referring thereto on agricultural products and foodstuffs to include livestock production ( COM ( 96 ) 0366 - C4-0481 / 96-96 / 0205 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , organic agriculture is practised in the European Union over approximately one million hectares and accounts for 1 % of all farming production .
In ten years , the areas farmed in this way have increased ten-fold .
Organic agriculture is now a realistic alternative and a reliable one to intensive farming .
It has no negative effects on the environment and its production , linked to the soil , avoids over production in equal farmed areas .
For this double advantage , organic agriculture should be firmly encouraged .
Regulation 2092 of 1991 covers the production and marketing of raw or processed vegetable organic products .
The report which we are discussing today is intended to extend this regulation to animal organic productions .
Let us look at the background : the text proposed by the Commission in 1996 coincided with the height of the BSC crisis .
If herbivores had been fed in a natural way , i.e. on the basis of grazing and vegetables alone , this crisis would never have come about .
This would have resulted in considerable savings for the agricultural budget which might have been earmarked , for example , instead to supporting the income of more farmers , environmentally friendly farming measures , research , setting up young people in farming , farmers ' retirement or the promotion of quality export products .
Unfortunately , this was not the case .
Let us now return to the specific character of organic production . Organic production presents a number of features : let me remind you of them .
It is a completely free and voluntary step by a farmer . It is the most elaborate , strongest and most controlled sign of quality of producers for consumers , even if there is still some progress to be made .
This approach is another sign of quality such as geographical indication , protected origins and special guarantees , but it is also different from them .
This approach is the subject of growing demand by consumers .
It is also a sustainable form of production .
In order to extend regulation to animal organic production , we have had the chance of having a very good initial text from the Commission .
Nevertheless it has had to be made more specific in order to be applicable and it has had to be improved in order to make it broader and more forward-looking .
I think that this can be said of water farming , new forms of husbandry such as snails , frogs , ostriches , buffalos , and game , which should also be the subject of extension of the scope of this regulation .
I wanted this regulation to remain sufficiently general so that its application would not be hindered by defining the principles of organic stock raising without entering into very detailed specifications .
I also wanted this regulation to remain flexible enough to limit certain constraints of conversion or excesses of organic puritanism .
However , in order to retain the regulation 's coherence and to remain faithful to the trend shown by most of my colleagues on the Agriculture Committee during exchanges of views , I have maintained a thorough approach to the forms of production and , in particular , controls .
That is how we have come to propose an improved definition of controls and the controllability of production , strengthening consumer protection , banning genetically modified organisms , genetic manipulation and living virus vaccinations .
These are bans which are expected by consumers in this specific area and which are thoroughly in keeping with the basic principles of organic agriculture .
But this report also bears in mind the need to protect traditional production such as pigs , cattle , capons , geese and ducks .
To sum up , the amended regulation is both more thorough on controls and forms of production and more flexible in order to facilitate conversion .
But it strengthens the common character of the regulation and prevents competition distortion between Member States and even between regions .
The consensus reached on this report in the Agriculture Committee enabled us to whittle down the 314 initial amendments to just 100 in number .
Nevertheless , there is still one problem to be solved .
We need a sufficient budgetary amount so that the European Commission can effectively perform its control mission in the Member States and guarantee supervision of the equivalent system with those countries .
At the moment the Commission only has two members of staff to carry out these tasks .
We must make sure that the shortcomings revealed by the Committee of Inquiry on BSC should not occur again in the context of organic agriculture .
If there is not a sufficient budgetary arrangement , application of the regulation will not be correctly controlled and this will leave the door open to import frauds .
To conclude I should like to say , as rapporteur , that I am unhappy with two amendments which add incoherence to an otherwise balanced whole .
I should therefore like you to reject out of hand Amendment No 25 which deletes mention of abandon products and Amendment No 85 which deletes common standards on the density of poultry rearing .
On the other hand I should like to ask you to support my Amendments Nos 101 on the budget , 102 on the restoration of ' poultry ' standards , 103 and especially 104 on the budget which I referred to earlier .



Commissioner , I was recently able to appreciate , in Austria where I was invited by my colleague , Mrs Schierhuber , the work which has been carried out there in organic agriculture ; you know something about that .
May I therefore hope , Commissioner , that you will enable the whole of Europe to follow your country 's example .
Mr President , as the rapporteur has already said , and especially since the BSE affair , consumers throughout Europe , much more than in the past , are interested not only in the cost but also in the quality of products and , in particular , the production methods used .
For this reason , in order to restore their confidence , consumers must be supplied with guaranteed and certified products .
New European legislation making it possible to certify clearly and uniformly throughout the territory of the European Union products of animal origin obtained in accordance with the criteria of organic production is an important step in this direction .
We must therefore place on record our displeasure at the delay in the Commission 's submission of a proposal following up its proposal on organic farming and extending it to include livestock production .
This document was supposed to have been submitted as far back as 1 July 1992 , then that deadline was extended to 30 June 1995 , and we did not actually receive the document until 26 July 1996 .
However , we do now have it , and we regard it as an important document , although there is a need for amendments along the lines already set out by the rapporteur .
In fact , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has already tabled various amendments , most of which have subsequently been accepted by the Committee on Agriculture . In particular , I would call attention to those amendments whose recitals refer to the fact that traditional farming has had a major adverse impact on the environment and also on consumer health , and the fact that it is necessary today - an extremely important amendment , this one - to accept that the Common Agricultural Policy will gradually have to be realigned towards more ecological production of plant and animal products .
We believe , then , that organic farming is pointing the way that must be followed by farming as a whole .
We must also emphasize the amendments opposing the presence of genetically modified organisms , which have no part in organic agriculture or stock farming , and all those amendments in defence of the rights of animals , particularly those concerning the inevitable aspects of their existence - space , food and humane transport and slaughter .
I hope that all these matters will be supported by this House and that we shall thus be able to produce a proposal in the best possible interests of both animals and consumers .
Mr President , Mrs Barthet-Mayer has brought a very serious and competent approach to her task .
The result , I believe , is a report which strengthens and improves the Commission 's proposal and represents a real contribution by the European Parliament to the enhancement of these products .
The rapporteur therefore has the full support , and the congratulations , of the Socialist Group .
It was high time that the Commission produced these proposals .
Regulation 2092 / 91 laid down , perhaps rather too naively and optimistically , a date of 1 July 1992 for extending the original part of that Regulation to cover products of animal origin . As other Members have already noted , here we are in 1997 , so that five years have passed since 1 July 1992 - five years to fill a gap in legislation and provide a harmonized framework of protection , recognition and valorization for the specific events experienced in that field during those years by farmers and various other operators .
I hope , Commissioner , that this delay on the part of the Commission has been solely due to objective technical difficulties and not to chronic underestimation of the importance of high-quality , organic farming production .
Several times , we in this House have had occasion to point out how , despite all the declarations of principle , the entire CAP is still insufficiently geared to quality policy . There is still a huge emphasis on quantity which exerts further pressure to intensify farming activities and producer higher and higher yields , resulting in financial distortions and adverse effects on the environment and the consumer .
We must resolutely oppose these trends , and we must not do what we did in 1992 and blame everything , once again , on the international constraints that have been and will be imposed upon us .
Organic farming is a progressive area , significant of a trend reversal .
Of course we must not be under any illusions : it is and will remain a minor , secondary aspect of European farming ; it is and must remain a voluntary and responsible choice for farmers and stock breeders ; none of us must allow ourselves to believe that it can be extended by legislation .
But we do need to encourage the present trend towards the steady growth of organic farming .
As the rapporteur has said , we are no longer concerned simply and solely with experiments of local significance , of interest for example to local markets , but with a comprehensive , generalized experiment where the organized wholesale trade itself frequently plays a leading role .
The scope of this regulation is such as to provide an impulse to that market , steering it towards a type of production where the climate is determined not by guaranteed prices or subsidies but by free choice on the part of the consumer who is prepared to pay the additional price for a total guarantee of his own health and safety and respect for the environment and the countryside .
Our group is in agreement with this report and will therefore support it during today 's vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I too support the Commission 's proposal for a regulation supplementing the existing regulation , and also most of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the rapporteur .
Above all because of the loss of consumer confidence brought about by the BSE crisis , by the debate on the conditions in livestock farming and by overproduction , the meat industry has run into serious difficulties .
The main feature of the rapid deterioration of the market has been a sharp decline in consumption .
Since consumers are displaying a growing interest in organic products - in terms of both quality and range of products - livestock production should be better geared to levels of consumption .
This requires a fundamental reform of quality control systems and a new policy on consumer protection .
In the long term , I believe that the consumer demand for food produced by environmentally compatible methods is opening up considerable opportunities for the agricultural sector , particularly in the less-favoured regions of southern Europe .
However , I am afraid it is an illusion to think that the whole of European farming can become organic .
The total market for organic products is limited at present , and the expansion of such production methods should be encouraged through publicly funded programmes , rewarding farmers for precisely defined environmental performance .
The change to organic farming must be a free decision on the part of farmers and , to be successful , it must take place gradually . Without a smooth and progressive transition , there is a danger that the move will not be positively received and that farmers will become disillusioned .
Expectations are already very high , and that is not an entirely positive thing .
It is also necessary and important for integrated agriculture to be defined , with a view to stimulating this sector .
The Commissioner deserves thanks for his sensitivity in this context .
In his former posts in his native country of Austria , he did an excellent job in this area .
I believe that it is absolutely essential to open up marketing opportunities for organic products and to promote the relevant funding , especially in the less-favoured regions and above all in southern Europe .
I also believe that there should be Community-funded publicity campaigns for organic products , in the interests of public health , but also with a view to promoting measures to improve quality and combat overproduction .
Mr President , of the 50 , 000 or so farms in Europe that can be defined as ' organic ' , 15 , 500 are in Italy .
And , indeed , the four speakers from whom we have heard so far are all Italians - including Mr Ebner , who spoke to us in his mother tongue but is nevertheless an Italian citizen .
This , then , bears witness to the great sensitivity in our country about this type of farming .
But it is only fair to say that we have now gone well beyond the stage of novelty , curiosity and experiment ; we have moved on from plant species to systems of biological stock breeding based on the same philosophy , a double-sided one combining respect for organoleptic qualities with the increased profits guaranteed by this kind of agricultural practice .
Organic farming now has its own indigenous economic parameters : it allows farming activities even in sensitive and difficult environments such as national parks and inaccessible mountain regions ; it allows a revival of crops and traditions sidelined by intensive and scientific farming ; and it reduces costs because of the absence of crop protection treatments and the smaller workforce needed .
But organic farming is not just a return to the past , a form of non-farming comparable to set-aside .
It is simply a new model of development , which is based on research , passes through a form of practice that has more to do with culture than cultivation , and eventually leads to a straightforward and transparent relationship with the consumer .
The praiseworthy result is that the regulation on plant products has been linked to and harmonized with the more difficult criteria of animal products .
That , I would say , is the greatest value of Mrs Barthet-Mayer 's report - and my group , too , offers her its congratulations - and the principles on which the report is based are especially praiseworthy .
Finally , let us indeed conclude with the hope that this proposal for a Regulation can constitute a clear and hopeful response to the bitterness and gloom cast upon the farming world by the dark and tragic events of the BSE crisis , which brought the entire European livestock industry to its knees but , more than that , did such serious and possibly irreversible damage to the delicate relationship of trust between producer and consumer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs BarthetMayer .
A growing number of consumers wishes for organically grown agricultural produce and foodstuffs .
This growth in demand is creating an entirely new market with higher prices for agricultural producers .
In the EU we have been striving for years to attain a better balance between the production and consumption of agricultural products .
This was the objective , inter alia , of the 1992 CAP reform .
An organic , less efficient means of using the soil and producing plants and animals will itself promote the achievement of a better balance between supply and demand of agricultural products .
The undisputed advantages of organic production are based on strict limitations on the use of those fertilizers and additives which have a harmful effect on the environment and which leave residues in agricultural products .
It is necessary to attain for organic agriculture comprehensive , sufficiently strict uniform standards which every producer , distributor and retailer who opts for agricultural production methods must comply with .
In complying with these regulations , transparency , high moral standards and business ethics will be required of everyone involved in the production chain .
The BSE crisis revealed all too clearly what happens when business ethics and monitoring are deceptive .
It also made clear how important it is to monitor compliance with regulations .
The Liberal Group considers organic , environmentally acceptable agricultural production , meeting growing consumer demand , to be particularly important .
We consider it essential that such products should be quality marked as clearly as possible .
The consumer must be given enough information on which to base his own choices .
The consumer must always be informed of the origin , production methods and distribution of the product .
The report , as a result of the numerous votes in committee , is partly contradictory and illogical .
I would have hoped that we could have had more time to cooperate to obtain a more consistent report .
In some places the report contains detailed provisions and in other places there is a complete lack of concrete rules .
In the report , too much credence is placed on supranatural treatment procedures like homeopathy and phytology .
Our group considers that the report contains too many special exceptional provisions which reduce the environmental acceptability and organic nature of the production and thus reduce the credibility of organic production .
In Finland , where the conditions for organic farming are excellent , a person going over to organic production needs a three-year transition period , whereas the report is content with twelve months .
In any case , it would be possible to use fodder crops from non-organic farms as fodder .
On a genuine organic farm I would not approve such exceptions .
On a genuine organic farm the production of fodder crops should also take place on the farm , because the fact of fodder crops passing through intermediaries creates one further risk .
Finally , Mr President , I should just like to make a small comment about translation errors .
In the Finnish translations the words ' waste water ' and ' waste products ' were used for a long time , whereas we really speak of cattle dung and urine .
Mrs Anttila , since that was one of your first speeches to Parliament , I did not wish to interrupt you .
In future , however , I ask you to match your speeches to the time available , because otherwise you will put the Bureau in a difficult position .
Mr President , I hope you will be indulgent with those who speak at length , because if one has much to say , one needs a good deal of time in which to say it .
It is important that we are finally discussing here today the extension of the regulation on organic farming to include livestock production .
Fortunately , practice is ahead of policy in this area .
We are not so much setting objectives here as taking on board developments .
Mr Fischler and his country can be congratulated , since 10 % of holdings there have already converted to organic farming , and many more are contemplating doing so .
It can be said that in Austria , organic farming is no longer a niche activity , but is becoming ' conventional farming ' .
This shows where a development can lead with political support , and it is surely one that we all welcome .
As the organic associations have established - and this has indeed been established - there has in practice been a development among consumers , who are quite clearly interested in these products . Patterns of purchasing are adapting to them , albeit hesitantly .
This is the most logical form of both environmental and consumer protection , and we have therefore proposed that Article 101 should be adopted as the legal basis .
It is a logical move , and we hope it will be accepted .
We shall examine the matter in the Committee on Legal Affairs tomorrow , and then vote .
If this article is not adopted as the legal basis , then we shall have to discuss the amendments .
As we all know , there is opposition to genetic engineering .
As far as I am aware , the Commission has not yet agreed on its position .
Consequently , if Article 43 is retained as the legal basis , we shall request referral back to committee , so that the Commission is not given the chance of deciding not to fall in with our progressive proposals .
Then we would agree to a debate on the matter .
I believe that this is an extremely important issue , and I hope the House will support our move .
Mr President , I would also like this morning to congratulate the rapporteur and to welcome this report .
This morning we have an opportunity to debate a subject that is very close to all of us and to express our views on the development of organic farming .
No matter what our backgrounds , we would all accept that the development of organic farming will surely benefit everyone .
I would also like to say that as we debate this subject we must ensure that we view the development of organic farming realistically , bearing in mind the cost of production .
It will not help the future of organic farming if we lay down such stringent rules that the consumer cannot afford to buy what is being produced .
There is a balance to be struck here : the cost of production should not be excessive because , in my opinion , this will defeat the object of the exercise .
Standards must be uniform throughout the Member States , and Member States must be more supportive in encouraging further development , and especially in assisting young farmers who want to go into organic farming .
It will be younger farmers coming into organic farming who are going to have to address this tremendous challenge .
So Member States must be supportive .
I hope that Mr Fischler and the Commission will ensure that all Member States treat the development of organic farming with a degree of equality .
That has not happened to date , because there are different support structures within different Member States .
I have had complaints in my own region in Northern Ireland , where people wishing to go into organic farming do not - and cannot - achieve the level of support they require .
It behoves us all to ensure that we are able to attain what are tremendous objectives .
It is not realistic to believe that organic farming methods can provide all the food we require in the European Union , but we must work to increase the percentage .
We have got to ensure that we provide this alternative for housewives so that they can freely choose the food they wish to buy for their families .
I take great pleasure in supporting this report and certainly approve of the realistic attitude of the rapporteur .
I certainly would not be supporting anything that would put too much pressure on those who wish to go into organic farming and find it difficult to do so .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two areas which are essential to man 's existence and , ultimately , survival : the environment and food .
In today 's high-tech world , we need to build a bridge between the two .
It is therefore necessary to adopt a holistic approach , not just base our action on a snapshot of one area or the other .
This proposal for a regulation points the way ahead , in that it seeks to strike a balance between productivity and the environment in relation to organic farming .
The BSE crisis in particular has shown us where farming which is geared purely to mass production can lead , with all its excesses such as the transport of live animals .
Reorienting the system towards organic livestock production and quality control is therefore an important step forward , not only for farmers , but above all for consumers .
However , good intentions often overlook the reality of the situation .
If the proposal is applied to beekeeping , it is clear that there will be no organic beekeeping virtually anywhere in Central Europe , because no one can fulfil the criteria .
On the other hand , if we look at the laxity of a number of developing countries as regards the labelling of honey , the system rapidly becomes absurd .
Labelling only makes sense if strict controls are provided for , so that consumers can be sure that the contents match the label .
It is doubtful whether , where genetically modified organisms are used , it is possible to use the term organic farming at all .
Given that some 1.2 million Austrian citizens - nearly a quarter of the country 's voters - supported the petition for a referendum on genetic engineering , it is unlikely that many Austrian consumers would agree that it is .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the expressed intentions of the current review of the treaties is to bring Europe closer to its peoples .
If this is not to be mere rhetoric but a practical effort to offer Europeans the best possible quality of life , the public 's demand for wholesome , safe food at an affordable price is one area where the EU Institutions would do well to act visibly .
Therefore , as has been said , it is sadly ironic that despite having brought forward organic crop regulations several years ago , the Commission has only now come up to date with livestock production in the wake of a stream of health disasters related to meat .
However this debate is certainly better late than never and the resulting text is a worthwhile effort to identify , regulate and nurture sustainable forms of farming which potentially offer benefits for our environment , consumers and producers , plus of course the animals .
It is worth noting that those earlier crop regulations have been the subject of many modifications .
As the complexity of Parliament 's comments has demonstrated , further evolution is likely to be desirable and necessary in this case .
Consumers increasingly demand simple information about their meat , their eggs and their honey and should be able to look for international protection and advice which they can trust .
A major supermarket chain recently told me that a quarter of its egg sales are now from hens other than battery-produced .
So demand is evident but what is the proper definition of free range or farm laid or perchery eggs ?
Appealing labels on beef or lamb indicate these are grass-fed but does that mean throughout their lives , or for just part ?
And what chemicals have they been given as well ?
This report has tried to tackle such a wide range of difficult technical issues .
It has undoubtedly improved the Commission text and Mrs Barthet-Mayer is to be congratulated for all her hard work .
But if we are to be serious about making these organic processes competitive , further work remains to be done .
We can encourage producers to move away from seeing animals as just units of production and set high standards of animal welfare and veterinary care on the farm and in transit .
Therefore I ask you to support Amendments 107 , 108 and 109 .
We can argue for financial stimulants .
We can cut the cost of production through less inputs and treatments and , crucially , we can increase the numbers of people working this sector .
This demands political will and action for the common good so I hope the Commission will today indicate that it sees this as a start , not a conclusion , and that it will also urge action from Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , if we go on stating the case for organic farming alone and treating conventional farming methods as obsolete , agriculture in the European Union will have no future .
It annoys me - and it is misleading - that many people constantly blame the nightmare of BSE on intensive farming : the most recent case of BSE in my country was discovered on an organic holding .
I would congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Barthet-Mayer .
With its proposal to include livestock products in the existing EU regulation , the Commission has taken a significant step towards establishing comprehensive rules on organic farming .
Within this type of farming , livestock products - essentially milk and meat - are particularly important , since this is the area of agricultural production in which the highest added value is generally achieved .
It is therefore crucial for the sustainable development of organic farming in the European Union that legal rules for this area are established .
In doing so , we must appreciate that this production sector is in its infancy , and it is therefore a question of laying down rules which enable agricultural holdings , the processing industry and the food retail sector to build up this market segment rapidly and without an excessive burden of costs .
The great majority of the amendments to the proposal tabled during the discussions in Parliament show that we are dealing not only with a complex issue , but with a very complicated legal text .
In my group 's view , it would therefore be very welcome if we could manage to simplify the text to a large extent and make it easier for farmers to understand .
Any increase in detailed rules always means a costly increase in controls .
Using feeds from organic holdings as exclusively as possible is undoubtedly a basic criterion of organic farming .
Our aim should therefore be to ensure that organic feeds are in fact used exclusively , with a suitable transition period .
In this context , I am not impressed with the Commission 's idea of imposing what is effectively self-sufficient economic management on organic holdings .
The EU regulation on organic farming must not become a battleground for ideological extremes , but must provide a sensible legal framework .
If anyone wishes to go beyond it by laying down special requirements , they must be free do so .
But these must not be forcibly imposed on everyone else .
In the short time available to me , I can of course only address a few particularly important points .
These include the question of whether we actually need a new , additional livestock units formula for organic farming .
The crucial point is to ensure environmentally compatible stocking densities in organic farming .
And this is guaranteed by the existing livestock units formula and the limits laid down by the nitrates directive .
I am therefore in favour of setting a global upper limit of two livestock units per hectare , in accordance with the nitrates limits laid down by the nitrates directive .
Clearly , the lack of precision in a number of places is also a fundamental defect of this proposal .
General descriptions and wishful thinking have no place in a legal text .
The EU regulation on organic farming must lay down precise rules which are also legally enforceable .
Otherwise , it will add to the loss of confidence among producers and consumers .
I also object to rules which are incomprehensible in practice , such as those on honey .
My time is up , Commissioner , but I wish to say that I can hardly imagine us laying down traffic rules for honey production , with signs telling bees where to fly to and where not .
The German press would once again have a field day !
Mr President , the current position of organic agriculture and its potential development are explained in Mrs Barthet-Mayer 's report , precisely and in detail , and I therefore warmly congratulate her .
The potential development of organic agriculture is linked to the needs for safety , quality and confidence in food , on the part of consumers , their concerns vis-à-vis the environment , respect for the well-being of animals , their rejection of genetically modified organisms and the use of synthetic chemicals .
Organic farming is an alternative for farmers who are concerned about the quality of their lives and their work and who would like a more environmentally friendly agricultural production .
It also makes it possible to reserve a dense socio-economic fabric in the fragile rural areas with a very strong awareness of the role and responsibilities of farming in preserving the eco-system and biodiversity , while producing healthy and quality products .
This report , together with the compromise amendments , is a coherent whole which we shall vote for , and this amended regulation will apply immediately in all states , without competition distortions .
French organic farmers are in favour of specific thresholds specifying the load per hectare of density in terms of buildings , respect for sanitary areas , food rates arising from organic farming , limits on treatment using synthetic allopathic products and minimum slaughter ages .
The development of organic farming is only possible if consumers also have full confidence in the control systems and product certification .
Every state will therefore have a role to play to ensure this safety in conjunction , of course , with the Commission .
But we should beware since an excessively rapid development of organic agriculture could make it more fragile and so we should beware of this .
The serious work carried out by Mrs Barthet-Mayer should help us in this and therefore we shall be voting for her report .
Mr President , my compliments too to Mrs Barthet-Mayer for the enthusiasm she has brought to her work .
It is a pity there are so many amendments .
Agriculture , Mr President , has to meet the demands of its customers .
It is clear that demand for organic products is increasing and it is thus logical that the Commission should have proposed measures for preventing unfair competition .
We see that as essential .
We have to lay down rules which can be applied throughout the European Union as uniformly as possible .
But regions are not all the same and so I would argue , as a number of amendments already do , for a measure of flexibility for certain regions .
I think there will have to be some flexibility during the transitional period .
That period cannot be the same everywhere and must be kept as short as possible to encourage farmers to switch to organic methods .
I totally agree with Mrs Keppelhoff that it makes no sense to say all products should have to come from one 's own farm .
Where cooperatives with other farmers are possible they should be encouraged .
Autarchy is a bad thing .
Lastly , Mr President , it is essential to have a European logo for organic products which is generally acknowledged and readily identified in the European Union .
The same will also be needed , as Mr Ettl pointed out , for products of integrated agriculture .
I hope to be publishing an own-initiative report on this later in the year .
Mr President , I am pleased that today we are able to discuss a proposal in the agriculture sector which for once goes in the right direction .
The Commission 's proposal to include livestock in the directive on organic production is of course a response to consumer demand - a demand which has been intensified by the BSE crisis .
With this proposal , we have a chance to give many farmers the incentive to switch to organic methods , while at the same time benefiting the environment .
That is why it is so important that in the rules we lay down for organic farming in Europe , there is a proper balance between conversion time and quality assessment .
By this I mean that it is no use insisting on a three-year conversion period before a farmer can sell his products as organic or use his crops as organic feed .
In my opinion , the rules should not make being a farmer almost a pipe dream - no , they should make it possible for many farmers to earn their living from organic methods .
That must be the object of this proposal .
There is a great demand among consumers for goods which are not genetically modified .
Europe 's organic farmers do not wish to have genetically modified organisms in their products , and this ban has already been incorporated into the Codex Alimentarius .
In my view , this is a wish we should support , because these will be the only goods where we know that , in any event , no genetically modified organisms have been used .
I think it is essential for us to be very sympathetic to the calls that are being made in this respect .
I should also like to say that consumers must naturally have an assurance that the goods they buy as organic really are organic products .
We must therefore have a workable means of monitoring organic products and , finally , it is an advantage to have a common EU mark which ensures that consumers can recognize those goods which have been approved as organic at EU level .
I think this is extremely important if we are to have any hope of creating confidence in this respect .
Only in this way can we be sure that consumers know what they are getting for their money .
In conclusion , I would say that I think the report which the rapporteur has produced is a good one , and we should join with the many others in thanking her once again .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal is intended to achieve the same objectives as Regulation 2092 / 91 , which only affected vegetable production , by extending the scope of application to animal productions , in order to establish fair competition conditions between European Union products in the organic agriculture sector and guarantee the free circulation of organic products within the European Union .
It is also intended to improve consumer confidence in this product and foster farming activity to meet growing consumer demand and which , as an added value , is environmentally friendly .
The content of the proposals defines the basic criteria for animal organic production , such as its link to the soil , specific rules of the main parameters conditioning animal rearing , such as the origin of animals , the arrangements for converting production centres to organic farming , animal foodstuffs , disease prevention and veterinary care , as well as the housing and maintenance conditions of animals .
However , I must point out that in some cases these roles are not very practical , because in some cases they are just a mere declaration of principles which have not been translated into concrete objectives to be met by farmers and be controlled by the authorities or control bodies .
On the other hand , the level of requirement and detail established in these roles is not homogenous for the different animal species hence , in the case of poultry , the principles have been developed to the maximum whereas for other species nothing has been specified at all , leaving up in the air important criteria for whole species of animals which are liable to be farmed such as , for example , rabbits .
In any case , this proposal had been long awaited , because at national level there are already rules regulating organic production , and it is felt that it is necessary to bring in rules which harmonise them at European Union level , with sufficient flexibility in order to guarantee regional diversity .
On the other hand , I should like to point out that in my country we already have the conditions to favour the development of ecological animal production , given that we still have an important genetic heritage of local species and breeds of cattle , sheep , goats and pigs , most of which live in the wild and are adapted to their environment , something which favours rearing and exploitation in extensive farming .
These aims have already been reached in terms of organic poultry rearing and there is already a tradition which has been developed , of bee-keeping , resulting in high-quality products given the abundance and variety of honey-producing flowers which exist in my country .
Approval of this regulation is regarded as positive for the organic producing sector but also beneficiary for consumers , since we can foresee growing demand for these products , fostering in turn the creation of mixed animal rearing systems , presenting advantages in this type of farm .
However , ladies and gentlemen , we should not go from one extreme to the other .
I must repeat what others have said , such as Mr Fantuzzi and Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , that this is a secondary activity , which complements traditional farming , which has just begun to make headway and which we in our group decisively support .
Congratulations , Mrs Barthet-Mayer .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to congratulate Mrs. Barthet-Mayer for a good report .
Then I would like to pause for a moment and consider the value of these words since we use the term organic farming for something which covers one percent of agricultural production .
This really means nothing other than the fact that our society is very artificial and that we have far too much faith in non-sustainable methods of production .
In this context organic farming naturally makes a valuable contribution , a spearhead in our development .
I would like to say that , even if we in Sweden have not succeeded as well as they have in Commissioner Fischler 's Austria , we did set an objective several years ago to achieve ten percent organic farming by the turn of the century .
We are now fast approaching this level which I find very satisfactory .
We need to create a fairly simple regulatory framework .
I have particular views on genetic technology as I am a believer in genetic technology as such .
But as we currently cannot distinguish between good genetic technology and bad we must say that all genetically modified organisms must be banned in organic farming .
This may not always be the case in the future , as genetic technology may help us to move away from non-natural methods in other contexts .
Let me finish by saying that it is important that we do not make this too complicated or unwieldy .
There is in fact sometimes an unholy alliance between the greatest advocates of organic farming and the worst opponents , they want to make the regulatory framework far too complicated and unwieldy .
I want to see us aim for tough but simple rules and more organic farming .
Mr President , I too wish to add my congratulations to Mrs Barthet-Mayer on her excellent report and in particular on her work in drafting compromise amendments to take on board the many additional amendments submitted to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
For over 25 years concern has been growing in Europe about the way we produce our food in the drive for ever higher levels of production .
Worries centre on whether what ought to be the basis of good human health - our food - is actually contributing to ill-health through overuse of pesticides , herbicides , artificial fertilizers , artificial hormones , routine use of antibiotics and inappropriate animal feeds .
As a result , many of the animals we eat are also suffering ill-health , and cruel conditions as well in many cases .
All this has led to the interest in organic farming as a means of ensuring that completely wholesome food is being produced .
The proposals before us are very much concerned with regulations to ensure that the consumer buying organic animal products really is getting food that has been produced naturally from animals fed on wholesome natural feedstuffs and raised non-intensively in humane conditions .
The report is not specifically concerned with animal welfare as such , but with good husbandry and avoidance of unnecessary stress to animals .
Both the way they are raised and the way they are transported are of great concern to many consumers .
I would therefore urge support for Amendments Nos 107 , 108 and 109 on animal transport and space for raising chickens and calves .
Clearly all European agriculture is not going to become completely organic .
But by setting an example of wholesome , animal-friendly stock-rearing , farmers who take this path are showing others what can be done .
Already there are moves in arable farming towards integrated crop management , broadly based on organic principles though not completely organic .
There are two demonstration farms in my Lincolnshire constituency .
I hope that in the same way the measures before the House today will encourage not just completely organic stockrearing but also generally-improved animal husbandry by non-organic farmers , in particular in the raising of chickens and calves , in line with consumer demand .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we know this proposal for a regulation is intended to apply to the animal sector an existing regulation , dating from 1991 , referring to vegetable products .
It is a shame that it has taken so long to appear but , as they say , ' better late than never ' .
As a number of members have already said , the definition and promotion of organic production and even the extensive production of farm products are not , as such , a miracle cure for solving the problems facing European agriculture .
We must also be aware that , for merely technical reasons , it is not always possible to practise organic farming in many circumstances , especially in areas with small and very small farms .
We must also be aware that organic agriculture , as a general rule , involves higher production costs , especially initially , which means that it is essentially aimed at an elite of consumers with greater purchasing power .
Despite that , there is no doubt that organic production is a promising dimension of European agriculture for three main reasons : first of all , because it can more easily gain the confidence of consumers , despite the fact that organic production is not the only safe means of production ; secondly , because it is a way of upgrading production resources , exploitation systems or regions which in any other ways would have difficulties in competing , especially since the GATT Agreement ; thirdly , because it is essentially respectful of agricultural and ecological conditions and therefore is an important way of reconciling farming with the environment and nature .
As I said earlier , no isolated policy will be able in itself to resolve the problems facing European agriculture , an agriculture which is so heterogeneous as ours .
Not even organic agriculture , nor a quality policy , nor a policy of prices and markets , nor a policy of structures will be able , alone , to resolve all of these problems .
All of these policies are necessary , but they have to be balanced between each other and they have to be carried out in a complementary way .
Therefore we must make sure that the common agricultural policy , the CAP , evolves towards greater balance between these different components especially since , in the past and still today , it is profoundly unbalanced , as is demonstrated by 90 % of the budget earmarked for the prices and markets components and only 10 % for structures , not to mention the insignificant budgetary amount earmarked for quality policy and organic production .
We still need to develop a rural development policy which is another important dimension of a balanced future CAP which can actually respond to the needs of all European agriculture systems and not just some of them .
I would like to conclude by reminding you that it is fundamental that we should also work on demanding credible certification by producer organisations to ensure that , at the next GATT round , organic production rules are equal for all of our trading partners so as to avoid any competition distortions by third countries .
I should just now like to congratulate Mrs Barthet-Mayer on her very serious , profound and professional work , which she has carried out in drafting this report .
Mr President , pure food produced near the consumer is an important absolute value for Europeans .
For this reason , organic farming should be supported by the EU and attempts should be made actively to find the means to support such production .
For this reason I should like to thank the rapporteur .
Mrs Barthet-Mayer 's report has , however , been drawn up in a hurry and this may be seen from the result , among other things from the number of amendments .
The report goes into small details without being sufficiently familiar with the basics of the subject .
For example , not enough attention has been paid to the EU 's northern dimension .
The EU already appears to the individual EU citizen more as a giant agricultural project than a great integrated cooperation project .
60 % of the EU 's budget now goes into agriculture , and there is no reason at all to increase that percentage .
However , by redirecting existing agricultural subsidies it might be possible to find ways of supporting organic farming at EU level .
Initiatives towards uniform taxation are , however , going too far .
Parliament should occasionally be reminded to ' hold its horses ' : in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , taxation should remain a national matter .
If organic agriculture is to be supported , it must be based on the use of natural procedures .
Thus , for example , the use of plants based on genetically altered organisms as food and their use in distributed products should be prohibited , because as yet not enough is known about the consequences of such use .
The report also refers to the transport of animals .
Finnish consumers , at least , are anxious to be assured that transport is carried out in a morally correct way which minimizes the stress suffered by animals .
Although labelling of origin is hard to harmonize , the Finnish consumer at least demands information about the method of transport of animals and the geographical origin of produce and , in my opinion , he has the right to do so .
In the production of animals the Finns have become used to upholding high standards , in the interests of animals as well as people .
Even so , the report seems to me to have a rather ' holier-than-thou ' aura to it .
It rather seems to be saying that , if a French gourmet thinks goose liver is a mouth-watering delicacy , he is not thinking very seriously about the interests of animals .
In our eagerness to impose standards we often forget that a European standard does not bring about any changes but it is a change of attitude in European individuals which produces results .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Barthet-Mayer , and also the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection for their excellent work .
The committees were anxious to make a genuine improvement not only to the basic features of the proposal , but also to many of its technical details .
Since 1991 , when Regulation No 2092 laid down the basic rules for organic farming , the latter has been steadily growing in importance in the European Community .
At the same time , Regulation No 2078 of 1992 on environmentally compatible agricultural production methods adapted to the landscape has also contributed substantially to this trend .
However , the existing regulation on plant products now urgently needs to be supplemented with rules on organic livestock production , so that all organic foods can be produced in a climate of fair competition and a high level of consumer confidence can be ensured .
The report strongly emphasizes the need to ban the use of genetically modified organisms and products derived therefrom in organic farming and the processing of organic products .
This view is shared by associations of organic producers and the majority of Member States .
The Commission therefore accepts that the use of genetically modified organisms and products derived therefrom does not reflect the current expectations of consumers regarding organically produced agricultural products and foods .
The Commission is therefore prepared to include such a ban in one of the recitals and in the key Articles 5 and 6 of the regulation , on the basis of Amendments Nos 8 , 26 , 24 and 28 , last indent .
However , the concept of a genetically modified organism must be clearly defined , and for this purpose reference needs to be made in the text of this regulation to the definition contained in Directive No 220 / 90 on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms .
This would make Amendments Nos 13 , 14 , 35 , 36 , 41 , 52 , 63 , 73 and 112 superfluous , however , since they simply reiterate the ban at several points in the recitals and technical annexes .
Nevertheless , the restating of the ban at a number of key points in Annex I , according to Amendment No 64 , can be accepted .
This also applies in principle to Amendments Nos 97 and 99 , where they bring the provisions of Annex VI into line with the general ban set out in the articles of the regulation .
As far as the legal basis is concerned , the Commission takes the view that Article 43 is appropriate .
Firstly , this measure is primarily concerned with regulating and promoting organic production methods , and thus has no health policy objectives .
Secondly , it involves integrating the livestock production sector into an existing legal framework and an existing regulation on organic farming .
The legal bases must therefore be consistent .
Consequently , I am unable to accept Amendment No 110 .

I can accept Amendments Nos 21 and 87 , in so far as they seek to extend the labelling and inspection provisions of the regulation to types of livestock products for which precise production rules will not be drawn up until a later stage .
However , I feel that there is a need for further detailed examination of Amendment No 20 concerning the extension of the rules to the labelling and marketing of organic feeds of animal origin , and of Amendments Nos 23 and 29 on special measures regarding infringements and sanctions .
Furthermore , I am afraid that the additional requirements imposed by these amendments would hinder the implementation of the regulation as a whole , since the Commission and the Member States have only limited scope and resources available for this purpose .
However , the Commission is prepared to reconsider these points in the context of a future amendment of the regulation .

I can only welcome Amendment No 22 , which seeks to improve the protection of certain terms that are frequently used to designate organic products .
I can accept the first part of Amendment No 24 and Amendment No 113 , which delete the reference to a conversion period in the labelling of livestock products , as well as Amendment No 30 concerning the traceability of livestock products throughout the production and marketing process .
With regard to the introduction of a suitable EC logo , I wish to assure the House that the Commission will begin the relevant preparations as soon as possible .
However , the deadline of 1 January 1998 referred to in Amendment No 31 is unrealistic in my view , and therefore unacceptable .
Nor can the Commission agree to the proposal contained in Amendment No 32 also to use the official logo for products from third countries , since neither the Commission nor the Member States have permanent or direct control over the specific application and monitoring of the rules in third countries .
I have noted with interest the amendments on the earmarking of the budgetary resources needed to implement Regulation No 2092 .
Without a precise estimate of the funds involved , however , I cannot officially accept these amendments , although I shall endeavour to ensure that adequate appropriations are proposed as part of the normal budgetary procedure . And I am counting on Parliament 's support to ensure that the necessary funds are actually made available for this sector .
Finally , I wish to acknowledge the fact that Parliament took great pains to examine individually the numerous technical requirements for organic livestock production .
The Commission believes that Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 16 , 19 , 22 , 27 , 34 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 55 , 56 , 60 , 62 , 66 , 67 , 69 to 72 , 74 , 75 , 82 , 88 , 93 , 94 , 111 , 116 , 119 , 124 and 125 make technical improvements to the original proposal or improve its drafting , and it is happy to accept them either as they stand or in principle , with more appropriate wording where necessary .
On the other hand , the Commission is unable to agree to the technical or drafting improvements sought by Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 12 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 25 , 33 , 38 , 40 , 41 , 46 , 51 , 54 , 57 , 61 , 65 , 77 to 80 , 85 , 90 , 95 , 96 , 98 , 100 , 102 , 105 to 109 , 114 , 115 , 118 and 120 to 122 .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 7 , 37 , 42 to 45 , 50 , 52 , 53 , 58 , 59 , 63 , 68 , 76 , 81 to 84 , 86 , 87 , 89 , 91 , 92 , 103 , 117 and 123 are partially acceptable to the Commission , though here too with more appropriate wording where necessary .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is convinced that , once adopted , this regulation will contribute to the further development of organic farming in the Community and therefore corresponds to the growing interest of consumers in these products .
In conclusion , I should once again like to thank Mrs Barthet-Mayer most sincerely for her efforts in drawing up this excellent report , and Parliament for its extremely positive contribution to this debate .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place , in principle , tomorrow , to enable the Legal Affairs Committee to give its opinion on the amendment of the legal basis .
Agriculture and producer groups
Mr President , Mrs Redondo has done her work well .
The proposal , of course , concerned the consolidation of three Regulations , a highly technical business .
I should like to take advantage of the Commissioner 's presence to ask him two questions .
The first , as I see it , concerns a fundamental rethink about the Objective 5 ( a ) measures .
This consolidation , it seems to me , is simply demonstrating a degree of delay : we are tidying things up from a formal standpoint , but from the substantive angle the Objective 5 ( a ) Regulations are beginning to show their age .

It would be necessary to start thinking , in broad terms , about what use has been made of them and what changes are needed : thought should be given , for example , to 2328 - the measures in favour of young people , some of them used and some not - or 866 : the schemes for adapting the processing and marketing structures no longer concern investment in new material structures ; there is often a need to acquire intangible investments , in trade marks and in structures that already exist , things that are outside the scope of application of this Regulation and detrimental to its efficiency .
That is my first point , then , looking back to the past .
My second question , Commissioner , relates to the future .
I don 't want to stray from the point , nor would I want my speech to be entitled something like ' forget about Cork ' , but in point of fact since that forum on cohesion it seems that Objective 5 ( a ) no longer has a future .
I would therefore like to ask you to shed a little light on this because , from my understanding of it , the two major thematic or geographical guidelines would substantially exclude the presentation of any further horizontal measures such as those of Objective 5 ( a ) .
It actually seems that there are people who would like to do away with the very concept of rurality as an independent category of the structural measures .
I am somewhat amazed by all this , and what I wonder is this : was Cork , in effect , just a weekend diversion or will it really be a strategic axis for the future of the Structural Funds ?
It does seem to me that this is a very serious puzzle .
With that in mind , then , Commissioner , I would ask you to take this opportunity today to provide some clarification that may be of some benefit to us .
Mr President , Commissioner , the regulation on improving the efficiency of agricultural structures holds the key to the adaptation of farm structures .
The promotion of investment at the level of holdings is very important , and the measures to encourage the establishment of young farmers are of great help .
The front-end grants for the introduction of operational accounting where it does not yet really exist and for assisting young farmers are , in my view , indispensable .
The measures should provide greater support for farm incomes in the less-favoured and mountain regions , since after all , Commissioner , it is your political philosophy to give the greatest possible opportunities to region-wide farming in the EU .
Cooperation between holdings is becoming increasingly important , I believe : firstly , because of the growing pressure of competition ; secondly , because of the frequent labour shortages at times of peak activity ; and , thirdly , because of the rising cost of machinery per hectare .
Close cooperation is urgently necessary in the reorganization of a great many agricultural holdings , and is increasingly accepted by young farmers .
I welcome the fact that the Commission grasps this necessity in its proposal for a regulation .
I should like to draw particular attention to the amendment to Article 6 ( 4 ) .
We wish to see investment aid for holdings in regions in which the overall number of pig places has demonstrably fallen .
This aid should not lead to the original number of pig places in these regions being exceeded .
However , since we repeatedly advocate regional production , since we wish to phase out long routes , and since the utilization of existing slaughterhouses is only sensible , this amendment should be adopted .
With regard to vocational training measures , as you can imagine , I wish particular attention to be paid to female farm workers , since the direct sale of farm products is primarily their task .
With this proposal , the Commission wishes to strengthen the market position of producers and counter the growing supremacy of the distributive trade .
Overall , this report by Mrs Redondo Jiménez is thoroughly uncontentious .
It makes only minor refinements to the Commission 's proposals , and we should especially thank the rapporteur for her work .
Mr President , it is obvious that any farmer looking at all of these rules and all of these regulations and all of these directives sometimes has no desire to invest , to restructure or to group .
We have to get used to Cork - as Mr Fantuzzi said - which is a kind of Vatican II .
We have to get used to various references which are virtually clerical .
The truth is that as we have heard from the different speakers here today the concerns of countries are all different : some are more ahead , some are in the middle and some are behind .
For a country like mine this document is , however , an extremely important one . It should bring about a restructuring of farms , it should lead to processing and marketing organisations , it should lead to farmers ' groupings as well as a concentration of supply , teaching farmers to be less individualistic and helping them to market what they produce , making them really understand that they have to work together and in a community in order to win the fight against the rest of the world 's major industrial and trading powers , in a world which is undergoing globalization .
Therefore , I think that all of this needs to be simplified and would benefit from a stocktaking exercise at the end of each year in order to find out how the Member States execute these directives and apply these documents , to find out what the execution rate was and to find out what the Court of Audit has discovered in terms of fraud .
It would be useful for the European Parliament to know exactly how the Member States apply in practice , on the ground , these measures which can only benefit the rationalisation and modernisation of our agriculture .
Therefore I agree with the changes made by Mrs Redondo Jiménez which I shall be voting for .
Mr President , the proposals that we are discussing are essentially a technical adjustment , but their substance is crucial to the continuing rationalization of agriculture .
That is what we are talking about today , and I wish to stress , Mr Fischler , that it is important to switch from the one-sided promotion of rationalization to the promotion of innovation in organic farming that we were discussing earlier .
And it would be sensible to extend this to improving market access for individual holdings , since that creates jobs , whereas rationalization destroys them .
In the area of jobs and the environment , an increase in capacity is also effectively taking place .
If we look at the situation on the ground , each holding will subsequently have an additional 80 or 100 places .
Here too , the brakes must be applied , and I am therefore unable to support Mrs Redondo 's amendment calling for aid for increasing capacity in areas where the total number of pig places has not risen but fallen , since this will once again lead to a shift in favour of rationalized , agro-industrial production .
Maybe it is different in her country .
In that case , regional conditions must be taken into account .
Otherwise , in my country , there will be just such a transfer of pig places to agro-industrial concerns , with all the consequences that we are now witnessing in terms of swine fever .
Mr President , the proposal for a regulation which is before the House represents a step towards improving agricultural structures .
If we look at the present system in terms of its soundness and efficiency , the urgency of this measure becomes apparent .
The maxim ' quantity before quality ' has lost none of its force .
BSE did not occur by chance , it was an inbuilt consequence of the system .
Nevertheless , it has led to a process of rethinking , which even the powerful farming lobby will find it difficult to stop .
The fact that investment aid will be used not only to increase production , but also to increase quality , is thus an especially positive and important aspect of this draft regulation .
Aid for diversifying sources of income , such as tourism and craft activities , will reinforce the independence and viability of small agricultural holdings .
Similarly , producer and marketing associations are perhaps the answer to the large-scale decline of farming and the resulting pressures on the labour market .
In the environmental sector too , the need to break new ground - which is essential for sustainable development - is being recognized .
The energy and water saving and land improvement measures must be adequately funded , so as to make these attractive to farmers as well as to the public at large .
The strengthening of agricultural structures is a pan-European issue , which has significance beyond the farming profession and forms the basis for ensuring the survival of farming into the future .
Mr President , three Regulations overhauled in a single report : improving the efficiency of agricultural structures , improving the processing and marketing conditions for agricultural products , and the life and the vitality , if I may put it that way , of the producer associations .
A fine performance indeed !
The objective was an ambitious one and the rapporteur , it must be said , has managed to achieve it by pursuing the path of clarity and common sense - another point which it is only fair to make - partly thanks to the previous efforts at simplification by the legal services of the Commission .
In addition to this substantial effort to make the rules easier for the citizen to understand , there are also the amendments , which go right down to the level of offering technical examples : for example , where they focus on the criteria for direct product sales to make life easier both for producers and for consumers , but with rules that tie any marketing activities strictly to the enterprise .
What is important is the incentive to promote energy saving , partly through the somewhat commonplace form , of the efficient distribution and economical use of water resources .
The principle giving preferential treatment to mountain breeds of pigs is praiseworthy ; less praiseworthy is the idea of granting aid only to farms whose areas are distinctly on the large side for so-called hill farming .
My group will be voting against these amendments , because the type of activity identified in the three Regulations in question has more to do with micro-farms than with extensive farming .
I welcome the conclusions in the report that invite us to take due account , in any innovation , of the two great challenges confronting the forthcoming reform of the CAP - the enlargement to include the CEECs and the reforms of the Structural Funds .
Finally , the rapporteur is right to remind us of the multifunctional nature of farms , especially hill farms , where a variety of forms of economic activity each play their part .
Among those forms , however , those strictly associated with working in the fields must be the dominant and characteristic ones : after all , tourism , agritourism and crafts are only byproducts ; the main emphasis must always be on agriculture .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , regardless of the reasons behind them , what is certain is that many of the guidelines which seem to be contemplated in this regulation are very close to the proposals which for a long time we have been defending on this matter .
In fact , in order to bring about a far-ranging change in the unfair shareout of support which is currently given it is vital that we introduce preferential aids to those on lower incomes and to family farms while limiting or even preventing aid which at present is given to farmers on higher incomes at set limits .
On the other hand , we must reinforce the trend which is already making itself felt to make clear changes to aids given to agriculture in less favoured areas , which have a structure which is very much based on very small farms and / or characterised by rapid processes of desertification .
We regard as positive the changes made by the rapporteur , who we compliment on her excellent work , including support for the construction of infrastructures designed to save water in farming , changes to make exceptions for non-intensive farms , as is the case of pig farms , as well as the possible payment of aids to repair structural damage or destruction resulting from natural disasters .
However , in respect of compensatory amounts for less-favoured farming areas , we feel that the proposed amount for the minimum eligible area in southern countries and regions , including my own country , namely two hectares , would be profoundly unfair and would call into question the essence of the positive guidelines included in the new regulation and the respect of amendments , which would already exclude a substantial share of farms situated in those areas .
That is why we are trying to make the rapporteur aware of the need to take an initiative and table together with us an oral amendment which would eliminate the minimum area conditions .
Finally it is important to stress and reassert the fact that without calling into question the desirable and possible diversification of farming activities , the vital aspects of the future of countryside and rural activity will continue to depend on the direct and permanent development of agriculture and the relevant desire to guarantee future resources destined to improve the social and structural aspects of farming production , making it possible to promote dignified living conditions for all farmers and in particular those who farm in peripheral or under-developed regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission , I should first of all like to thank Mrs Redondo Jiménez and her colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their report on the Commission proposals which are now before the House .
I am pleased that the Committee on Agriculture welcomes the Commission 's initiative of recasting these three regulations on agricultural structures .
This involves a number of minor changes of a purely formal and linguistic nature .
The Commission 's aim is to make the regulations clearer and easier to understand , without altering their content .
That is why , quite logically , we are rejecting any amendments which affect the substance of the regulations .
Any debate on altering the substance of the regulations should be conducted separately from that on the present proposals .
Here I should like to take up what Mr Fantuzzi said .
It is certainly not the case that the Cork conference was merely a talkingshop . On the contrary , I continue to support precisely the conclusions of that conference that in principle we need rural development wherever there are rural regions , now and in the future .
I would urge Parliament to continue to support me in this endeavour .
In view of the fact that this is a recasting of the regulations , Amendments Nos 3 to 9 and 15 are being rejected .
For the same reason , the reference to new amendments in Amendment No 1 is inappropriate .
All this goes beyond a recasting of the provisions in question .
On the other hand , we welcome the clarifications and corrections contained in Amendments Nos 2 and 10 to 14 , which clearly improve the present text .
These amendments are in line with a recasting of the relevant provisions .
If we can stand by the idea of recasting the regulations , the Commission and Parliament now have an excellent opportunity to help to clarify and simplify our policy on farm structures .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 12 noon .
Preliminary draft budget for 1998 ( presentation )
The next item is the presentation of the preliminary draft budget for the 1998 financial year .
Mr President , serious efforts are being made by public administrations throughout the Union to obtain and to sustain a stable financial environment .
The Community budget must be compatible with these efforts .
At the same time , existing commitments need to be respected , and also the European value added of the Community budget needs to be improved .
Preparations for enlargement have to start with the 1998 Community budget .
Margins have to be built up gradually to facilitate enlargement with limited resources .
But the substance of Community programmes must also start to take into account the requirements of enlargement .
The programmes must be such that they can be effectively implemented throughout the enlarged Community .
At the end of 1997 , following the new procedure established in the SEM 2000 context , the Commission adopted a rigorous position on preparations for the preliminary draft budget .
It decided to limit the 1998 PDB as close as possible to 3 % .
Allowing for the full budgeting of the structural actions , as agreed in Edinburgh , this implies a maximum 0.5 % growth for the other categories .
The Commission also agreed to the full integration of the allocation of financial and human resources .
On human resources , it specifically decided for a second year to freeze the total number of staff - except for some small addition owing to the enlargement - and to undertake a compulsory redeployment exercise .
I want to emphasize this last fact : this time the Commission is really redeploying the human resources in order better to serve the political priorities which have been set by the Commission and the budgetary authority .
On 13 March 1997 the European Parliament adopted its guidelines for the 1998 budget procedure .
Based on a proposal of its rapporteur , Mr Tillich , Parliament indicated its willingness to agree with the Council on an overall rate of increase of the budget .
But there is a list of conditions for such an agreement , as you , of course , know .
In particular , Parliament has underlined the importance of real savings in agricultural spending on the compulsory side .
In early April the Finance Ministers decided in the informal Ecofin to be more actively involved in decisions concerning the Community budget .
This was followed yesterday by discussions in Ecofin in Brussels .
This greater involvement of the Finance Ministers is in line with the European Parliament 's resolution on the 1997 budget .
One important aspect agreed in the informal Ecofin was that strict budgetary discipline must be applied to all categories of the financial perspective .
There was also recognition that the Interinstitutional Agreement needs to be respected .
Just before the end of April , the Commission , the Council and Parliament agreed to transfer ECU 500m in commitment appropriations for structural actions from 1998 to 1999 ; and , as the Commission stated , this will not endanger the effective implementation of the programmes .
Taking into account these elements , on 30 April 1997 the Commission was able to adopt a preliminary draft budget fully in line with the objectives stated in January .
Commitment appropriations are to grow by 2.4 % ; payments by less than 2.9 % compared to the 1997 budget .
Based on the interinstitutional agreement and the adjustments agreed by the end of April , the commitment appropriations for structural funds are to grow by 6.5 % .
With regard to the payment appropriations , the Commission considers 8 % growth the minimum to meet the commitments .
Of course the actual need of payment credits depends on the invoices presented by the Commission .
For Categories 1 , Agriculture , 3 , Internal policies and 4 , External policies , careful preparations showed that it is possible to limit the growth to 0.5 % .
After yesterday 's Ecofin there have been a number of calls in today 's press for budget growth to be cut to zero .
I just want to say that if we are talking about cuts in payment credits , which do not change the underlying regulations and commitments , we are not talking about real savings but very often just about a change in the forecast .
Real savings normally require changes to regulations .
The budget proposal for administrative spending , Category 5 , has to take account of the high rate of growth in pension obligations for all Community institutions .
The growth rate for next year will be more than 11 % .
Parliament has commented on this issue and the Commission is going to respond on the basis of Parliament 's report on the 1997 budget .
As a partial counterweight , all other items of expenditure have been frozen at the 1997 level .
If the other institutions accept a similar line , the total growth of Category 5 could be limited to 1.1 % .
Overall , the Commission proposal is fully in line with trends in national public expenditure .
I now turn to some specific points on the budget .
On agriculture , growth in expenditure can only be limited to 0.5 % if the Commission proposal to cut per hectare aid for cereal producers is adopted .
This decision is important for reasons of agricultural policy but it is also a key signal for the 1998 budget .
It is important to begin to achieve real savings in this sector .
As I said earlier , real savings need to be based on changes in underlying regulations , not only in changes of forecasts .
In Categories 3 and 4 the Commission PDB continues to sharpen the expenditure profile .
As foreseen , in Category 3 , it proposes to conclude a fourth research framework programme and to mobilize additional funds for transEuropean networks and small and medium-sized enterprises .
Education and training , the third pillar , consumer protection and the environment are also reinforced .
In my opinion the majority of these priorities are shared by Parliament .
In some details there may be slightly different interpretations .
In Category 4 , the external cooperation activities of the Community continue along the lines of the European Council of Cannes .
An important element here is the reorientation of PHARE to prepare accession .
I know that there has been a lot of discussion of that issue in the Committee on Budgets .
Its reorientation is of extreme importance during this year and in the execution of next year 's budget .
The outcome of the whole budget exercise will depend on the cooperation of the two branches of the budget authority .
Each side has to take responsibility to adopt a 1998 Community budget which contributes to a stable financial environment and , at the same time , strengthens the key policies for Europe .
The Commission hopes that discussions between the two branches of the budget authority will help to achieve this purpose .
Thank you , Mr President .
I am extremely grateful to Mr Liikanen for presenting the preliminary draft budget and addressing us here in the plenary .
Having looked for the first time at the documents available , I should like as general rapporteur to state my initial views on the Commission 's preliminary draft budget for 1998 .
The Commission is consistent with its decision on the guidelines of January 1997 .
It has allowed for an increase of 0.5 % in all the categories of the budget except Category 2 , where it adheres to the Edinburgh agreements and treats the Structural Funds accordingly .
This produces a 3 % growth in the 1998 budget , which in reality amounts to zero budgetary growth once the increase in GNP has been deducted .
The European Parliament stressed in its guidelines that it was concerned to see a budget with European value added , and that it would only go along with the Commission and the Council in approving a modest increase in the budget if the Council opted for budgetary moderation in all categories , and not only in respect of payments - I was glad to hear you say as much yourself - but also commitments .
Moreover , there are still a number of outstanding problems which we should like to resolve with the Council by the end of the discussions on the 1998 budget .
As the Council is aware , these outstanding issues are the legal bases , the classification of expenditure , and interinstitutional matters concerning the budget lines relating to the second and third pillars .
The Commissioner has indicated that the Commission 's preliminary draft budget comes close to the targets set by Parliament in its guidelines .
Parliament too would like the Union 's budget for 1998 to make a significant contribution to combating unemployment and boosting the potential of SMEs to create lasting jobs .
We also see eye to eye on the subject of the initial preparations for EU enlargement , which will no doubt please many colleagues in the House , as well as those affected by this process throughout the European Union .
Support for youth , educational and cultural programmes has also been built into the preliminary draft budget .
I should also like to address some fundamental comments to the Council representatives who are not here today : the 1998 EU budget has a lower rate of increase than most national budgets in the European Union , and the Member States should not call for pruning of the EU budget alone , but should also put their own budgetary houses in order .
Although our citizens are not directly affected by the EU budget , if the European Union is bled dry financially , then their support for the Union will soon decline .
I now come to some comments on the individual areas of expenditure , the individual categories : I would compliment you , Commissioner , on your success in managing to achieve the same budgetary discipline in Category 1 as in the other areas of expenditure .
It is now up to the Council to take a decision on the savings of ECU 1.35 billion , and those would indeed be real savings .
What is more , the gentlemen 's agreement with the Council , as proposed by you , now makes it very likely that a viable budgetary approach can be drawn up for the agricultural sector by autumn 1997 - on the basis of hard data - for the 1998 perspectives .
As I said , you have adhered to the Edinburgh agreements and increased the funding of the Structural Funds accordingly .
I told you yesterday evening , during the Budget Committee 's discussions , that the Commission 's proposal to enter as of now the negative reserve to secure the peace process in Ireland under Category 2 is quite extraordinary .
Although this is provided for in the Treaties , it will certainly lead to conflicts within both Parliament and the Council , as you know .
I believe that this measure is inappropriate and will require further discussion .
As far as Category 3 is concerned , it might be worth considering an approach somewhat different from the one you have adopted .
Looking at the individual budget lines which are subject to codecision , we note an increase of 2.6 % .
On the multiannual programmes , you have made a saving of 1 % .
For those budget lines which are annual , most of which were included in the budget on the proposal of Members of the European Parliament , you have proposed a cut of 16 % , whereas in the case of your own proposals - the budget lines created at the Commission 's initiative - you have scheduled a 40 % increase for the 1998 preliminary draft budget .
Clearly this is not altogether logical , Commissioner !
I now turn to the question of the Veterinary Office .
It struck me , on reading the preliminary draft budget for 1998 , that in principle you have earmarked nothing whatsoever for this .
I cannot imagine that you require only human resources , a need of which you have informed us in the supplementary budget .
Surely the Veterinary Office will also need the technical wherewithal to carry out its duties .
You still have to tell us why absolutely nothing has been entered .
In Category 3 , you have proposed an increase for the trans-European networks which actually goes beyond the outcome achieved between Parliament and the Council in the Conciliation Committee .
This is all the more incomprehensible when we know that there is of course a considerable debate as to the purpose of the transEuropean networks ; the increase of ECU 123 million - a huge 34 or 35 % - therefore obviously needs explaining .
The Commission has already proposed substantial cuts in the area of social policy .
We are familiar with the little game which the Council has played here several times before .
The European Parliament will not simply let this pass .
Let me make just one comment on information policy .
Here the Commission 's preliminary draft budget takes with one hand and gives back with the other : in principle , you are making a cut of ECU 3 m , whilst increasing expenditure on general information policy by ECU 1.5 m .
You will be aware , however , that we still have ECU 11 m in the reserve for general information policy .
Your colleague Mr Oreja promised to report by February on how the Commission would like to use these funds , so that they can finally be transferred from the reserve to the budget line .
I would therefore ask you to tell Mr Oreja that the House is still waiting , and will not make a move in this direction unless the Commission does its homework .
I have just one remark on Category 4 , Mr President .
The Commission has responded to Parliament 's initiative regarding the trans-European networks by in principle making a cut , whereas we entered the ECU 100 m for cross-border cooperation last year in order to link the trans-European networks to Eastern Europe .
We have not yet heard the final word on this matter .
I believe that the individual services of the Commission still need to present a suitable proposal .
The solution which you have now set out , whereby all of this would be dealt with under PHARE , is not a viable one .
Parliament will be devoting particular attention to this issue .
As regards the question of subsidies to support European organizations , I believe that you are taking a rather sweeping approach here , not to say a radical one .
You have simply axed certain budget lines and increased others , which could undoubtedly be discussed at length .
In January , we agreed that you would present us with a report , and you told me yesterday evening that you intended to do so next year .
This procedure is repeated every year .
I would invite you and indeed urge you actually to present such a report this year in the 1998 budgetary procedure .
Then we will both have a general starting-point for our consideration of these budget lines .
Of course , this matter can also be raised with individual colleagues and committees .
We congratulate you on SEM 2000 and MEP 2000 .
Your approach is the right one .
The results will only become apparent in the medium to long term , and I cannot say anything more today .
Nor is it likely that we shall reach any definite findings during the 1998 budgetary procedure .
This preliminary draft budget is the first step .
I hope , for the sake of the European taxpayer , that we shall reach a satisfactory conclusion together at the end of the year .
The European Parliament has undertaken to do so , and we are prepared to make a realistic contribution to the 1998 budget .
I should like to make two or three comments about Mr Tillich 's intervention .
As far as the Veterinary Office is concerned , the requirements are covered by the additional amending budget which the Commission has proposed .
If it is accepted , we shall have to send an amending letter for next year 's budget .
That is the procedure .
As far as the 1998 budget is concerned , our indicative planning includes also part of the human resources for the Veterinary Office .
So , if it is accepted , major priority will be accorded to the Veterinary Office as regards human resources .
Secondly , as regards subsidies , perhaps yesterday I did not make myself totally clear .
Our intention is not to postpone everything until next year : we are ready to come up with the information this year for the Committee on Budgets .
I spoke about the need to have a clearer and more transparent system when we decide about subsidies .
We have too many sources which give subsidies according to different criteria ; for any well-functioning budgetary administration the rules should be clear , the same for all and transparent , so that any organization which applies for money knows what they are .
As for public control , that would also be essentially easier .
We are prepared to return to that issue later .
As far as the social actions are concerned , I want to state here that in Category II the increase of resources for the Social Fund is about ECU 1b next year , so this is a major issue .
For Category III our problem is the court case which is still pending .
That is why , regarding those actions which are tied up with the court case , we have not been able to propose more funds at the moment .
As regards information policy , I shall convey a message to Mr Oreja .
I am sure that we shall have a lot to discuss on these matters during this year .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
Emissions from non-road mobile machinery
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0136 / 97 ) by Mr Kenneth Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the measures to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery ( C4-0072 / 97-95 / 0209 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , it is a great privilege to be given the floor to speak on such a riveting topic .
It is only once in a lifetime that people get to make a speech about the measures to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in nonroad mobile machinery .
I am sure that if Tolstoy had thought of such a title then the course of literary history in Europe would have been quite different .
This is in fact a piece of legislation in line with Parliament 's desire to reduce emissions from motor vehicles which cause enormous damage to the natural environment and human health .
The legislation aims to reduce gaseous pollutants emitted by combustion engines , especially nitrogen oxides and particulates , and deter non-road mobile machinery .
For those of you who are collectors , this is actually about tractors and combine harvesters although I fail to see why the Commission did not say so .
They are not designed for use on roads but that does not mean they are not a source of damage and therefore regulation is needed in this area which was previously unregulated .
It is good and uncontentious and we are all in agreement with one exception .
Today not only are we talking about a matter with a title that nobody can understand or really care about , we are also talking about comitology .
This is of course a matter , which while it did not exactly decide the result of the British election , will not decide the result of the French election or decide the result of very much else , is nonetheless important .
Comitology is about the way in which technical decisions are made about political matters or how political decisions are made about technical matters .
It relates to that very difficult area .
At the first reading Parliament approved this proposal without any amendment because we thought that it was uncontentious and no political group felt very strongly about it .
We thought it was worthy and DG XI and Mrs Bjerregaard came up with a proposal that met with the approval of all of us .
However , it was then submitted to Council who looked at the comitology procedures and changed them .
After its return to Parliament we discovered that the comitology committee had been changed from a type 1 committee i.e. an advisory committee , to type 2b , a management committee .
To the outside observer this is not a matter of great importance - it is just the faceless Brussels bureaucrats at it again .
In fact this matters a great deal because the change makes the whole decisionmaking procedure of the Community more opaque and less accountable and therefore we cannot approve it .
We are determined to go back to the original position and our amendments are designed to do that .
There is just one further thing I wish to say .
There is an amendment from Mr Lannoye of the Green Group concerning economic instruments and that amendment defined conditions for possible economic instruments and tax incentives .
When this was proposed in committee I supported it and the committee 's decision is a reflection of that .
It has subsequently been pointed out to me that it poses certain problems for Member States as it is too restrictive in that it restricts the possibility of Member States improving the situation in their own environment .
Therefore it may well be that Members , when they come to vote on this - and I can see that they are all listening very carefully right around the Chamber to what I am saying at the moment - will want to reconsider their view .
They might even consider not supporting the Environment Committee 's recommendation on this one particular amendment .
Mr President , I shall not deal at any length with the first amendment , which the committee 's chairman has explained extremely well , but just say something on the subject of taxes and openness .
It may be that we have not found exactly the right wording for Amendment No 2 , but I think it would be unfortunate if the amendment were to be rejected , since I believe we need to concentrate on trying to have some economic instruments introduced .
We all know , and the Commissioner better than anyone , that it appears almost impossible to have anything unanimously adopted , and so what we can at least hope for is that the individual countries will have the opportunity to apply some kind of economic incentives , so that we can gain experience of them .
Amendment No 3 deals with openness .
I think we need to emphasize that , now more than ever , it is necessary for us to have openness in our decision-making procedures , and I would therefore call on the Commissioner to look favourably on this proposal .
Mr President , the Commission would like to take this opportunity of thanking the Environment Committee and its rapporteur , Mr Collins , for the care that has been shown in dealing with this proposal , which is a very technical one .
The proposal covers various machines - bulldozers , excavators and combine harvesters - and it is becoming increasingly important to reduce air pollution in this sector , which has yet to be regulated .
The pollution from these sources was already substantial in 1990 and , according to the forecasts , by 2010 it will be almost on the same scale as that from road transport , given that pollution from that sector is being reduced .
The level of particulate pollution will be nearly as high as that from all road vehicles , even if we assume that this proposal is adopted and there is a considerable reduction in engine emissions from new machines , including farm tractors .
The quantity of nitrogen oxides will be around two thirds of the quantity produced by road transport .
Under this proposal for a directive , strict emission requirements will be introduced gradually in two stages , with stage 1 taking effect in September 1998 and stage 2 being phased in between January 2001 and 2003 .
The common position is aimed at reducing the emissions of carbon monoxide , nitrogen oxides , hydrocarbons and particulates , so that the final reduction as regards these last three substances will be 50 % , 29 % and 67 % respectively .
In the latest research into air quality in Europe in connection with the Auto / Oil Programme , reducing emissions of these substances from all sources is being given top priority .
The common position sets its sights high and , if the directive is finally adopted , it will be the first example of legislation to reduce emissions from mobile sources where the same principles are being followed on both sides of the Atlantic .
If the directive is adopted quickly , it will be the first time ever in terms of legislation on air pollution from mobile sources that Europe - at least for a while - is further advanced than the USA and the rest of the world .
This shows that the new legislation will not only bring benefits for the environment and harmonize the internal market , but will also improve the EU 's possibilities for trade .
The Commission would very much like to see the proposal finally adopted in June this year .
This is because of the previous delays , and it would mean that the Member States only have six months to transpose the directive into national law .
The industry has only nine months to secure the certification of the most significant category of engines , and there are only three and a quarter years left of the period of stability between stages 1 and 2 of the emission requirements for that engine category .
We could not have made the timetable any tighter , so any extension of the current legislative procedure would mean a change - perhaps a radical change - in the proposal .
Therefore - and this is also why I have taken some time over my introduction - the Commission took the view that it was appropriate to respond flexibly to some of the Council 's amendments and to approve the changes made in the common position , since in this case the Commission has above all given priority to having the text adopted quickly .
I therefore also hope that the discussion of Parliament 's amendments will help to avoid any delay .
My reaction to Amendment No 1 is very brief .
The Commission can naturally agree to the introduction of a new recital on the modus vivendi .
Amendment No 2 reinstates the original article from the Commission 's proposal .
This sets out a framework on how the Member States can grant tax incentives with a view to encouraging the rapid introduction of engines which meet stricter emission requirements .
The deletion of this article should be seen against the background of the Council 's statement that the adoption of the directive does not create a precedent for any future decisions on tax incentives .
I naturally regard this as important , since I share the wish expressed by both Mr Collins and Mrs Dybkjær for the tax instrument to be applied .
A debate of principle was held on this subject as part of the discussions on the Auto / Oil Programme , and let me say at this point that the amendment we are considering today is not in keeping with the line which Parliament took during the debate on that programme , as the rapporteur , Mr Collins , also pointed out .
Even if this framework article is omitted , the Member States are not prevented from introducing tax incentives under the Treaty .
The framework is principally desirable in terms of the internal market .
From the environmental viewpoint , it is not a problem if we do not lay down a framework of this kind .
On the basis of these arguments , the Commission takes the view that it should not accept Amendment No 2 in the form in which it has been tabled , but as my comments indicate , I do agree with its political intention .
As regards Amendment No 3 , I would emphasize that I personally am very much in favour of transparency and of public access to administrative procedures .
However , making this committee 's meetings public and publishing its agendas and minutes would be incompatible with the current rules on the meetings of committees .
That also means that I naturally cannot accept this on my own initiative .
The proposed amendment would require the current legislation on committees to be amended , and an issue of this kind ought to be resolved in conjunction with other related problems .
So at present , the Commission is unfortunately unable to accept Amendment No 3 .
Amendment No 4 concerns the standard committee procedure for adaptation to technical progress .
In principle , the Commission is not against Parliament 's proposal for an advisory committee to be employed .
However , we once again feel that , with a view to rapid adoption , a type 2b committee as introduced in the common position does not create any fundamental difficulties for the management and application of the directive .
This is particularly the case in the present situation , since the committee under this directive is closely associated with the similar committee which was established in connection with the framework directive on type approval for motor vehicles .
The Commission is therefore obliged to stand by the common position and regrettably cannot accept Amendment No 4 .
I hope that these quite extensive comments have contributed to Parliament 's understanding of the background to the Commission 's decisions and , finally , I also hope that the directive can be adopted as soon as possible and above all that it will enter into force without delay .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Biocidal products
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0137 / 97 ) by Mrs K. Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the placing of biocidal products on the market ( C4-0006 / 97-00 / 0465 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , it is essential for us to establish clearly which chemicals are used in the EU , and where and how they are in use .
There are said to be a hundred thousand different chemicals on the market , but only a few have been through an authorization system which involves a risk assessment , and we see time and time again that chemicals can have terrible effects on nature .
Just think of the debate on the diminishing quality of male sperm , because of chemicals behaving like artificial hormones .
The Committee on the Environment is disturbed by the changes regarding water in Annex VI .
Water is an extremely sensitive subject .
All the time , we hear horrifying stories of contamination from sources which we did not think could cause pollution , and we must insist on having the maximum possible protection for our water resources .
Through this proposal for a directive on biocides , many chemicals will be subject to a process of authorization , and that is in itself a very positive move .
However , our welcome for the general purpose of the directive has been overshadowed by the way in which the whole matter has been dealt with by the Commission and the Council .
When the common position was adopted , the Council of Ministers and the Commission worked out together how parts of the directive could be interpreted over the head of the European Parliament , which is one of the joint legislators .
They wrote 14 declarations into the minutes of the meeting , and these were not attached to the proposal which was forwarded to Parliament for second reading .
I have officially received three of these 14 declarations from the Commission , with the remarkable request that I should treat the declarations - which were an initiative from the Commission - as confidential .
It cannot be right for us to do this .
The European Parliament practises open legislation .
Other EU institutions and national parliaments could learn a good deal from that .
And it should be pointed out that we are not talking here about secret declarations as such , but simply something which has not yet been published .
So the European Parliament is being expected to continue its work on the proposal without knowing the full intentions of the Commission and the Council of Ministers , even though as a joint legislator and a body elected by the people it is directly responsible to our citizens .
It is objectionable that the Council and the Commission should try to legislate in this way , not least in view of the fact that as recently as December 1996 , the Council presidency agreed that in future all declarations would be sent to Parliament with the common position .
So the Commission and the Council of Ministers were meant to be agreed in principle that Parliament must have the whole basis for the decision presented to it at the same time as the common position , but they are not demonstrating this in practice .
Generally speaking , declarations should be avoided .
The legislation should show what the Member States have actually agreed upon .
The worst thing about the declarations is that Europe 's citizens , who have to live with the rules and laws which we adopt , have no earthly chance of finding out what the rules actually contain , and that the declarations make it possible for the rules to be interpreted differently in each Member State .
They create bureaucracy and a lack of clarity , and should simply not be part of modern legislation .
Other strange things have also been happening in the second reading by the Council .
Two new annexes have been attached to the common position , but it is hard to see what the purpose of these is .
As you know , we in Parliament proposed the framework formulations which were meant to provide exactly the kind of flexibility that many governments wish to have .
The frameworks were designed to give governments the possibility of concentrating their work on the most toxic substances and spending less time on those which are less dangerous .
The two new annexes make it necessary for us to have a clear answer to the following question : what is meant by ' low-risk ' ?
The risk is associated with both the substance and its use , just as dosages are critical in the world of medicine .
Using the term low-risk gives the impression that a guarantee of the product 's safety is being provided , but danger to the environment is of course precisely what is already being taken into account in the method for authorizing products which the Commission set out in its original proposal .
The other new annex also raises a number of questions .
In the first place , it looks as if it was not even possible to work out what it should be called .
What in Danish are termed ' almindelige handelsprodukter ' appear in English as ' commodity substances ' ; in German , they are called something quite different , namely ' bestimmte Wirkstoffe ' .
What these extremely different terms have in common is that they all create an unreasonable amount of scope for individual interpretations .
All this lack of clarity has led the Environment Committee to propose that the annexes should be completely deleted .
Mr President , I would like to give my support to the rapporteur 's proposals for this directive at second reading .
This directive seeks to introduce European-Union-wide controls for the marketing and use of biocidal products , which are a wide variety of chemical substances , used to control disease , pests and other nuisances .
We want to see and allow free trade in these substances but , at the same time , maintain a high level of protection for human health and the environment .
I particularly welcome the introduction of a system of comparative assessment , which will ensure that some of the older biocides are replaced by safe and more environmentally-friendly substances and that new substances do not pose new dangers .
The producers of these substances should , within the framework of the directive , be able to market different products and compete in a free and fair manner , but also in a safe manner and one which respects the environment .
However , like my colleague the rapporteur , I have been concerned about the way the Council has formulated the common position and , in particular , has placed many of the declarations on how it will interpret the provisions of this proposal in its private Minutes .
It was only with some difficulty that Parliament obtained these Minutes and managed to examine these secret declarations .
One has to ask : what has the Council got to hide ?
What is it ashamed of ?
Whereas there is a great deal of logic in some of the provisions of the directive - for example , the simplified procedure for some less dangerous substances which are better known , less toxic and pose no serious risk - one has to be sure that these procedures are not abused to the disadvantage of the environment and public health .
Until I can be assured of that , I can only support the rapporteur 's opinion that these procedures should not be permitted until we have clear and transparent controls over the way in which they are applied .
The directive has the potential to fulfil the needs of everyone , to protect the environment and public health , to give the consumers a range of products from which they can make a choice and also to enable the industry to sell freely and fairly in the marketplace .
I want the directive to fulfil those needs and I will endeavour to help the rapporteur to ensure , through the conciliation process , that it does so .
Mr President , the directive on biocidal products , which we are discussing at second reading today , is a convincing illustration of the need for European legislation .
Neither at European level nor in the Member States are biocides regulated in any systematic or uniform way .
This directive therefore fills a legal gap and is essential not only to protect the environment and consumers , but also to guarantee free trade in Europe .
Biocides are active substances contained in products such as disinfectants and pesticides , as well as preservatives .
At present , there are some 500 active substances of this kind on the market in the European Union , and around 5000 products containing these substances are manufactured , mostly by small and medium-sized enterprises .
Following Parliament 's adoption of a large number of critical amendments - some quite fundamental - to the Commission 's proposal at first reading , I can now say on behalf of my group that I regard the common position as a successful balancing act , taking due account of the interests of all concerned . Our group fully endorses it .
We believe that most of the amendments which have been retabled are counterproductive , and we shall not support them .
However , we are extremely concerned , suspicious and distrustful as regards one point which has already been raised by both the rapporteur and Mr Bowe : this is the problem which Mrs Jensen referred to as Commission declarations in the Council 's minutes .
Where such declarations cover future technical guidelines and the inclusion of active substances in Annex 1 , they can perhaps be tolerated .
However , they cannot be tolerated when they amount to an interpretation of the individual articles of the directive .
These declarations have no legal status for the purposes of the legislation , since they are not part of the act itself , but given that they are intended to interpret certain aspects of the legal text , they do have an effect on it in legal terms .
This is a form of legislation which is not provided for in any legislative procedure set out in the Treaties , and it cannot be tolerated by the European Parliament .
My group and others will therefore seek to ensure during the conciliation procedure that either these declarations disappear from the minutes or their content is incorporated into the existing legal text .
We therefore support some of the amendments , with a view to maintaining the possibility of making a statement in the Conciliation Committee .
Mrs Bjerregaard , please tell us here and now what is the purpose of such declarations in the minutes .
If the entry into force of such an important measure - which is fine in its present form - is now to be delayed , then it is the conduct of the Commission and the Council , not Parliament , which is to blame .
This conciliation process would be superfluous if we clarified matters beforehand .
Therefore , Commissioner , we shall be very interested to hear what you have to say .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what we are considering here is the common position established by the Council on 20 December last year on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the placing of biocidal products on the market .
I would remind the House that the term biocides refers to a very wide range of products including disinfectants , insecticides , fungicides , and preservatives for wood and for the treatment of textiles and structural materials .
All these products contain an active principle , and that is what really has to be controlled , in view of the routine and widespread use of products containing such active principles .
So the significance of the Directive can easily be understood .
It has been calculated that biocidal products actually number more than 14 , 000 , and that they are placed on the market not only by a few multinationals but also by countless small- and medium-sized enterprises , especially in Italy where such enterprises account for 70 % of production .
The Directive essentially has two objectives : 1 ) the harmonization of the internal biocide market and 2 ) a high level of protection for man and the environment .
The common position , which was adopted unanimously , has been accepted by the Commission , since the amendments introduced do not substantially affect either the content or the effect of the Directive .
Moreover , the changes proposed by the Member States clarify or simplify certain aspects of the authorization procedures .
The final text of the common position is more comprehensible and practical and highlights the main aims of the proposal - the protection of human health and the environment - while at the same time permitting free trade in biocides .
The Union for Europe Group is in agreement with the common position and with some amendments tabled here today , but it is absolutely opposed to Amendments Nos 17 , 18 and 19 .
It opposes No 17 because that amendment is designed to reduce by six months the period for transposition of this very complex Directive - even if an eighteen-month transposition period were to be approved , it would not be observed by any Member State .
And it opposes Amendments Nos 18 and 19 because they would substantially change the balance of the Directive , and it would be difficult for the Council to accept them .
Mr President , the Liberal Group will be voting in favour of the committee 's amendments .
I hope that there will be the necessary number of votes in favour of these amendments and against those of the Greens - not because of any fundamental disagreement on the matter as a whole , but because we need to concentrate on the present .
Like other speakers , I shall now also focus on the declarations .
In the old days , international relations were dealt with by a diplomatic élite .
The art was to steer a course between friend and foe ; secretiveness was the order of the day , and in any case there were no ordinary people involved to consider asking for advice .
Such has also been the case through most of the Union 's history , and it has been shown time and time again that it is difficult to change this state of affairs .
Most recently , we have seen it in connection with this directive , which is a long and complicated one in itself , and therefore in a sense could accommodate everything .
The Council 's many secret declarations show that people in the Council still believe that European cooperation is something which should be dealt with by a small élite .
One might imagine that the many surveys of public opinion , which all point to a lack of public support , might lead the Council to think differently .
But we can see that this is not so .
It is incredible that it should be necessary to remind the Council that the development of democracy - and not least the developments in the EU - have meant that openness and the involvement of the population have become a necessary - though not of course sufficient - precondition for legitimizing the decisions which are taken .
It also demonstrates a total lack of respect for the European Parliament - the only directly elected institution in the EU - in that it is expected to sit and discuss common positions from the Council which do not contain everything which has been decided .
The Council 's argument is that the declarations only serve to clarify the legal text , but why then are they so secret ?
Why should they be withheld from the rest of us ?
It would certainly have been reasonable for them to be incorporated into the preamble or elsewhere , and then perhaps they would have been more immediately comprehensible .
It is not surprising that there is a widespread scepticism about the EU among our citizens , when parts of the legislative texts are kept secret .
The Council 's approach is therefore directly undermining the whole legitimacy of the EU .
Mr President , first of all I should like to add my voice to those already heard , deploring the total lack of transparency with which this matter has been dealt , a very important matter .
After all biocidal products concern hundreds of products which , at varying degrees , present risks to living beings .
Some of these risks are acceptable but others are not .
I am thinking in particular of bio-accumulable substances or persistent substances which may have carcinogenic or mutagenic effects and even affect the hormonal systems of mammals , human beings in particular .
These products should be withdrawn from the market as quickly as possible .
But what is the result of the common position in the wake , after all , of the initial proposal by the Commission ?
It organises the free circulation of substances and in particular of these carcinogenic substances but it has absolutely no aim of redirecting production towards low-risk substances in terms of people and the environment .
The Committee on the Environment has had very little impact on this .
Of course , we shall be supporting the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment but we feel that some of the supplementary amendments , which we have retabled , must absolutely be taken into consideration .
I am amazed to hear the position of the EPP which , in theory , feels that it is not going to be supporting the amendments , even those tabled by the Committee on the Environment .
On a matter of this kind , I think that this is an inexcusable attitude .
I should like to draw attention to the three main amendments which we have tabled .
I have in mind Amendment No 32 which is particularly reasonable - it stipulates that inclusion on the list of authorised products must be refused or withdrawn when there is another product on the market posing less of a risk , or another method enabling the same aim to be achieved .
This seems to be quite logical .
Amendments Nos 34 and 37 introduce the principle of refusing authorization for any subject recognised as carcinogenic and for which there is no harmlessness threshold .
Finally , Amendments Nos 38 and 39 demand that the dossier accompanying the authorization request supply information not only on the active matter studied but also on degradation products .
We know that many degradation products can sometimes be more dangerous than the initial product .
It would therefore be incoherent for no mention of this in the dossier accompanying the authorization request .
These are just some proposals which are far from purist or extremist and which we would like to have approved by the whole of the European Parliament .
Mr President , as Mr Lannoye has already said , this directive does not meet the environmental criteria .
It could be a very significant directive , but it offers no incentive whatsoever to restrict the use of biocidal products .
Of the 450 active substances and 10 000 biocidal products already circulating on the internal market , only a handful will be authorized under the method proposed in the directive .
The EU is primarily restricting itself to harmonizing the opportunities for industrial competition , instead of ensuring maximum health and environmental protection where these substances are used .
The substitution principle must be established here : in other words , toxic products must be replaced by less toxic ones .
As Mr Lannoye said , this is one of the most important criteria .
It would also at last make it possible to compete for authorization .
The European Union should therefore be looking to take up the Swedish type of legislation , which links such authorization to the principle of competition .
The criteria for the authorization of biocidal products are flawed on many counts , but the main one for us is that , in the case of some biocides , no minimum value is set for carcinogenic ingredients .
These ingredients are carcinogenic even at very low concentrations , and biocides containing carcinogens should be withdrawn from the market immediately : given that biocidal products are in such wide use , our objective must be to eliminate carcinogenic substances from them , and hence from the market .
We would also be very much in favour of compulsory labelling for biocides .
Our aim must be to protect consumers and safeguard the environment , and not to give free rein to the biocide industry .
The Commission would like to thank the Environment Committee and in particular its rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , for the considerable amount of work which has been done on this proposal .
It is the final part of the EU 's legislation on chemical substances , and also a very important proposal in that context .
I therefore have some comments to make , firstly on the proposal in general and the prospects it contains , and then on what has proved to be the more political debate here in Parliament today concerning the secret declarations .
The aim of the proposal is to harmonize the internal market in biocidal products and the active substances they contain , and to bring about a high degree of protection for humans and the environment .
It covers a wide range of product types , such as disinfectants , wood preservatives , insecticides and anti-fouling products .
Ultimately , it will only be legal to use those active substances included on the list annexed to the directive in biocidal products of this kind .
Decisions on inclusion in the annex will be taken at EU level , with the starting-point being a complete risk assessment based on information from the industry .
When the directive has been adopted , the active substances which exist at present will be reviewed in order to determine whether they can be included in the list in Annex I. This review assumes that information will be provided by the sector and evaluated in the Member States .
A Commission regulation on the review will be adopted in due course .
The directive will also harmonize the national systems for authorizing biocidal products , with common principles for evaluation being introduced .
The Member States will then be obliged to recognize such authorizations on a mutual basis .
At first reading , Parliament supported the basic principles of the proposal and put forward a number of suggestions for improvements in the form of 64 amendments which were adopted .
The majority of these have been included in the common position , for the most part on the initiative of the Commission .
I shall now explain the Commission 's stance on Parliament 's amendments here in second reading .
Forty-one amendments have been tabled , and of these the Commission can accept 21 completely , partially or in principle .
Amendments Nos 18 and 19 are intended to remove the so-called simplified procedures for low-risk biocidal products and commodity substances by deleting the new Annexes IA and IB .
The introduction of these two procedures is one of the Council 's most important contributions in the common position .
The Commission has endorsed this , since it takes the view that the addition of these annexes will generally make the directive more effective , without reducing the level of protection for mankind , animals and the environment .
The advantages are that the emphasis is placed on the most dangerous products , that there is a simpler procedure for less dangerous products , and that it is possible for active substances which may only be used to a limited extent as biocides to be brought within the scope of the directive and thereby controlled .
In this context , I must emphasize that active substances will be subject to the same evaluation procedure for inclusion in Annex IA or IB as for inclusion in Annex I. We are therefore unable to accept Amendments Nos 18 and 19 .
The Commission cannot accept the removal of the simplified procedures , but is happy with Amendments Nos 2 and 10 , which serve to tighten the controls under those procedures .
We then come to the amendments concerning biocidal products based on micro-organisms .
I should first like to reassure you all .
Biocidal products based on micro-organisms are covered by the directive .
The definition contained in Article 2 of what is understood by biocidal products and active substances is quite clear in this respect .
Many of the amendments - Nos 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 , part of 10 , 11 and part of 31 - insert into various articles specific references to Annexes IVA and IVB , which contain information requirements relating to active substances and products based on micro-organisms .
The Commission finds all these amendments useful and acceptable , with the exception of No 31 , which it can only accept in part .
Next there are the amendments on the committee procedure and initiatives by the Commission .
The purpose of Amendments Nos 15 and 16 is to change from committee procedures 2b and 3b to types 1 and 3a respectively , which is almost a reversion to the Commission 's original proposal .
The Commission defended its position in the Council , but was voted down unanimously .
In our view , the directive will certainly be manageable with the Council 's text , but we think it would be managed more easily and effectively with Parliament 's amendments .
These amendments are acceptable , except that the wording should follow closely that of Council Decision 87 / 373 / EEC and the reference to Articles 29 and 33 should not be deleted .
Amendment Nos 25 and 31 require the Commission to take the initiative at a later stage to revise and extend Annex VI , in particular by incorporating recommendations of the International Maritime Organization , the IMO .
It is proposed that Article 189b of the Treaty should be taken as the legal basis for these initiatives .
The Commission does not disagree with the aims of the amendments , although it feels that as they stand at present , they limit its right of initiative .
These amendments are therefore acceptable in principle .
All the other amendments are technical in nature , and seek to clarify and improve the individual provisions of the proposal or simplify the everyday application of the directive , and at this late stage , just before a vote , I shall not go into further details of them , but simply state the Commission 's position .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 3 , 13 , 14 , 20 , 23 , 24 and 26 , except for those parts requiring the deletion of Annexes I , IA and IB .
The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 8 and 12 .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 17 , 21 , 22 , 27 to 30 and 32 to 41 .
So much for the amendments and the actual content of the proposal , but I should now also like to comment on the declarations attached to the Council 's minutes , which have taken up a good deal of the debate .
The Commission can appreciate that Parliament has difficulties with these declarations .
The problem does not only relate to environmental proposals , but is a horizontal one and must clearly be solved in a horizontal way .
As was evident from the debate , the Council is primarily involved here , and the problem is therefore best resolved in the context of the trialogue .
The Commission 's policy is to restrict the number of declarations attached to the Council 's minutes .
They should be incorporated in the text itself or the recitals , as Parliament has also underlined here today .
The rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , also referred to the trialogue of December 1996 , and here the Commission repeated its wish that the Council should inform Parliament of any declarations attached to the minutes of its meeting and associated with the common position .
In this context , the Council adopted guidelines on the procedure for presenting declarations of this kind on 25 March 1997 .
The Commission remains willing , independently of the Council , to fulfil its obligation to keep Parliament informed by forwarding its own declarations to the House , as we have now done .
The proposal on biocides which we are discussing here today was unfortunately presented during a transitional period when no rules were really in place .
An ad hoc procedure therefore had to be devised , and that is why it took a little time for the Commission to forward the declarations .
In this context , I should like to thank Parliament , and especially the Environment Committee , for choosing not to postpone the second reading of this proposal , but instead to work in the declarations .
The Commission entirely supports transparency , and its position is that these declarations should not be kept confidential .
However , the Commission must of course respect the confidential nature of the discussions and minutes of the Council , in accordance with the Council 's code of conduct of 2 October 1995 .
It was in that spirit that the Commission asked Parliament not to make the texts of the declarations available to the public at the current stage of the procedure .
In the specific case of the proposal on biocides , the Commission takes a positive view of the pragmatic approach which Parliament has suggested , aimed at incorporating the substance of the declarations into the amendments , all of which can be accepted , as already stated , although a few of them only in principle and / or in part .
In conclusion , I should like to reiterate that the Commission supports the common position .
I am convinced that it has found the right balance between the two aims of the directive , namely the internal market and a high degree of protection .
The Commission can accept those amendments which are designed to improve the text itself and certain aspects of its implementation .
On the other hand , we cannot accept those amendments which , in the Commission 's view , would disrupt the sound balance which has been achieved during Parliament 's first reading and in the Council 's common position .
Lastly , I would once again thank all those who have worked on drafting the amendments , and those who have been here for the final part of the debate .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
VOTES
Madam President , with regard to Amendment No 1 , there has been some considerable discussion .
May I make my group 's position clear .
This report is about lobbying .
This amendment refers to Members ' assistants .
As you know , the Lehne report , which deals specifically with Members ' assistants , is before the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I would like to make it clear that my group has been pressing for this question to be dealt with in this report , but we understand some other groups are not happy with it .
If there is a clear commitment from other groups , and in particular from the Group of the European People 's Party , to deal with this in the Lehne report , we are prepared to abstain on this report .
I should like to have Mr Martens ' comments on Amendment No 1 .
Madam President , in response to Mrs Green , we do indeed think that this point will be best dealt with in Mr Lehne 's report .
We are thus prepared to abstain on Amendment 1 .
We think it is a better way of doing things to deal with members ' assistants in Mr Lehne 's report , and our Group will be abstaining of Amendment 1 .
Madam President , I just wanted to point out that there are nine groups in the European Parliament , not just two .
As far as our group is concerned , we shall be voting for Amendment No 1 , in the knowledge that it has no chance of succeeding since the two other groups have decided to abstain .
But in the future I think that any consultations should concern all group leaders .
Amendment No 15
I have been asked to isolate the words ' all gifts or ' and ' or officials of the Institution ' .
I submit the remaining text to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the rest of the paragraph ) Since the rest of the paragraph has been rejected , I do not see how we can vote on the isolated words .
Madam President , there is some confusion .
I do not think that everybody was clear that we were voting on the paragraph minus the two exclusions rather than the other way round .
I do not know if we can do the vote again but there was some confusion .
Does everyone agree that there was any confusion ?
After all , i did say that I was removing the words ' all gifts or ' and ' or officials of the Institution ' and that we were voting on the rest of the paragraph .
And the vote was quite clear , it seems to me .
If you want to have another vote , I repeat that we are voting on the paragraph , minus the words ' all gifts or ' and ' or officials of the Institution ' .
( Parliament rejected the paragraph )
Madam President , concerning the two exclusions .
One referred to officials .
That is obvious , because it is forbidden under the Staff Regulations , whilst the other , concerning gifts of all kinds , is a different matter .
I think a separate vote should have been held .
Firstly on gifts and then on officials .
But given that there is no majority for the basic text , further comment is irrelevant .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
The agreement we came to yesterday was that we would go ahead with the debate but that my group would ask for the report to be sent back to committee for further work to be done on it in the light of the debate .
I would like to make that formal request now .
( Parliament agreed to the request for referral to committee )
Madam President , Article 18 of the proposal for a regulation on improving farming structures , document 96 / 0044 ( CNS ) , establishes very restrictive conditions for the payment of compensatory amounts . It only provides for them in the case of farms larger than three hectares as a whole , and larger than two hectares in certain regions of Italy , France , Spain , Greece and Portugal .
In accordance with this , I would like to table an oral amendment to point 1 of Article 18 proposing the deletion , in the first paragraph , of the expression ' at least three hectares of usable agricultural area ( UAA ) ' and the deletion of the whole of the second sub-paragraph of paragraph 1 of Article 18 .

You have all heard the oral amendment tabled by Mr Novo .
Are there at least twelve colleagues opposed ?
( Parliament accepted the tabling of the oral amendment )
Madam President , I wanted to speak when Mr Novo tabled his oral amendment in order to say that I , the rapporteur , agree with the deletion of the limits to which he refers in his oral amendment to Article 18 .
( In successive votes , Parliament adopted the three legislative resolutions )
We think that the code of conduct for lobbyists which has been presented is excellent .
But it would have been even better if the proposal which was presented in the committee on the Rules of Procedure by my party colleague Mr Metten , of the Netherlands , had also been included .
This proposal concerned the content of the report which lobbyists are obliged to submit each year to renew their pass cards : it contains details of their lobbying of decision-makers in Parliament .
Mr Metten 's amendment proposal attempted to ensure that the report contained at the very least information on those issues over which they had tried to exert an influence and the people with whom they had been in contact for this purpose ( members , assistants and staff ) and the financial or other means they had used for this purpose for each individual issue .
It would have been excellent if this text had been included in Parliament 's procedure of work .
It is to be welcomed that we now finally have a political majority in Parliament in favour of taking the consequences of the code of conduct which we adopted last summer and amending the House 's Rules of Procedure , so that we have clear rules on how lobbyists are to operate in Parliament .
We hope that the new Rules of Procedure will not be seen as an attack on lobbyists or assistants , but can make it possible for us to work together in orderly conditions .
That has been lacking here for many years .
We have voted for the Ford report .
We think it is step towards eliminating the undue influence which powerful , rich lobbying groups have over the activities of the European Parliament .
A Parliament worthy of the name should pay heed to the political aspects as a whole and not allow itself to be governed by private individual interest groups with money .
We have also voted for amendment proposal number 15 .
It really is absurd that there is no ban on the giving of gifts and benefits to Parliamentarians , assistants and parliamentary staff ; it undermines the integrity and credibility of the institution .
But it is current EU fact , however absurd , that at the very least all such gifts and benefits should be reported and made fully public .
The Ford report deals with the Code of Conduct for lobbyists in the European Parliament .
While we feel that lobbyists may bring considerable information to us parliamentarians , it is also our duty to ensure the maximum amount of transparency in the decision-making process and in the way in which lobbies attempt to affect our decisions .
In other words , any attempt to influence this process , anything that goes beyond information , must be made visible .
We therefore ask the thousands of lobbyists who are associated with the European Parliament to establish their own professional code of conduct and to comply with it .
Any code of conduct is worthless unless it has the support of those who are involved .
May I remind you that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure is involved in a huge project aimed at creating the conditions for increasing transparency to the maximum in our relations with the outside world ?
One of the vital provisions consists in asking members of the European Parliament themselves to declare any gift or any perk which they receive , which should in principle cover any external action of any kind .
This obligation stems from the Nordmann report which we adopted in 1996 .
May I also remind you that we are working on assistance and intergroups and these provisions will add to the content of the Code of Conduct ?
In any case , this Code of Conduct will only be useful if the quaestors control its application .
But the key word is self-discipline , the ethics that everyone must freely accept in order to make sure that this parliamentary institution operates in utter transparency .
The idea that lobbyists , who are influential in Parliament in many respects , should be required to give an account of their activities annually , is to be supported .
However , the proposals do not go far enough , because some of them are almost impossible to monitor , for example the proposal that Parliament documents should not be surrendered to outsiders for money .
The report should have added a demand that lobbyists should inform Parliament , by means of a public register , of all operational assistance and gifts which they give to Members and officials of Parliament .
However , the responsibility for directing lobbyists to the straight and narrow path cannot be left solely to the lobbyists themselves .
The Members of Parliament cannot deny that they themselves have a greater responsibility .
Parliament has already adopted the Nordmann report in which MEPs are given responsibility for notifying any assistance they receive .
The receiving of gifts was forbidden .
It is time to investiage the extent to which these requirements have been put into practice .
It is the besetting sin of Parliament that it makes provisions and does not even attempt to monitor whether they are implemented .
The report is a move in the right direction so I have voted for it .
The EU organisation must be characterised by both integrity and openness .
Strict rules must apply for lobby work so that the democratic process is not distorted .
There needs to be stringent control over any potential attempts to influence unduly the decision makers within the EU .
Non-profit making organisations such as environmental or peace and solidarity movements must also have the opportunity to participate actively in information activity .
Special financial support should be given to the European operations of such organisations .
A procedure whereby information may be submitted to interested parties for comment should be used to give special interest organisations and non-profit making organisations the opportunity to put their opinions forward in a more organised way .
One prerequisite for achieving equal conditions for different types of pressure groups is that the principle of openness must operate equally for all EU institutions which would make it possible to obtain the information required .
Recommendation for second reading Collins ( A4-0136 / 97 )
Following the adoption of the EU rules on the operation of road vehicles , there has been a gap in legislation hitherto on non-road mobile machinery .
This European Commission proposal for a directive on this subject is designed to fill the gap in this area .
It aims to achieve a substantial reduction in atmospheric pollution caused by pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery .
The machinery concerned is intended for industrial and agricultural use , for example , mobile cranes , bulldozers , forklift trucks , maintenance equipment etc .
The European Commission proposal lays down certain requirements and rules relating to emissions , to be implemented in two stages .
Stage 1 : From June 1997 to December 1998 .
Stage 2 : From January 2001 to December 2003 .
The aim of this directive is to reduce nitrogen oxides by 42 % by the year 2003 .
These provisions will only apply to new machines put onto the market after the deadlines specified .
As a Member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , this directive has my wholehearted support .
Recommendation for second reading K. Jensen ( A4-0137 / 97 )
Amendments Nos 18 and 19 of the recommendation for second reading on the proposed directive on the placing of biocidal products on the market seek to delete Annex 1A and Annex 1B of the directive .
These annexes would allow for a simplified procedure to be applied for low-risk biocidal products and for certain commodity substances .
The British members of the EPP Group share the concerns that have been expressed that these annexes appear as titles only in the Common Position .
However , we believe that there is justification for allowing a simplified procedure in certain cases , provided that a thorough risk assessment has been carried out and that there is no reduction in the level of protection for humans and the environment .
Ensuring that control measures are proportionate to the established level of risk would enable resources to be concentrated where they are most needed and would help to reduce the bureaucratic burden on industry .
Anastassopoulos report ( A4-0119 / 97 )
The Danish social democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Parliament 's report on the Commission 's Green Paper ' Legal protection for encrypted services in the internal market - Consultation on the need for Community action ' .
Pirate firms are unfortunately growing in number in the audiovisual sector , which means that copyright provisions are increasingly being infringed .
As a matter of principle , it is unacceptable that products should be used for illegal purposes .
Moreover , pirate firms are pushing up the cost of encrypted TV and radio programmes , so that consumers who receive these programmes legally are having to pay higher prices .
The legislation of the EU Member States in this sector differs widely , and in many cases is inadequate .
At the same time , the market for audiovisual products is characteristically an international one .
We therefore believe that there is a need for an EU or international solution regarding legal protection for encrypted services .
Having said that , it is important to stress that any legislation in this sector must not only take account of the interests of service providers , but also those of consumers .
This means firstly that limits must be established on how many and which services can be covered by encryption .
Secondly , we must avoid a situation where providers of encrypted services obtain such a high degree of legal protection that they acquire a quasi-monopoly position in various sections of the market .
Palacio Vallelersundi report ( A4-0155 / 97 )
The principle of subsidiarity was introduced as a political principle in Article 3b of the Treaty establishing the European Community and means that actions for those areas where the Community does not have sole jurisdiction shall be taken at the lowest level possible .
The principle is not a supplement to Article 235 , namely a means of giving the Community a new way of securing power at the expense of the Member States .
Our basic attitude is that Sweden joined an inter-state co-operation group and that new areas should not be introduced under Community Law .
For this reason we must object to the statements in points 2 and 12 of the report .
The use of the principle of subsidiarity to prevent new areas such as culture , the media , energy and research being brought in under Community Law is , we consider , more in line with our politics .
When the Treaty of Maastricht came into force in autumn 1992 , one of its primary recommendations was that the principle of subsidiarity was to be incorporated in key European policies and programmes .
What this simply meant was that local authorities and local communities must be given a greater say in the spending of European monies in their areas .
I am a great supporter of this concept because local communities can pool their creative talent to create employment for their localities .
Europe needs to be decentralized and bottom-up schemes such as Leader 11 and the County Enterprises Board System need to be supported , renewed and expanded .
Too much spending of European monies lies in the hands of the European Commission or central civil service departments such as the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry for the Enviroment .
I am disappointed to see that Directorate-General XVI , the regional policy wing of the European Commission , is looking very closely at possibly srapping the Leader scheme when it expires in 1999 .
This would be a very regressive step , a slap in the faces to rural communities and a rejection of the EU principle of subsidiarity , which tries to involve all sections of society in the implementation and administration of European policies .
The Union for Europe Group of the European Parliament wants to see an expansion of bottom-up EU initiatives for both rural and urban schemes and not to dissipate these programmes in any shape or form .
The European Union is still too heavily centralized and needs to be brought closer to the people .
The principle of subsidiarity is an important EU principle .
So we are very disappointed and surprised that the rapporteur has such a negative attitude towards it .
Sweden views the principle of subsidiarity as a guarantee that national and local democracy will not be overruled by the EU .
Our view is that this is a fundamental principle which must be used often .
We would like to emphasise that the EU should only involve itself with those issues which are included in their area of competence as determined by national governments .
The principle of subsidiarity should restrict the opportunities for the EU to take new areas upon itself as is otherwise often urged in various green and white papers .
According to the rapporteur the principle has been a disadvantage for the EU but for the Member States and in particular for the general public we are totally convinced that it has only been to the good .
The Member States must endeavour to use their democratic instruments in all those areas where the EU has no decision-making power .
Clarity is the Alpha and the Omega in this process .
We think therefore that the principle of subsidiarity ought to be given a solid footing and substance .
I welcome the fact that , as a result of the Maastricht Treaty , the Commission has been obliged to look specifically at how the subsidiarity principle is developing in practice .
There is still a great deal to do to ensure that both the letter and the spirit of the Treaty are respected in this area .
I would therefore point out that this duty does not apply solely to the Commission .
All the EU institutions are committed to the principle of subsidiarity , not least the 626 Members of this Parliament .
It is no use for us to make fine speeches about the subsidiarity principle if - when it comes to matters close to our own hearts - we are prepared to take a relaxed view of the principle .
I hope that the Commission 's three reports will help to ensure that we too here in the European Parliament will take the subsidiarity principle more seriously in future .
The principle of subsidiarity concerns the issues which should be handled at union level and which by Member States .
Within the Member States we could be talking about national , regional or local level .
The objective of the principle of subsidiarity must be that as many issues as possible should be handled as close to the people as possible .
So , the first question must obviously be : is this an issue for the Union or not ?
It is quite wrong to call this subterfuge ' taking issues back to national level ' , as the committee does , or to move the issue up to a wholly interstate level .
The very opposite should be the objective of subsidiarity .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Welcome
On behalf of Parliament I welcome members of a delegation from the Parliament of the Republic of Georgia , led by Mr Giorgi Kobakhidze , Deputy Speaker of the Parliament and Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the EU .
This is the fourth meeting between our delegations , the European Parliament 's and the Georgian Parliament 's , and the first since ratification of our cooperation and partnership agreement .
We attach considerable importance to our relations , with you and , through you , with the Georgian people .
I have no doubt that the meetings and exchanges that you will hold will be particularly fruitful . I wish you a warm welcome to the European Parliament and to Strasbourg .
Community environmental law
The next item is the report ( A4-0109 / 97 ) by Mr Ken Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission concerning the implementation of Community environmental law ( COM ( 96 ) 0500 - C4-0591 / 96 ) .
Mr President , this is the second time today that I rise to speak to a particularly crowded chamber .
On this occasion I wish to talk about implementation and enforcement of European environmental legislation .
I wish to say , right at the beginning , that there is a very patchy record of implementation in the Member States .
According to the 13th annual report on the application of European Community law , the Commission , in 1995 , was notified of 265 breaches of the law in spite of the fact that there are over 200 legal instruments to protect the Union 's environment .
So there is a problem .
The Parliament has for some years taken a particular interest in how we might improve the record of implementation in view of its importance for the environment as well as for the economic performance of companies in the Member States .
The main problems are secrecy in the Council , compromise texts which are sometimes weak and incoherent , and sometimes the fact that environment law is not properly codified .
With regard to secrecy in the Council it has been suggested to me very recently that no comment from me today would be complete unless I included in this a reference to declarations in the Council .
This was dealt with this morning but a comment was made to me very recently indeed that this is of such importance that I should mention it again .
Having now done so I have kept my word .
Enforcement can be a complex task .
One directive can require enacting several laws at national and regional levels .
And the more complex it becomes the more likely it is that there can be a smokescreen to avoid the key issue of enforcement .
We have to find out where the problems are and the Commission has a duty to police implementation .
The Commission is in difficulty because , in spite of all the rumours , it has very few resources to do this .
It has to rely on notification from citizens or interest groups because it cannot always be supplied with correct or complete information by Member States .
Sometimes the Member States are not aware of the state of play and sometimes one suspects that perhaps they do not want everybody to know what their own record is .
So we do have a problem .
The action we are suggesting takes a variety of forms .
We think that in the first place we need greater transparency .
Citizens have a right to know what laws are enacted and they have a right to believe that all relevant legislation is properly enforced .
So we need to improve access to justice for ordinary citizens right across the European Union .
We are calling for all environmental legislation to be subject to codecision and qualified majority voting in Council .
We think this will bolster both democracy and transparency and improve the availability of information .
We want to ensure that the information produced is of better quality and we want Member States to report on actual implementation and enforcement and not just transposition into the law of these Member States .
It is necessary to codify existing legislation so that it can be intelligible and coherent .
All too often it is only coherent if you have access to a whole library of Official Journals .
Of course the resources for implementation must be sufficient .
There is no point in obliging the Commission to do more if the resource levels are not sufficiently high and if the budget does not include an allocation for implementation of environmental legislation .
Inspection and sanctions must be improved and all Member States must have an inspectorate - which is not the case at present - to be policed at European Union level by the Commission in conjunction with the European Environment Agency on the one hand and the IMPEL network on the other .
On a local note , where such agencies are set up , Member States should not impose on them financial penalties that limit their ability to do the job effectively .
In my own country , the Scottish Environment Protection Agency was set up just over a year ago and it was discovered just a month ago that they actually have to pay about 10 % of their budget in tax because of sloppy drafting of the legislation by officials in the first place .
This is a crazy situation which Member States should not be encouraged to repeat .
This report received cross-party support in the committee .
It is very important and the fact that it does not carry a great many amendments does not mean it is unimportant .
There are only two amendments and I propose to accept the one from Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
Although I have sympathy with the one from Mr Florenz , I do not want to accept it because it unnecessarily restricts the freedom of manoeuvre of individuals and agencies .

Madam President , if so few amendments have been tabled , Mr Collins , one reason is no doubt that you have produced such a good report that there is hardly anything to add to it . You have also incorporated the work done by the Committee on Legal Affairs into your report , so we had no difficulty with it .
You said that there are major problems concerning the implementation and enforcement of environmental law in the European Union .
Unlike other areas of legislation , there is no real economic lobby here to ensure that the Member States do actually enforce environmental law as required .
It is therefore important to devise instruments to meet this need , and above all instruments to ensure transparency .
The rapporteur has already emphasized this point .
The Legal Affairs Committee has therefore proposed some measures to improve transparency , such as transposition tables , greater consultation , and clarity in the framing of legal provisions , something which is particularly important in this area .
One of the key issues here is to ensure the widest possible access to correspondence between the Commission and the Member States .
Clearly , not every item of correspondence can be made public , but Parliament must at least know when Article 169 is being applied .
It must be informed that this article is being applied , when , and in what form .
We do not want the correspondence itself but the information , and we also want something actually done in this area .
The implementation of environmental law also requires that the legislation itself should make provision for funding .
That is why the Committee on Legal Affairs is proposing that the Commission should ensure that its legislative proposals contain provisions which commit the Member States to effective , appropriate and proportionate sanctions in the case of breaches of Community environmental law .
This is a second and much-needed element to be addressed .
Finally , as the rapporteur himself has mentioned , there is the matter of the Environment Agency .
Cooperation between the Commission and the Environment Agency must be strengthened , because the Agency is best placed to have the information needed for legislative purposes .
Such information is very useful indeed , and can be of considerable assistance to the Commission .
Madam President , I am a citizen of the European Union as well as a Member of this European Parliament .
I would like to summarize the rules that the ordinary citizen - such as myself - can follow if he or she wants to make a complaint to the Commission .
It is quite simple .
If you have a complaint you can obtain a form from a Commission office - in my case from London .
The form states that you can make a complaint ' subject to the rules of confidentiality ' .
Nobody explains what that means .
I asked for an explanation and was told that it was ' the custom and practice that we usually follow ' .
Well , it is a bad custom and a bad practice if it means that the citizen is not able to be kept informed on an open basis rather than on a secret one .
Sadly , when I , as a citizen , made a complaint about the state of affairs in the Severn Estuary on which my constituency abuts , I received no satisfactory information about the progress of that complaint .
Even now I do not know whether the file is open or closed .
I do not know what has passed in the way of correspondence between the previous government of my country and the Commission .
And that is wrong because I have to report back to my constituents .
I am not able to do so , because even though I deleted the reference to confidentiality in my individual complaint , the details about the progress of that complaint have not been given to me .
So clause 10 of Mr Collins ' otherwise excellent report is not sufficient .
We as a parliament , and ordinary citizens must be kept regularly informed by the Commission .
After all there is an internal code of procedure which requires that the Commission should keep citizens informed .
Until and unless the Commission complies with its own Rules of Procedure , it has failed in its duty .
Is it not worth speculating that failure to comply with its own rules of procedure might constitute a case for reference to the European Ombudsman ?
That might be something we could look at on a future occasion .
Madam President , we in the EPP Group think that the Collins report is fine as far as it goes , although we have our reservations about paragraph 11 , to which we have tabled an amendment and on which we hope Mr Collins will have second thoughts .
Clearly there is a very serious problem here : laws are passed on the environment and then they are widely ignored .
Reporting requirements are introduced and they are ignored .
Mr White apparently complains from his constituency in England , and his complaint is lost or forgotten and he does not hear anything about it .
No one in Brussels can really say that they know how or whether the law is being enforced , even in crucial sectors of environmental policy such as hazardous waste management , where to date the European Commission has received reports from only six of the fifteen Member States .
In fact you could say , in the presence of the Georgian delegation , that we are - sadly - not a terribly good example of how to apply European environmental legislation .
Fines are introduced , under Article 171 of the Treaty .
They have been introduced rather laboriously but they have yet to be applied .
I hope that when the Environmental Commissioner replies , she may be able to give us some up-to-the-minute news on what is happening to the actions which the Commission apparently announced in January under Article 171 against a number of Member States which have successively ignored European Court of Justice judgments since 1990 .
So I agree with the Collins ' recommendations on the whole .
It is particularly interesting that Mr Collins has proposed that we should try to bring into play a sort of inspectorate of the inspectors - a small force that might be able to go around examining whether Member States are in fact putting the law into action themselves .
I offer three reinforcements to the points made in the report .
We cannot continue to go on relying on individual complaints , such as those that have been mentioned , on inspection or on self-inspection - by which I mean the reporting requirement .
My three points are as follows .
First , on cost : one of the great deficiencies of the Commission 's approach to environmental legislation is that it seems prepared to ignore the cost of legislation .
The real trouble is : will a cost-impact statement work ?
It does not have to apply to all legislation but we in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection have seen that when a cost-impact statement is put together it is either extremely difficult for the Commission to take action on it or it is completely worthless , as in the case of the impact statement on the bathing waters directive .
I therefore suggest to the Commission that it would be better , if we are going to apply codecision to the whole of environmental legislation - which is highly likely - that at some stage , either at the preliminary draft stage or at the common position stage , the Commission should invite the Member States to state their assessment of the cost of implementing the legislation within their territory .
This should be a published statement by each Member State .
It could then be debated .
It would probably be hotly contested by non-governmental organizations , but it would at least drag the issue out into the open , and I hope that idea recommends itself to the Commission .
Secondly , on transparency : the Commission should be more honest with Parliament about the problems it encounters with the Member States .
I do not see any point in preserving confidentiality if all that does is make it more difficult to ensure that the law is being enforced .
As an example : on 19 July 1996 , the Prime Minister of France had his office issue a press release stating that the implementation of the habitats directive in France was to be suspended .
We MEPs owe it to my Dutch colleague , Mr Eisma , that he asked a written question in the Official Journal which brought this into the open .
I am afraid that I did not know that this had happened .
None of my French colleagues brought it to my attention and it would have been right for the Commission to come back to Parliament and say : look , help !
The French have unilaterally suspended application to France of an entire directive which Parliament had a hand in adopting .
That at least would have put the French Government on the spot .
As it is , the implementation of that directive is still suspended in France , and that is completely unacceptable .
Thirdly and finally , enlargement : what do we do about enlargement ?
We are either going to have a very long series of derogations indeed in relation to existing environmental legislation , or we are going to have a situation where new Member States accept the existing bulk of legislation - the so-called acquis communautaire - and then do not do anything about it .
My final suggestion is that when the Commission presents new legislation to Parliament - which it really should have started to do on 1 January 1997 - this should contain an enlargement-impact statement .
Will it be possible even for the most hopeful Member States to comply with the sort of deadlines which we set , for example in the auto-oil directives or , more recently , in the directive of which I am the rapporteur , the landfill directive ?
They cannot even comply with that directive in East Germany .
It is highly unlikely that any of the deadlines which the Commission is putting forward there would be met in Poland , Hungary , etc .
We need an enlargement-impact statement attached to all environmental legislation put before this Parliament from now on .
Madam President , in view of the shortcomings identified in the application of Community environmental legislation within the Member States - more than one-fifth of violations of Community law in 1995 related to the environment - the Commission has forwarded this communication on improving the implementation of the relevant European Union legislation .
The idea is to think about ways of ensuring compliance with Community legislation without its being necessary for the Commission to take systematic legal action against the Member States .
While emphasizing that it is impossible for the Commission to monitor the implementation of Community provisions on the ground , the report nevertheless puts forward proposals designed to rationalize the application of the legislation and to offer Europe 's citizens the necessary information and powers to ensure compliance with environmental law .
The communication also provides for the arrangement of wide-ranging consultations before any environmental legislation is drafted , and the publication of an annual report on the application of Community environment law in the Member States .

In his motion for a resolution , Mr Collins - to whom I offer my congratulations on his excellent work - calls on the Commission to undertake a variety of complementary activities , which we support and which I will summarize here once again : first , the codification of Community environmental legislation ; secondly , earmarking a proportion of the funds from each year 's Community budget to ensure implementation of Community environmental legislation ; thirdly , the creation of an inspectorate ; fourthly , attention by the Commission , when drafting legislation , to the process of consultation , which should be broad and systematic ; fifthly , the application of the codecision procedure to all environmental legislation , which should be ensured by the IGC ; sixthly , close co-operation between the European Environment Agency , which must monitor the efficacy of the measures approved over the course of time in the various countries with the Commission and the Member States ; and , finally , the creation of the position of Environmental Ombudsman or of a court to ensure the proper management of environmental and territorial resources .
I should also like to thank the Commission for its communication and the rapporteur for all the work he has done .
It is very important for us to deal with the processes of implementation .
What are we actually getting out of this legislation which can be so troublesome ?
What are we getting out of it in practice ?
I therefore think it would be a good thing if we could have one or two indications from the Commission as to how much it wishes to carry through and implement at the present time , and above all what kind of timetable it has , because Mrs Jackson has quite rightly said that we are rather concerned about the legislation in the environment sector .
Enlargement will in fact mean that we have limited scope for implementing new environmental legislation .
And will we even be able to get the existing laws applied in the new countries within a reasonable period of time ?
I would say that in its communication , the Commission is reasonably down-to-earth as regards what it can do itself , but of course is somewhat more modest when it comes to what can be done in relation to the Member States .
However , I therefore think it is important for us to establish a rather stronger and tougher line towards the Member States .
As far as I can see , paragraph 4 of Mr Collins ' report does in fact match the Commission 's statement on page 19 regarding the annual reports .
In my view , it is an extremely important part of this whole process for us to be able to see whether in fact environmental legislation has been notified , so that at least the texts are in order , but what is of course just as important is for us to start actually monitoring legislation on the environment in practice .
That brings me to paragraph 2 , and the question of spending on inspection .
This is the really weak point in the Union .
I therefore also think that what Mr Collins refers to in paragraph 6 is important , namely that we should issue guidelines providing for spending on inspections of a certain minimum level , possibly in the individual Member States , since otherwise our environmental legislation will lead to nothing at all .
The last point I should like to raise is the question of the right to bring legal actions .
I think it is very important for us to provide for extensive rights of legal standing , because this is in fact our best ally if we are to try to monitor the legislation .
I believe it is important for us to support the widest possible right to bring legal actions , since NGOs and individuals in the various countries will be our best allies if we are to determine how environmental legislation is being implemented in practice , as the Commission has in a way also indicated .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have no choice but to repeat ourselves because we agree with the Collins report .
We are in agreement with the analysis that it makes of the effects of the failure to enforce or enact Community law in various Member States and we are also in agreement with the proposals that he makes in order to correct this situation .
The truth is that we must accept that , if the rules of the internal market are flouted in any way , then an accusing finger will be directed at the Member State which flouts them .
Despite the fact that environmental law has been flouted on so many occasions , not so many accusing fingers have been pointed at the Member States which have done so .
This explains the analysis made by Mr Collins that Council unanimity , secrecy in the Council , has a negative effect on decisions on the environment .
Complaints procedures are very bureaucratic and inflexible and take a long time .
Ordinary people who want to make complaints feel frustrated and it has to be borne in mind that , according to the Foundation for Wildlife Protection , 80 % of complaints made to the Commission come from ordinary citizens or citizens ' associations .
There is also secrecy in the correspondence between the Commission and the Member States .
We are very much afraid that , on occasions , this conceals a lack of interest , a lack of political will on the part of the Member States when it comes to correcting situations - for example , the lack of resources in DG XI , which only has fifteen members of staff to draft legal reports , to produce over 600 reports in fact .
This means that the Commission is unable to have a body of inspectors who would take action in the Member States and clearly denounce any violations .
Coordination between the Commission and the Environment Agency , the creation of a body of inspectors , putting an end to secrecy , the denunciation of inflexible , bureaucratic and lengthy methods which , in the case of nongovernmental organisations working to protect the environment , would make it easier to reach the Commission or the Petiitons Committee , would mean bringing down obstacles to the enactment of Community law .
Last weekend I was invited by a defence body representing the Donãna Park , a biosphere reserve and world heritage area , in Andalusia .
There are three whole built-up areas - one luxurious one - which interfere with the integrity of that park and a dam on the River Guadalquivir will completely destroy the estuary .
Nevertheless , environmental impact studies are not thorough enough and people are tempted by job creation .
Yet these built-up areas provide very few jobs and it would be much better in terms of quality and preparation for the future for employment to be created using human resources properly as well as the wealth of the country itself .
If the Commission does nothing to stop it and if the country itself does nothing , harm will be done to a park which is not only Andalusian or Spanish but European and a part of the world heritage .
When you hear about cases like this or when I saw for myself the deviation of the River Acheloos in Greece , then you realise that it is vital to take the measures which are being proposed by Mr Collins in his report in order to prevent attacks on our natural areas such as the one which is being proposed in my country - and it pains me to have to tell you this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our group also congratulates Mr Collins on his report .
Surely it must now be possible to make real progress in implementing environmental law .
However , unlike the previous speaker , we believe that the Commission is not only short of staff , but also lacks the political will to enforce environmental legislation .
It often acts for reasons of political opportunism .
Why should not environmental law be enforceable within the Commission itself ?
How can the green light be given for trans-European networks , with ever more countryside being concreted over for motorways , even though we know that this will raise CO2 levels ?
Why was it possible for Member States such as Germany to introduce a law on accelerated procedures which clearly contravenes the need for environmental impact assessment , and also the wild birds directive ?
It is up to the Commission to really take account of the environment and not be guided by political opportunism .
Furthermore , greater use must be made in future of the Article 189 procedure ; only then will the Commission have any credibility .
It has also become clear that the Article 171 procedure , which the Commission first implemented against Germany , makes a good deal of sense .
We need fines , because they are effective .
The Member States must not be allowed simply to tinker with environmental law ; it really must be properly enforced .
Here we need to give a greater role to non-governmental organizations , by which we mean international NGOs and also natural persons .
The environment belongs to all of us , and because that is so , every one of us should be free to bring actions concerning breaches of existing environmental law .
The environment is vital to the survival of future generations , and that is why it must be possible to bring legal actions .
Only then will we be able to ensure that greater pressure is exerted .
To sum up , the Commission must demonstrate more political will and act with greater rigour and toughness .
It must also ensure that environmental law is enforced , as well as improving the right to bring legal actions , since the environment belongs to us all .
It must be possible to bring proceedings against anyone who fails to implement environmental law .
Madam President , Europe has more than 200 environmental laws .
There is room for another bookcaseful , but the question is whether that makes sense at the moment .
Should we not first make sure that what we already have is in fact put into practice ?
That is what the Collins report is about .
To my mind it is perhaps one of the most important subjects we have dealt with in the House over the last eight years .
The question is whether all this work by hundreds of members of Parliament , ministers , thousands of officials , nongovernmental organizations in their capacity as watchdogs , the media which regularly report on all this legislation , whether all this work actually leads anywhere .
Is it implemented ?
Mr Collins ' answer is that that is very much the question .
The question , again , is thus whether it is not more sensible to look at compliance .
Perhaps we should also look to tighten up these 200 laws further , but first and foremost we must insist on compliance .
Despite the ability of the Commission to draw on Article 155 of the Treaty , compliance is largely a matter for the Member States .
Other honourable members have mentioned this .
Mr Collins also states that failures to comply with the legislation are legion .
And this is blamed on differences in interpreting concepts , as in the case of waste .
Something may be waste in one Member State , whilst it comes into a different category in another Member State .
Or the blame is put on complicated procedures .
But the general conclusion is that so far there is no system at all of independent and equivalent scrutiny at Member State level .
Mr Blokland made this point too .
That is a significant finding , especially when we note at the same time that environmental problems are no respecters of borders , and thus to my mind should be the number one priority in European policy .
Even if we decided tomorrow that we would all revert to being nation states and forget about Europe , the environment would still continue as a transboundary issue .
This is why environmental policy is such an important European policy .
In this context I would also draw your special attention to a gratifying development .
We often deal with unwelcome developments in Europe , but this is a welcome one , namely the Impel network , or ' implementation of environmental legislation ' network .
This had informal beginnings .
Officials from the various Member States got together and decided to work together .
This network is interesting in that it transpired in the working groups set up in the meantime that people got together round a table and were able , on the subject of waste for example , to air real questions of fraud and unethical practices .
I should like to ask the Commission if it intends to intensify this network further , expand it and support it in a Community framework headed by the ' inspectorate of all inspectorates ' .
I think this would be a good idea .
Madam President , although we are quite right to bemoan the fact that while we have over 200 directives in Europe , all with the same basic aims , we are experiencing major difficulties at national level in terms of transposition and especially implementation , we must ask ourselves at some point what we are actually doing wrong .
We shall not make much progress just by repeatedly lamenting the situation and writing a report about it - a report with which I am broadly in agreement .
We have the same problem with environmental policy in Europe as in my own family .
Whenever my children , my wife and I talk about environmental policy , at first we are all full of enthusiasm .
But when I then suggest introducing practical measures , that enthusiasm soon wanes .
This is precisely what has happened on a large scale here in Europe in recent years .
We made a good start with the IPPC directive , which sought to introduce across-the-board authorization procedures in Europe .
After all , industry should no longer be allowed to clean up the air by discharging dirt into the water ; an overall approach is needed .
We have used so little force that all we have achieved are ridiculous administrative rules , and hardly any practical measures have been introduced .
That is exactly what we need , Mrs van Putten , when you say that Europe 's environmental policy transcends borders .
We need to lay down practical measures , and here we have come up with a new trick : we now no longer say 0.01 or whatever , but demand BAT , best available technique .
This is a splendid environmental slogan , but no one defines what we mean by it in Europe , and so we should not be surprised if the loopholes are exploited .
If I were in charge of an industrial plant , my job would be to find a favourable course of action to take .
We therefore have to define what BAT means : it is certainly not what is still at the research stage in universities , but nor does it mean the practice of 20 years ago .
And here , Commissioner , you need to stand up to other , more heavyweight Commissioners - everyone knows to whom I am referring - and finally bring in quality targets with parameters for emissions and quality levels .
We do not need his foolish proposal on water and river management , but we do need a proposal specifying which toxins those waters should no longer contain .
Our Member States are bright , intelligent and responsible enough to manage their own affairs .
But the criteria stipulating what may or may not be in those waters do have to come from Europe .
We should not be surprised , if we open the door so wide , that interpretation varies from one year to the next .
There are 55 directives on water policy .
What small businessman - myself included - can cope with 55 sets of European rules ?
I can hardly cope with three !
That is why it is important to provide a guide by setting out parameters , leaving the ways of achieving these targets up to the Member States .
Of course , transposition periods vary .
It is no great feat to transpose a European law into national legislation in Greece .
In my country , which as you know is made up of several Länder - 15 or 16 - it takes rather longer .
But the overall approach is what matters most , in my opinion , and I would propose that besides the national monitoring bodies , which exist and which we support , we should consider if there might not be another option .
I believe that we in Europe have too many detailed rules and regulations , but too few incentives .
I would reverse that situation , laying down very strict targets , but ensuring with the aid of incentives - which could well be tax measures - that we introduce a different form of control .
The Member States are of course responsible here , and we must make it worth their while to implement these controls .
Repeated threats of prosecution alone are unlikely to win anyone over to environmental protection - quite the opposite .
I suggest that we consider a European environmental MOT - like the test which cars have to undergo every two or three years in my country - which would be run on a private basis and issue the certificates required for economic and fiscal measures .
And one last point - I am naturally in favour of allowing our citizens to bring legal actions .
However , I am not in favour of allowing actions to be brought by persons who are quite unaffected and live thousands of kilometres away from a new construction project .
Those who are affected , who live in the region , are more than welcome to avail themselves of their legal rights .
But planning permission in northern Germany must not be held up by a legal action brought 1500 km further south .
Madam President , the Liberal Group sets great store by three paragraphs in the resolution by Mr Collins which we regard as very important .
The first is paragraph 15 , which calls on the Commission to bring forward proposals for the thorough and timely application of Article 171 of the EC Treaty to breaches of environmental law .
I should like to hear the Commission 's response to this proposal in our resolution , because thorough and timely application of Article 171 is something which has hitherto been absent .
I would also ask the Commissioner when we are going to see Article 171 applied by the Commission .
I know that it has gone as far as calculating the size of any possible fine , but I have not yet seen - and this may be because I am not well enough informed - any proposals or guidelines as to when the first action is to be brought against a country under Article 171 , so that we can ensure that crime does not pay in the environment sector .
The second point is the amendment by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , which is strongly supported by the Liberal Group .
Personally , I would like to see declarations abolished altogether , but as long as the declarations are there , they should at least be published .
I was glad to hear the Commissioner 's statement before the vote this morning , in which she expressed clear support for our position .
Finally , my third point concerns paragraph 4 of the motion for a resolution , which refers to the publication of an annual report on contraventions in the environment sector .
I would suggest that we might have some ideas here from Mr Monti as regards the internal market .
We could perhaps draw up a kind of league table - I am not sure how many of those present are football players - a league table of countries which comply with the rules , and thus provide a little competition between the countries .
Madam President , in the implementation of Community environmental law there are , explicitly or implicitly , greater questions of European construction at its various levels .
The Collins report - and I must compliment Mr Collins on his work - will help us to consider this .
Let us begin at Community level .
Following loose directives , and the more or less binding directives of action programmes with good but inconsequential proposals , and from a cohesion fund targeting only four countries with the environment as its objective , we have gone to the creation of a genuine Community law .
This will result from the detection of risk situations in that the Commission has registered hundreds of violations of the various elements of legislation on the environment on the basis of complaints , questions or petitions , as well as cases directly detected by the Commission , representing some 20 % of violations registered in 1996 .
At the end of the year , over 600 complaints and violation procedures on the environment had been received against Member States , compared with less than 300 in 1995 .
Yet the process of implementation takes place by means of transposition to national legislation .
This is disappointing because the delay and laxness in the violation of deadlines established by the Community bodies are far greater than on other matters , harmful to the environment , in which rapidity is the rule .
On the other hand , most environmental legislation coming from Community sources is not directly applicable in Member States and calls for national enactment measures , or adaptation and the creation of means by national legislation .
If the States prove ineffective in the application of what , in this area , they themselves produce , they will be even less so in terms of what they are induced to introduce .
Portugal is no exception . In fact it will illustrate the situation .
Some Portuguese legislation on environment is enacted by force , in other words Portugal has been made to give in to the obligation to transpose directives in environmental fields .
And it is significant that some of the directives which most complaints concerning violations concern are examples of omissions or failure to regulate in the country : the protection of national habitat , the protection of water from pollution caused by nitrates used on farms , the elimination of waste , refuse , the treatment of emissions from incinerators , water quality .
This leads on to the importance of the local level . This shows the priceless advantage of combining environmental problems with the needs and features of local communities .
Involvement of political parties and local authorities , environmental protection associations and other NGOs , the local populations , is vital for the definition of environmental policy and should be recognised as an essential element for the genuine adaptation of directives .
After all , the specific problems of each region cannot be dealt with in directives common to fifteen states with very different situations .
It is vital that the infrastructures , the decentralisation resources and close and decisive cooperation with the local authorities should be made a priority , as this is the only realistic approach to lead to a genuine translation of Community legislation and its enactment .
But will this be possible or compatible with the obsession with centralising policies and means , which is not hidden behind this construction which , even if it means excluding other ways and means , places the priority on anything to do with EMU , the single currency , a single central bank and single monetary and budgetary policies ?
Community legislation on the environment will have to stop being a pretext and an argument and only will do so when it responds to concerns of thoroughness and applicability , adapted to the realities of the situation .
The Collins report heads in this direction and therefore I congratulate the rapporteur . However , I think that we should have to be even more explicit .
And that is what I intended to be !
Madam President , listening to a number of speakers here today , one of the most effective measures that the EU has is to impose fines on Member States for not honouring their obligations under EU law .
It is definite that fines will have a positive and quick result .
They should be used more and more often .
I come from a country that has a very bad record as regards obligations under EU environmental law .
Our government has applied over and over again for ever-increasing amounts of structural and cohesion funds without feeling that the EU has any right to scrutinize how the money is spent .
The proposed sewage plant at Galway Bay last year was a typical example .
The Minister for the Environment originally sought EU funding to construct the plant even though it would be located in a special protection area for wild birds .
When the EU 's Regional Commissioner refused funding on environmental grounds , he contended that the EU should not interfere in Ireland 's planning process .
After intense public pressure he actually agreed to modify the plant 's design .
More recently the EU Commission took the first step towards legal action against Ireland for inadequate monitoring and control of water pollution from agricultural sources .
The Commission argued that Ireland had not incorporated the full requirements of the EU directive on nitrate pollution into Irish law .
Farm waste has paralysed some of Ireland 's most important lakes .
A study by the Lough Corrib Angling Federation found that the Irish state agencies were involved in little more than a policy of supervised neglect of western lakes .
In the area of environmental impact assessments Ireland has taken a minimalist approach .
No EIA was sought by the authorities on the massive Hilton Hotel project which is planned for the centre of Dublin , even though a revised EU directive adopted by the Environment Ministers in March said that such statements should be prepared for large-scale urban development projects .
The only way we are going to get governments to respect EU law is to impose fines if they do not do so .
I know that many organizations in Ireland fighting on these issues would definitely welcome this step .
Madam President , the position with regard to implementation of Community legislation on the environment is highly unsatisfactory and perhaps even worse than the report suggests .
The thrust of the Legal Affairs Committee 's opinion is that attention should be focused not only on checking whether directives have been incorporated into national law but equally importantly whether directives already incorporated are being implemented .
There is in fact only one choice if we are to protect our environment , preserve the environment we live in and ensure sustainable development .
Either we do this through a global European approach , or it just will not work .
Correct and proper implementation of the environmental standards has other consequences too .
It is not good enough that certain Member State should fail to comply with collectively agreed environmental legislation in order to maintain or secure a more competitive position .
Economic integration must not fail because of national divergences in areas where that is totally inappropriate .
Hence the warning that we certainly must not create economic instability within the Community as a result of Member States failing to adopt or implement Community legislation on the environment or doing so incorrectly .
Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Parliament for its report on the communication on implementing Community environmental law .
It is clear from the report that this issue is not only one of great interest and priority for me , but also for the Environment Committee .
I am therefore grateful to the committee , and of course its chairman and rapporteur , for the very constructive work which has been put into this report .
It was also good to see that in their discussion of the communication , both the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee reached a positive conclusion on the Commission 's proposals .
It goes without saying - and many speakers made this point - that the implementation of Community environmental law is a vital precondition for enabling Community policy to be effective and thus to safeguard and protect Europe 's environment .
I think it was Mrs van Putten who said that these could well be the most important proposals which Parliament had dealt with for many years .
There is a great deal at stake , since when it comes to international relations , the Community must also be able to point to its own results if it is to be a credible player in the negotiations on global environmental issues .
That has unfortunately not always been the case as regards the implementation of Community environmental law in the Member States , as many speakers have pointed out .
The House is aware of the countless examples of this , and the many complaints forwarded to the Commission either directly from individual Member States through Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , or by interested Members of Parliament .
I share Mr White 's opinion that something must be done about the problems connected with providing information to complainants when a matter is being dealt with .
The Commission is currently examining the procedures and the question of openness in connection with Article 169 , not least in the light of the observations made by the Ombudsman .
As you know , I have never taken the view that the number of cases brought before the Court of Justice under Article 169 of the Treaty can be used as a gauge of whether our own policy on implementation and enforcement is a success .
The Commission has always worked actively on this , but court cases are only the tip of the iceberg , since the others often melt away under the Commission 's threat to bring an action .
We have now seen something similar happen in connection with the Commission 's use of Article 171 as regards the provision on fines .
I do not quite see how it has escaped Mrs Riis-Jørgensen 's attention that we do actually have five specific cases which are being heard .
On 29 January this year , the Commission decided to bring five cases back before the Court of Justice , with a request for substantial fines on the Member States .
Here it looks as if the threat of a further Court judgment will be able to resolve these long-standing issues .
That is a good thing , but ultimately it is of course unacceptable that it should take so long .
As Parliament is aware , the five cases to which I have referred are all from the environment sector , and as you also know , they are the very first to be brought under this new provision of the Treaty in Article 171 .
The Commission intends to use - and is using - the powers which this provides to ensure that there is complete consistency between Community environmental legislation and the judgments of the Court .
I agree that there is a need for the Commission to play an active role .
Mrs Jackson wished to have some more specific information on the matter , and as I say , the situation is that five cases have been brought .
We believe that three of them have almost been resolved , now that they have come into public view .
Two are still outstanding , and we would say that there are seven other cases in the pipeline .
Clearly , we feel that the more cases we can settle in the meantime , the better , and we regard the instrument of fines as one means of achieving better results .
However , the Commission 's communication also deals with how we can ensure positive and active implementation in the Member States .
Here Mrs Jackson gave an excellent example by referring to the habitats directive .
I can say that for the Commission 's part , as soon as we were made aware of the French Prime Minister 's statement , we naturally also responded in public , as well as taking the matter up with the French authorities .
I had occasion to mention this as an example when I last visited the Environment Committee .
So we do indeed follow things up when we are made aware of declarations of this kind .
But in addition , we are of course interested in helping the Member States to cope with the task they have ahead of them .
Our reason for adopting this approach is that the earlier in the process we can ensure that environmental law is implemented , the better it is for the environment .
Because as we all know , there is not a great deal of point in winning court cases after years of discussions , if the damage to the environment has already been done .
The communication which is before the House today therefore contains three innovative proposals on inspection standards , access to justice and the right to bring legal actions , together with a series of other proposals to improve the present mechanisms at Community and Member State levels .
Parliament 's positive reaction to these three proposals is a great encouragement .
Having adopted measures such as the directive on integrated pollution prevention and control , the IPPC directive , it is important for the Council to ensure that its members have an adequate basis for carrying out the necessary inspection tasks .
That is why we are already establishing minimum criteria for these inspections through the IMPEL network , as mentioned by several speakers here today .
The IMPEL network , which includes representatives from enforcement authorities and agencies in the Member States , possesses the practical , down-to-earth experience which is needed for this preparatory work .
The guidelines will not be limited to the tasks which are necessary to ensure compliance with the IPPC directive , but will apply to all Community environmental legislation where the inspection of emissions is a necessary part of implementation and enforcement , as Mr Florenz indicated .
As you know , the Commission 's communication does not propose any binding legislation as regards the three proposals I have mentioned .
Nor has that been raised in the Council 's interim discussions of the communication .
The approach which has been chosen in the communication is that we begin with ' soft ' legislation to see whether the new ideas work .
If it turns out that they fit the bill , they will have to be converted into binding legislation .
I would say that this approach is basically a sound one , but in political terms , I would agree with Parliament that we cannot avoid laying down binding rules .
I therefore very much welcome the House 's proposal that legal acts should be drawn up during the lifetime of this Parliament .
This obviously serves to reinforce my wish that in the longer term , these proposals should be turned into legally binding rules .
I believe that this also responds to the first amendment by Mr Florenz .
Besides the areas in which new efforts are required , the Commission 's communication sets out proposals for improvements in current practice and procedure in a number of other fields .
I am pleased to say that considerable progress has already been made in these areas .
In Parliament 's report , for example , the Member States are called upon to develop training schemes for national regulatory bodies and civil servants to enable them to become familiar with the Community 's environmental law .
The Commission has already introduced such training courses at European level , and we are asking the Member States to take similar initiatives in their own countries , adapting them to all levels of their administrations and legal systems .
The communication also proposes that in the customary annual report on the application of Community law , the Commission should publish an extended chapter on the environment , dealing specifically with the implementation by the Member States of Community environmental law for which there is a deadline in the year in question .
This would be supplemented by an annual survey of Community environmental law containing further information on the activities of IMPEL , for example , as Mrs van Putten was requesting , the results achieved by the Member States with regard to reporting obligations under EU law , and on relations with the European Environment Agency , as Mrs Gebhardt mentioned .
I hope that these publications will meet Parliament 's wishes as regards the publicising of implementation at EU level .
Both Mrs Dybkjær and Mrs Jackson raised the question of links with the new applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I agree that this is a substantial and important issue .
We have not in fact dealt with it in detail in this communication , and I think we need to find an opportunity to have a thorough discussion of the matter .
We all share the responsibility for full implementation and enforcement of the acquis communautaire in the environment sector .
It is a responsibility which is shared by the Member States , the Commission and Parliament .
I am grateful for the enthusiasm and interest which many people in Parliament have shown over the years in improving this implementation .
Let me emphasize in conclusion that the advantages of our broad approach as regards the implementation of environmental law were clearly demonstrated at the public hearing that was organized jointly by Parliament and the Commission a year ago .
That hearing considerably increased the awareness of this issue among both politicians and citizens .
It only remains for me to hope that the Commission 's communication and Parliament 's excellent report can persuade the Council that there is a need for substantial improvements in implementation and enforcement .
I therefore look forward to being able to report on the progress which is made in this area .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Dangers of ionizing radiation
The next item is the report ( A4-0146 / 97 ) by Mr Amadeo , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive replacing Directive 84 / 466 / Euratom on health protection of individuals against the dangers of ionizing radiation in relation to medical exposures ( COM ( 96 ) 0465 - C4-0548 / 96-96 / 0230 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since 1959 we have been faced with the problem of protecting the health of the general public and of workers against the dangers of ionizing radiation .
There have been many Directives to this effect , the most recent being 29 / Euratom , adopted by the Council in 1996 .
That directive , however , like its predecessors , did not deal with the subject of radiation protection in cases of exposure for medical purposes .
The only attempt to do this occurred in a Directive of 1984 , 466 , which was intended to complement the directive on basic safety standards and improve the radiation protection of patients without losing sight of the potential benefits deriving from the use of such radiation .
This introduction will undoubtedly give you an impression of the importance of the Council 's proposal , on which I have the honour to be the rapporteur .
First and foremost , by comparison with 1984 , there has been an enormous increase in the number of cases of medical exposure in the course of examinations and treatment , while at the same time these last ten years have seen a massive increase in scientific and technological knowledge .
Nor can I refrain from stressing the point that , during that same period , Article 129 of the Treaty on European Union gave the Community specific powers in the public health sector .
I must also stress that the proposal for a Council Directive - even though this is an area where progress is taking place at dizzying speed , so that it is difficult to be fully abreast of events - is a sound one , and we should approve it as soon as possible .
At the same time , I must thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection for the seriousness , dedication and speed with which it has dealt with this matter ; thanks are also due , from the whole Parliament and especially from myself personally , to all those who have worked so courteously and efficiently to suggest improvements to the proposal under consideration .
The growing level of awareness in all Member States of the Community poses a challenge in this sector , as in others . There is ever-increasing pressure for high levels of information , education and training to be available to every citizen - health professionals , technicians and commercial operators in the sector , managers in charge of health services or institutions and authorities responsible for advising both small and large communities - demanding increasing levels of responsibility .
The message could not be clearer : 1 ) we must reduce the need for medical radiation by using alternative methods , methods which cost the same but involve a greater commitment in terms of time , such as echography , or methods which cost much more such as nuclear magnetic resonance ; 2 ) we must eliminate the use of radiation for unnecessary examinations , 3 ) we must verify any request for examination with the prescribing physician , who must be responsible for establishing the specific indications for each individual referral ; 4 ) we must ensure more careful use of radiation by those carrying out the examination - the radiologists , in other words - for example by way of appropriate and stringent protection in critical areas not subject to examination , and the use of appropriate sensitive material and techniques to replace conventional radiology , such as digital technology , quality controls and individual index cards for the examinations carried out .
Apart from this , we need to make correct and systematic use of a medical physicist , who will assess each intervention on the instruments used for radiotherapy .
The medical physicist will also check the suitability of the equipment on the basis of the exposure / diagnostic benefit ratio , laying down maximum and minimum reference criteria to be respected .
All this is necessary because , on the threshold of the third millennium , we believe that guaranteeing the quality of life means taking all the necessary initiatives in planning , organization , management and control to ensure complete protection for the individual against the dangers of radiation , in particular that resulting from medical exposure .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment - and I note with pride that all the amendments were tabled by that committee - are intended to make the various paragraphs of the Directive clearer and more specific , and I believe that they are in harmony with the spirit that inspired the Council in the production of this Directive .
I am therefore favourable to these amendments , though I would just like to make one comment about the amendment regarding the radiological examination of pregnant women , because I believe that in these cases it is more appropriate to use alternative examination techniques such as echography and / or nuclear magnetic resonance , rather than impose further limitations and restrictions on the use of radiation .
Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for his work .
I believe that this is an issue which must be taken extremely seriously .
I find it very regrettable that the report which we are now discussing is based on Chapter 3 of the Euratom Treaty , on health protection , under which this House is only able to express an opinion but not to address itself to this very important issue through codecision .
As the rapporteur has already said , in recent years there has been a huge increase in the use of X-rays , of equipment using ionizing radiation , and nowadays very many people undergo examinations - routine and preventive examinations - which simply did not exist ten or fifteen years ago .
It is very important , especially in the case of preventive examinations , on the one hand to be able to say to the person : we shall gauge our examinations with this equipment in such a way that you are exposed only to radiation which is strictly necessary .
On the other hand , however , it must certainly be made clear that such examinations can lead to the early detection of very serious illnesses , and can sometimes be used for treatment which will remove the need for an operation .
It is therefore very important to work with great precision in this area , since X-ray examinations of sick people - and even healthy ones - can do considerable harm if too much radiation is involved .
We are all aware of a number of such cases which occurred while this medical equipment was in its developmental phase .
It must also be said in this context that both the Commission 's text and Parliament 's improvements to it place particular emphasis on the need for quality control in the hospitals and installations concerned , and for the staff to have appropriate training .
Here I believe that the text really must contain the word ' practitioner ' , as in the Commission proposal .
According to the legislation of the individual Member States , these may be doctors or persons who have achieved university entrance standards at school and then completed a three-year training course , and who are therefore competent to operate X-ray equipment and other machines .
I believe that Parliament must ensure that health issues connected with radioactive material - X-rays - are removed from the Euratom Treaty as soon as possible and included in the chapter on health protection in the general Treaty .
Madam President , we are discussing a Council directive on health protection here - an important topic - but unfortunately Parliament only has the right to consultation .
I make this point because I believe it must be stressed again and again that Parliament has too few powers .
It is also necessary to make the point because , in their ignorance of the codecision powers which Parliament actually possesses , some of the media often tend to cause considerable anxiety among those concerned , as has happened here in the case of qualified X-ray assistants , who saw their livelihoods disappearing thanks to the European Parliament .
I had to make it clear to the public that , on the one hand , the Council and not Parliament has the final say ; on the other , I was also able to set minds at rest by stating that Parliament certainly had no desire to deprive these professionals of their livelihoods .
Since the Commission traditionally comes in for severe criticism here in Parliament , it is only fair to express our gratitude for once for what is an excellent proposal .
And I am delighted that those colleagues who have tabled amendments have nevertheless managed to improve this good text further still .
One thing must be made clear , I believe : the responsibility for what happens lies with the doctor in charge .
He , and he alone , gives the instructions , without this in any way diminishing the responsibilities of those carrying out the treatment .
Initial , further and in-service training have been improved , as has protection for pregnant and breast-feeding women .
This is a very good proposal and a very thorough job of work by Parliament .
We can only hope , Commissioner , that the Council will do justice to Parliament 's good work .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the point has already been made that after exposure to natural radiation , medical irradiation is by far the main source of ionizing radiation .
We are thus fully in favour of a revision of the legislation which places emphasis on the principles of responsible and optimum management of exposure for medical reasons .
Rapporteur Amadeo rightly says that we must limit radiation .
But I have faith in the medical profession , as guardians of human health , to do everything possible to ensure that unnecessary or harmful examinations are avoided .
What they do have to do is use equipment which is the best available and is properly maintained .
The costs of this are enormous ; but the benefits show that they are necessary costs .
The aim here is not self-indulgence , but reduction of the harmful effects of radiation .
It is not only the patient who will benefit but also the personnel operating the equipment and those who care for the patient .
Ladies and gentlemen , Member States and hospitals should remember that when they are hard-pressed by current cuts in health spending .
Madam President , as a way of introduction I should like to insist on the fact that medical exposure to ionising radiation is no different from exposure of a non-medical type .
The difference resides only in the justification : in principle , medical exposure is directly advantageous to the patient , an advantage which is meant to compensate the harm done by that radiation .
Therefore , quite rightly , the Commission has taken the initiative to amend the 1984 Directive which - I must say this and I go along completely with Mrs Flemming - is a good proposal , even if we thought it was helpful to amend it in a way which is relatively marginal .
Why do we want to change it ?
First of all because , as Mr Amadeo said , the relevant technologies have been greatly improved and are now widely used .
Secondly , because , since 1991 , the International Committee on Radiological Protection has changed its rules on radiation on the basis of two new important elements , which have been the subject of consensus among scientific circles .
First of all , there is no such thing as inoffensive radiation .
Any radiation , albeit at low levels , will be harmful .
Therefore it is important to note that there is no threshold .
Secondly , the International Committee on Radiological Protection considers that radiation can pose certain difficulties for the health of unborn children .
It is now known that a foetus of more than three weeks runs a greater risk of cancer following radiation .
We now also know that the radiation of unborn children of between eight and fifteen weeks will result in a markedly increased chance of serious mental retardment .
That has led to the changes which the Commission is proposing , in particular Articles 4 and 11 , where it calls for special attention to be paid to exposure without direct medical advantages for the patient or in the case of potential pregnancy .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has found it necessary to slightly tighten up these texts asking that this type of exposure be avoided altogether .
Apart from that , I think that the Commission should support these amendments and therefore produce a text which is completely acceptable for the Council .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report on the protection of human health against the dangers of ionizing radiation associated with medical exposure could from certain standpoints be regarded as complementing Directive 80 / 636 / ECSC , which did consider in general terms the precise subject of medical exposure .
Mr Amadeo , a doctor like myself , has done well to modify the Commission 's text with amendments that were then adopted by the Committee , amendments that were broader and more technically relevant , designed to protect the health of those who come into contact with persons who have absorbed ionizing radiation - pregnant women , mothers-to-be in other words , and thus the unborn child .
There is no doubt , as the Commission has emphasized and the rapporteur has repeated , that radiological diagnosis has provided us with preventive benefits , all designed to allow early diagnosis , but it is also true that on many occasions indiscriminate use has been made of radiological diagnostic methods , such as to produce adverse effects .
The need , then , is to promote specific schemes of health education and training directed at every citizen , every health professional , the health institutions and the authorities responsible for them , whether medical or political , and so try to reduce the necessary applications of medical radiation by resorting to alternative methods , as the rapporteur has stated ; we need to dispense with the use of radiation for examinations that are not strictly necessary ; we need to protect the workforce and the general public against radiation with appropriate and extensive schemes on the ground and in the premises where preventive care and research take place , with , maybe , the assistance of a medical physicist to measure and monitor dosages ; well , it does appear to me that both the Council and the rapporteur have made up their minds to pursue this objective .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report on this public health issue .
I endorse the decision to update the 1984 directive which will protect people from ionizing radiation during medical exposures .
There are four main reasons for this and most of them have already been mentioned .
However , they are worth repeating .
Firstly , there is the enormous increase in the use of X-rays during medical treatment and tests over the past twelve years throughout the European Union ; secondly , the significant progress in scientific knowledge and X-ray technology that has taken place over this time ; thirdly , the number of international organizations that have issued more updated recommendations on X-rays , and fourthly , Article 129 of the Maastricht Treaty , which has given the European Union new powers in public health .
So it was clear that the 1984 legislation had to be updated , and I agree with the proposals .
However , we can go further .
Although radiological diagnosis provides undoubted benefits for patients , it entails risks , and for this reason we have to try to reduce the use of medical radiation where at all possible by employing alternative methods .
We must give greater attention to enforcing the highest possible safety level for patients , in particular , as many speakers have already said , for vulnerable women .
I agree with those who have called for Parliament to be further involved by way of co-decision rather than just being consulted on an issue which is of such great importance to our citizens .
I hope the IGC will redress this anomaly .
Mr President , it is a historical fact that both Roentgen , who worked with X-rays , and Pierre Curie , who together with Marie Curie discovered the element radium , suffered the harmful effects of the radiations they discovered and studied for the progress of science and for the benefit of humanity .
Since then , the harmful mutational and carcinogenic effects of ionizing radiations have been confirmed and , unfortunately , there have been many accidents from those effects including ones to people engaged in the application of radiation in medicine , in other words radiodiagnosis and radiotherapy .
Of course , we must stress and not overlook the great contribution of radiodiagnostic methods to the progress of medicine . Today , however , we know that people should not be exposed to ionizing radiations without good reason , because they cause cell damage .
In the past , and indeed from as early as 1959 , there have been Community directives on protection from radiation .
Directive 84 / 466 / EURATOM , however , which relates to the protection from ionizing radiations of people undergoing medical examination , was approved in 1984 .
That directive needs to be updated for many reasons , the most important among which are :
a ) The considerable scientific and technical progress in the field of radiations for medical use.b ) The large increase in the number of accidents taking place in the twelve years since 1984 , from exposure to radiation for medical reasons.c ) The proposals by international agencies concerning exposure to radiation for medical reasons.d ) The enactment of Article 129 of the Treaty of the European Union in 1992 , pursuant to which the Community was invested with specific responsibilities in the area of public health .
Thus , the amendment on the replacement of Directive 84 / 466 / EURATOM is more than ever necessary.Among all that is described in the Directive we are considering , I should like to stress the following :
1 ) A very important factor in radiodiagnostic and radiotherapeutic procedures is the role and presence of a specialist doctor , not only to monitor the dose administered , but also to deal overall with any eventuality and the particular features it might present .
2 ) During diagnostic procedures , the principle applied should be that of obtaining the necessary diagnostic information with the least possible exposure of the patient .
During radiotherapy , the exposure of patients to radiation should be correctly calculated to constitute the optimum dose .
And most certainly , both during radiodiagnosis and during radiotherapy , those operating the equipment should be protected as much as possible in every way .
3 ) It is important for the equipment and installations used for radiodiagnosis and radiotherapy to be up to date , and to provide the best possible safety , both for the person being examined or undergoing therapy , and for the working participants of those medical procedures .
In this respect , the Member States also bear a serious responsibility , and must take care to inspect equipment for the production and use of ionizing radiation for medical purposes .
4 ) The Directive makes special mention of the serious dangers involved in the exposure of pregnant women to radiation , both for themselves and for the embryo , especially when exposure takes place in the abdominal area .
It is fortunate that today there are alternative methods of approach to certain diagnostic problems , and those methods must be used when the situation so dictates , even if they cost more .
The Directive we are considering complies in the best possible way with the Hippocratic maxim ' to benefit or not to harm ' .
In conclusion , I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur for his work , and also to all on the Committee on the Environment and Public Health who contributed towards the formulation of the Directive in the best possible way .
Mr President , there is something rotten even in this matter of radio-protection , this wonderful scientific method to benefit man 's health .
There is something dangerous , and the first formal proof of it is that under the pressures of reality , the Council keeps coming back with successive directives which strive in some way to patch things up .
I am afraid that the new directive too does not address the issue radically and effectively .
The report by Mr Amadeo makes an honest and praiseworthy effort , but it too has its weaknesses .
What is involved here , Mr President ?
I know that in my own country - and the same thing happens in very many other European countries - such radiological laboratories are being set up all the time , and clearly on a business basis and with business criteria .
There are some formal prerequisites , there must be a responsible radiologist and some protection against radiation .
Those companies , however , which set up such units on the basis of business criteria , constantly solicit more and more custom . And they secure this by paying commissions to doctors to refer patients to them for repeated , sometimes unnecessary radiological examinations , which are dangerous , while on the other hand , they place terrifying burdens on social security funds .
Furthermore , Mr President , even if the doctors are honest and carry out these examinations correctly , it can happen that the way they are done does not suit the doctor responsible for treatment , who then has to call for another examination with the result that examinations are repeated and the funds are burdened still further .
Finally , Mr President , there is no monitoring , or at least no effective monitoring of the renewal of equipment in those laboratories .
This is where the business criterion of allowing equipment to get old so that writing it off will take longer and be easier , to maximize profits .
First of all , then , this equipment replacement should take place at the instigation of scientific companies and social security organizations - which suffer losses because of it - and every kind of modern technology should be introduced , as Mr Trakatellis emphasized as a person qualified to do so .
Secondly , every patient should have a social security record listing the examinations he has undergone , so that doctors can see them and order new examinations accordingly .
Without such criteria , Mr President , I am afraid that the report , which is good in other respects , will not be sufficient with its proposals and amendments , and sooner or later yet another directive will come along while in the meantime the danger to patients will still exist and grow worse , while companies that literally trade in the health of European citizens will inflate their profits .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to thank Mr Amadeo for his excellent , full and meticulous report .
I must also thank him for his willingness to accept amendments : he has accepted a variety of amendments which I myself have tabled and the Committee has discussed and approved .
If these amendments are taken into account , I believe the Directive will be considerably improved .
It is true that this is a consultation procedure , and that is a serious matter .
In all my speeches in this House I have stressed , and I stress again today as we near the end of our discussions on the Intergovernmental Conference , the need to broaden the scope of the tasks allocated to Parliament in health matters - that is , the tasks referred to in Article 129 .
The fact is that it has been common knowledge for some time that ionizing radiation is the major source of radiation exposure for the citizens of Europe .
So this is a very important subject , and certainly not a secondary directive , because radiation exposure is no trivial matter : it means cancer , it means malignant tumours .
Ever since 1984 , in the context of the Euratom treaties , we have been trying to regulate this subject .
We did so at the time , but many years have passed since then and in 1996 another directive failed to address the subject of health problems .
That is why the present directive is important , because it broadens the requirements for the justification and optimization of diagnostic examinations of this kind . By justification I mean that such examinations should be undertaken only when they are strictly necessary - only when it is absolutely certain that there is no other , safer way of arriving at the diagnosis .
The same applies to optimization : by optimization I mean ensuring that the technician , the radiographer and the doctor are exposed to the minimum possible risk .
Well , as far as these matters are concerned I believe the present directive has taken account of the most important aspects .
The amendments have clarified , in general and in detail , what the minimum exposure must be for patients , but above all special emphasis has been placed on the task of the doctor , in his dual capacity as prescribing physician - whose duty it is to prescribe one set of tests rather than another , and hence to select the least hazardous - and as examining doctor . His task must be to ensure that the procedure prescribed entails no risk to the patient .
Of course , as Mr Trakatellis said , doctors have always followed the criterion ' first , to do no harm ' , and will continue to do so , but there is a need for precise standards to be laid down by the Member States .
Not only that , but the Member States will also have to adopt specific guidelines on the decommissioning and replacement of apparatus that is old , obsolete and so harmful to the patient .
In substance , Mr President , this is an important directive which has been improved by Parliament , and I trust the Commission will take it into consideration .
For this reason , it deserves our full and unanimous support .
Mr President , the Commission wishes to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and especially of course its rapporteur , Mr Amadeo , for the support that has been given to the proposal which is now before the House .
I am also grateful for the helpful comments which have been made during the process .
When the Council adopted a directive for the first time in 1984 on the radiation protection of persons undergoing medical examination or treatment , it was in recognition of the fact that this was by far the largest man-made source of radiation to which people were exposed .
The aim of the Commission 's proposal to amend this directive is to take account firstly of the scientific and technical developments in the medical field , secondly of the amendment of the 1996 directive on basic safety standards and , thirdly , of the experience gained in implementing the 1984 directive .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 10 .
We also agree with the purpose of several other amendments , which can be reworded slightly or perhaps included in a different article so as to ensure the coherence of the proposal .
We can therefore accept in principle or in part Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 11 .
The Commission cannot accept the two remaining amendments , for the following reasons .
Amendment No 6 on the consultation of a medical physicist under Article 4 ( 1 ) a is seen as superfluous , since the requirement for a medical physicist to be consulted is already clearly established in Article 5 ( 5 ) of the proposal .


Amendment No 12 to Article 13 ( 2 ) , in which the term ' practitioner ' is changed to ' examining doctor ' , may lead to misunderstandings .
The term ' practitioner ' is used throughout the proposal to describe the person who is responsible for the medical exposure .
The same person is concerned in this article , and we should therefore use the same description .
To ensure that persons undergoing medical exposure to radiation continue to enjoy the highest possible degree of protection , the Commission will submit an amended proposal on the basis of the useful amendments which the European Parliament has presented today , with a view to having the directive adopted by the Council in June .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Trans-European telecommunications networks
The next item is the report ( A4-0166 / 97 ) by Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text ( C4-0166 / 97-95 / 0124 ( COD ) ) , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Decision on a series of guidelines for transEuropean telecommunications networks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the trans-European telecommunications networks are the third of the trans-European networks to take shape , after those for transport and energy .
Let me begin with one fundamental comment : the aim of the telecom TENs is to establish a European telecommunications infrastructure which , in addition to the physical telecommunications network , will include generic services and applications for our citizens and businesses , especially SMEs .
The outcome of the negotiations can be seen as positive .
Here it must be emphasized that the successful conclusion of the conciliation process was greatly helped by the excellent coordination and leadership of Mrs Fontaine , Parliament 's representative and chief negotiator , but also by the willingness of the Dutch presidency , under Mrs Jorritsma , to accept many of our arguments , as well as the very influential advice of the Commission in the form of Mr Bangemann .
Even though the overall budget for the telecom TENs , ECU 40 million , will not permit any major strides forward , the purpose and aim of the projects cannot be questioned .
The resources available will cofinance and support European projects which would not come about without Union funding .
These EU-funded projects will thus contribute to the development of the information society .
The negotiations concerned elements of substance and technical aspects , the powers of the European Parliament , priorities and satellite communications , which has been added to the list of priorities .
Parliament 's key demand in terms of technical aspects was to insist on the wide use of applications .
Generic services such as E-mail and applications were given more emphasis than in the Commission 's original text .
The TEN projects are not research projects , since those are included in the fourth research framework programme , but are designed to demonstrate to our citizens and businesses the practical and economic benefits of information and communication technologies .
The Parliament delegation argued successfully that the criterion concerning the transnational nature of projects should be retained ; hence there is a guarantee that EU funds will not be used in support of national projects which remain national in the future .
Moreover , Parliament argued successfully for social requirements to be assessed in this decision .
The social consequences of new technologies , for example teleworking , will be taken into account .
The powers of the European Parliament were of course a particularly important aspect of the negotiations for us , and preserving Parliament 's institutional powers was in fact the greatest obstacle .
From the start of the legislative procedure , Parliament had insisted that its rights under Article 129c and d should be protected .
Here , our scope for codecision in the procedure for establishing the guidelines for projects of common interest has been retained .
Parliament 's powers were fully asserted in the negotiations within the Conciliation Committee , in that a practice similar to the one for the TENs in energy and transport was established .
The projects of common interest are identified in Annex I to the decision .
The annex , to be drawn up jointly by the Council and Parliament , thus sets out guidelines , and the Commission has made it perfectly clear - and has presented a text to this effect - that it undertakes to report on the transposition of these guidelines and to present under the codecision procedure , by the middle of 2000 , appropriate proposals for the revision of the list of projects of common interest .
This proposal must be adopted within the following 18 months , in other words by 31 December 2001 , when the validity of this annex lapses .
The action is thus guaranteed to continue uninterrupted .
Moving on to the priorities , the annex sets out some priorities which are of particular importance to us .
These are generic services , applications of collective interest concerning distance education and training , cultural heritage , services to SMEs and telematics for transport , the environment and health .
The plan put forward by the Commission , and in particular Mr Bangemann , to include satellite services in the telecom TENs , is of special importance to me personally and also to Parliament , although the Council was initially reluctant to approve it .
This is an indication that satellites will play a far more prominent role in our deliberations in the future than has been the case until now , so that the trans-European networks - connected to global networks - will function even more effectively .
I believe that the reports which are to come next - the satellite action plan or our discussion of it so far , the agreement on personal communications services by satellite and the directive or Commission proposal on the subject of the European Union and aerospace - all demonstrate our clear intention to assess the implications of this issue in much greater depth for the benefit of the public , so as to make it clear that this important sector of European industry needs promotion .
I believe that some important tasks lie ahead of the EU - the Commission and Parliament - in a global context here , and that we must pool our efforts .
We must involve all the major players , including my friend Mr Glante from the PSE Group , who helped us bring this matter to a successful conclusion .
Thank you very much for your attention .
This is the direction in which we are heading , and I believe that it can only lead to success .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a pat on the back is very welcome every now and then in this business , Mr Hoppenstedt .
It was the first time that I personally had taken part in conciliation proceedings , and I must say that I found it very exciting and often very instructive .
I can only endorse the basic comments made by Mr Hoppenstedt , and should just like to add a few of my own .
Telecom TENs , in my view , can only be compared up to a point with the other TENs in energy and transport , where the main aim is to improve or create network infrastructure , in other words hardware .
In the case of telecom TENs , the focus is not so much on hardware as on software , in the broadest sense .
We need appropriate applications , using existing and new infrastructure , which will enable potential users to access these technologies .
We must introduce people - consumers , employers and employees - to these technologies and allay their fears of them .
However , we must also create the conditions for money to be made from these technologies , since otherwise there will be no private investment , which is absolutely vital in this area .
Politics , in my opinion , is nearly always the art of reaching a compromise .
I noticed that everyone became more willing to compromise as time went by .
As Mrs Fontaine will remember , I said in one of the meetings that a good compromise is one which is a little painful to both sides , or to all three sides .
That , I believe , is the case with this outcome .
I particularly welcome the Commission 's promise to make a statement to the House on Article 14 of the decision .
This is a crucial aspect of the outcome of the conciliation process and will , I believe , secure Parliament 's demand for codecision , and my group will certainly vote in favour of this outcome .
I hope that the House as a whole will do likewise .
Mr President , Commissioner , I really do welcome the fact that we have finally arrived at a positive outcome to this conciliation on the telecommunications networks , both because this final text largely reflects the European Parliament 's recommendations and because it is a matter of urgency that these guidelines for European policy should be confirmed .
Hardly a week passes without new microelectronic components appearing on the market , and it takes less and less time to develop digital electronic technologies for network access and navigation and for the compression and storage of data .
Although it is true that these things take longer for telecommunications network operators , satellite designers and publishers of audiovisual material , it is equally true that even in this sector events are being massively accelerated by the disappearance of monopolies and the globalization of markets , together with a substantial influx of private investment .
Government authorities , for their part , have powers of supervision and guidance , and may also become important customers for applications such as public information , health , education and regional planning , applications that may involve them at both local and national level .
In the United States this type of symbiosis takes place mainly at local level , I understand , with ' smart communities ' on the lines of Silicon Valley , but in Europe the telecommunications networks and the information society can and must become an instrument of policy for the single market , of interregional cohesion and cross-border co-operation .
This is why I also support the recommendation that the Structural Funds , too , should occasionally be used for applications of this type . I would add that the Cohesion Funds could also be used to increase opportunities for the financing of new enterprises in the information society sector .
I also note the part that telecommunications networks can play in our foreign policy , building bridges between different economic and cultural realities . I am glad to note that satellite services , too , have been accepted at least by the Commission in this decision .
In two weeks ' time a symposium is to be held in Cairo , organized by the Commission and the ESA and dealing with this very subject - the trans-Mediterranean information society and satellite applications - and I look forward to seeing meaningful and specific signals from governments and from operators in the sector concerned .
I must make one comment on the fact that the guidelines of this decision now relate to the three levels of the network system - applications , services and infrastructures : I believe that in the applications sector the Commission must act as a unifying force for potential users , a pilot customer and a financial support for small and medium-sized enterprises , whereas in the services and infrastructure sectors the Union 's main task should be to ensure interoperability and support for technological research .
Finally , I congratulate Mr Hoppenstedt on his report and on his vigorous efforts to strengthen the role of the European Parliament in this decision .
Mr President , Commissioner , the information society provides unique opportunities for people to fulfil perhaps their most basic need for communication , for proximity , the need to speak and express one 's views , to communicate with other people and with the world around them .
Development has been rapid with TV , radio , the Internet , e-mail etc . , and it will continue .
Our task as elected representatives is to ensure that the information society is made available to all and that those investments which are made benefit the majority and do not damage health or the natural world .
These guidelines were put forward by the Commission in 1995 .
During their discussions Parliament has always placed emphasis on the social aspects , public utilisation , the environmental impact and on determining those projects which are in the public interest and under Parliament 's influence .
I think that the proposal from the Conciliation Committee , in which I myself participated on behalf of the Liberal group , agrees essentially with Parliament 's views in this respect .
I would particularly like to emphasise the cross border aspects and the issues concerning language and culture in less developed regions .
It is also important and beneficial that we establish those projects which are in the public interest and that a number of these are prioritised , such as distance learning , small and medium sized companies , the environment and health and satellite communication .
The Liberal group supports the proposal from the Conciliation Committee .
We think it is a step along the way to the information society and a trans-european telecommunications network for all .
Mr President , we think it is vitally important for the European Parliament to support the outcome of the agreement in the Conciliation Committee aimed at bringing about a final approval after more than a year of tough negotiations of a set of guidelines relating to the trans-European telecommunications networks .
The aim of this decision consists in establishing the main thrust of action which has been proposed and to identify projects of common interest which would benefit from Community subsidies in accordance with the regulation setting the new principles for the granting of financial aid by the Community in the framework of the trans-European network .
Indeed , both the 18 technical amendments and the decision to identify projects of common interest and their priorities and the introduction of satellite communications in Appendix I , including its revision clause , mean that we must approve , in the plenary session , the whole agreement text - for the general interests of the ordinary people of the European Union who will definitely be the end beneficiaries of the proper operation of the programme of trans-European telecommunications networks .
In order for this to take place , this programme must be based not only on a network of telecommunications directed at the major undertakings in the sector but also at fostering the creation of jobs and the promotion of the development of telecommunications in the less-favoured rural areas of the European Union where , because of special characteristics , the proper dissemination of this sector will prove more complicated - as is the case , for example , in the ultra-peripheral regions .
The first step will be to foster the creation of aids for small and medium-sized enterprises in the telecommunications sector , which are generators of a high percentage of job creation in Europe , as well as improving the infrastructures which these enterprises install where there is a lack of telecommunications networks and where it is far from convenient to do so .
In order for this to be done , we must identify , as project of common interest , that which improves these deficiencies and which , in turn , can be applied to areas as important - as has already been said - for our society as universities , transport , health centres and small and medium-sized enterprises , to mention just a few .
Bearing in mind the social purpose of telecommunications networks , it is vital that these projects should be approved , bearing in mind their very nature , their economic viability , their environmental consequences and , above all , as has already been said , their social and economic effects on European society , and in particular the impact on employment .
Finally , the disagreements which have cropped up could be solved if we make a joint effort and try to bring about a solution to the differences between the parties involved . We must unanimously back the assessment made by the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee which has carried out such a good piece of work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is good that an agreement has been reached .
Telemessages , or more properly information networks , will form the basis for the information society ; they are its highways .
But they are much more too .
We are looking at a veritable revolution .
Why is that ?
Because the network system can bypass the democratic system or be out of reach of democracy .
A network is also a means of exercising power : economic , cultural , political and social power .
Will power slip out of our reach in the network society ?
It will slip away by coming very close , as close as half a metre away even right on top of us .
At the same time , it is faceless , hard to visualize and may be situated anywhere in the world .
It will not be easy to trace power to its source .
It will not be possible to elect the people who have power on the network .
The person who controls the network and its content can operate on the network and thus rule .
Our first demand is that everybody should be able to use the networks freely and in such a way that where they live and what their economic circumstances are does not form a barrier to using the network .
This , however , is not enough .
There are great economic , educational and social obstacles to using the networks .
A person who is deficient in information is more excluded in the information society than people in a weak economic position are now .
It will be possible to wage information society wars by means of the networks .
People and governments will not be physically damaged in a modern war .
It is better to degrade the enemy to a customer and make him dependent on the victor .
Computer hackers , for example , can be the highwaymen or the fighter pilots of networks .
There are also viruses on the networks .
The Commission should draw up a fresh report on the effects of networking on democracy , national society and security .
It is not enough that we in Europe have a high technical level of networks .
We need democracy and the participation of the citizen .
We therefore need network democracy , social policy and security policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today sees the conclusion of yet another co-decision process , this time on the guidelines for the trans-European telecommunications networks , in which the European Parliament has played a fundamental role .
This is a vital sector for the future of European society and economy and is a prerequisite for enabling European citizens and European Union enterprises , especially SMEs , to benefit fully from the opportunities offered by telecommunications in the perspective of the establishment of the information society .
In fact , telecommunication services and networks are fundamental if every citizen , enterprise or public authority is to have access to the type and amount of information that they need , including those situated in the least developed or peripheral regions .
Through this programme , the Community will be backing the interconnection of telecommunications infrastructures , essentially in order to improve competitiveness , especially of SMEs , and to strengthen the internal market , strengthen economic and social cohesion , bearing in mind in particular the need to link up island regions , land-locked regions , and peripheral regions to the more central regions of the European community as well as speeding up the development of activities which create jobs in new growth sectors .
A new project has already been planned for , concerning satellite communications - also coming to be regarded as a common interest sector .
The Commission 's decision to set a maximum deadline of four years for proposing the revision of Appendix I , on projects of common interest , the latter ceasing to exist if the deadline is overrun , will , I hope , prevent political holdups in the Council .
From my point of view , as member of the Conciliation Committee , this is a good agreement and it shows how the Commission , the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament can and must work together to define policies which will have so much influence on the future of European society .
It is also a good agreement because each of these institutions has shown that it can develop the role incumbent upon it : the Commission proposes , the European Parliament defines the strategy and fundamental sectors and it is for national governments to execute the project .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the noteworthy conciliatory effort made by our Vice-President , Nicole Fontaine , and our rapporteur Mr Hoppenstedt .
Mr President , if I begin by expressing my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Hoppenstedt , and above all to the Vice-President of Parliament and head of its delegation , Mrs Fontaine , it really is not simply a formality , because those who were involved in the conciliation negotiations know just what a significant role they both played in achieving an outcome .
It is of course true that the Commission made its own contribution , but ultimately , to use a metaphor , it is like being on board a steamer : the Commission shovels coal into the boiler , the course is set by Captain Fontaine , and the helmsman , Mr Hoppenstedt , weathers the storm on the bridge and keeps us on course , in spite of the adverse winds blowing in from the Council .
The outcome is a very good one , I believe , especially when one bears in mind that not only were we a long way apart on the substance , but a whole series of institutional issues had arisen , where Parliament naturally wished to see its rights protected .
The Council did not want to have anyone trespassing on its territory , and even the Commission must of course point out that flexible and quick reactions are only possible if a certain degree of trust is placed in it to implement the decision .
All of this was ultimately tied up in a reasonable package , and that is very welcome .
Nor has anyone rejected the outcome during today 's debate ; everyone has welcomed it and called for it to be approved .
Perhaps , when it comes to implementing these decisions , it might not be a bad idea to cast our minds back to the source of these discussions on European infrastructure .
It all stems from the question of the internal market .
Although we put in place at an early stage the legal preconditions for the functioning of the internal market , we very soon realized that this alone was not enough : such a market can only take shape if it grows together in practice .
And a market cannot grow together without an efficient infrastructure .
That was when this idea was born .
We then carried the matter forward , and very soon came up with the three component sectors : transport in all its forms , naturally , then energy and energy distribution , and finally telecommunications .
Thereafter , the idea of the information society developed out of this idea of a telecommunications infrastructure network , so that we now have a kind of family tree of these political ideas , which I hope will now bear fruit .
I am obviously very much in the mood to use metaphors today , some of which might sound rather lyrical .
But spring is here , the sun has made an appearance , so why should one not wax lyrical for once ?
But what I did just want to say to Mr Glante was this : of course there is a difference between a road , a canal , an airport or even an electric power line and infrastructure for telecommunications or communications .
Infrastructure for telecommunications is naturally much more dependent on content , and is determined by the dissemination of content .
To that extent , I agree with you .
But one must not ignore the fact - and several speakers made this point - that if such an infrastructure does not exist or exists only partially , then even the best content is worthless , because it will not reach the intended user .
This applies in particular to rural and peripheral regions - hence our keen interest in satellite-based communications , as Mr Hoppenstedt has stressed once again .
If we wish to do anything at all for remote and rural regions , the only way is through satellite-based communications .
Cable-laying in such distant areas is quite unthinkable .
That is why I am very pleased that the joint forces of Parliament 's delegation and the Commission succeeded in convincing the Council to include this .
This is not the only point , since we shall of course also be able to work on content - above all , socially beneficial content - but ultimately I do regard the addition of this point as extremely important .
We have presented an action plan , on which the House is to draw up a report in the near future .
We have had some very intensive talks with the industry , and will continue doing so in order to encourage it to form consortia , as has happened in America , which can then establish mobile satellite communication networks across the world .
Because it would of course be very unfortunate if Europe were merely to remain a customer of such American networks , without competing ourselves on this market .
After all - and this is important too - these satellites will , for the first time , make full competition possible even within the various infrastructures .
That does not exist today .
Full competition exists in respect of hardware ; there is no problem there .
We have adequate competition on content ; one or two problems do exist in this sector , and we shall have to deal with them in the future .
But competition is incomplete with regard to infrastructure .
We have some legal monopolies , which will in fact disappear in most Member States after 1 January next year , but that does not mean that de facto monopolies will disappear .
And in some Member States , the owners of such cable networks are starting to realize what market power lies in their hands , and are moving on from simply operating networks to providing content too , because they know very well that the real money is to be made by supplying content .
This then puts them in a position to damage the interests of competitors who are providing different content , through their ownership of the cable network .
This is not an ideal situation , and nor is the solution proposed by some : just to separate cable networks from content provision , in other words to do what was once mooted for the electricity and gas industries , creating a split between carriers and content provision .
I do not regard this as an ideal solution for telecommunications , since we would be dividing up two activities which need to be operated globally in order to be globally competitive .
There is no global infrastructure .
Mobile satellites might perhaps create one , but even that infrastructure will only be competitive if content can be provided at the same time .
Therefore , I do not consider the separation of cable networks and content provision to be an ideal solution .
We have commissioned a study on the matter . It is to be presented soon , and we shall then report to the House on our position .
It would , however , be better to ensure competition in respect of infrastructure too , since that is always the simplest solution .
All the other solutions are regulatory ones involving litigation , in other words job creation schemes for lawyers .
That is very nice for lawyers - and I am one myself - but for our citizens , it is tedious and of course very expensive too to watch the game being played out , rather than receiving decent content .
These comments are intended to clarify the background .
Now , with the joint agreement in the Conciliation Committee , we have an outcome which takes account of Parliament 's amendments .
The listing of projects of particular importance ensures that Parliament can exert the necessary influence .
The topics listed correspond to the wishes that were clearly expressed again by Parliament : education , culture , health care , services for SMEs , transport and the environment .
Above all , it is important to identify the European dimension of such projects because , as Mr Hoppenstedt quite rightly said , if the whole affair leads only to the funding of what one might call national orphans , who can no longer obtain support at home , that will be a serious mistake .
That is not the job of the Union .
So I think that content has been dealt with very satisfactorily .
The question of the decision-making mechanisms has also been resolved .
The institutional principles of the Treaty have been adhered to , but there is enough flexibility in terms of programme management , and especially as regards how this might subsequently be amended .
I think that the solution reached also allows us both , Parliament and the Commission , to evaluate our experiences .
Here it is very important to do things in the right order , and I welcome what Mr Hoppenstedt has said .
I wish to repeat here , on the record , what I said at conciliation : we are prepared to produce a report on the implementation of these guidelines , and to submit appropriate proposals for the updating of the project list through codecision by the middle of 2000 .
The proposal is to be adopted within the following 18 months , in other words by 31 December 2001 , which is exactly when the present annex lapses , to ensure that the action will proceed without interruption .
I think that we can now adopt this timetable together without it causing us any major problems , since 18 months really should be adequate for a codecision procedure , especially if we are able to evaluate positive experiences .
Let me make two further remarks . Perhaps the President-in-Office behind me and the Vice-President , Mrs Fontaine , in front will forgive me if I address myself to you personally , Mr President .
The Commission comes here from a far-off building , which in itself is good physical exercise .
But then we walk through that gallery , and the pictures hanging there are a culture shock .
Even at the start it was hardly bearable , but it is becoming steadily worse .
The Commission would gladly designate one of its Members to set up a kind of panel to decide whether or not a series of pictures is worthy of Parliament 's patronage .
Not everything which someone sits down and daubs on a canvas is art - I paint in my spare time , incidentally , and that is why I venture my opinion .
I would volunteer myself as a member of that panel .
Perhaps it could be done .
Of course I am not being entirely serious , but I promised the President that I would fill in the time until 5.30 , when Question Time begins .
My second comment is rather more serious .
I know that in the near future , Parliament is to hold a three-day seminar - a very lengthy one - in Brussels , to examine what can be learned from the conciliation procedure .
You have been good enough to invite me , and so I shall attend .
But I can give you here and now my initial impression of what has happened .
The procedures in which I have taken part - with the exception of this one - have always used up all the time available .
Positions are presented at the outset which everyone knows , on both the Parliament and Council sides , will ultimately be unacceptable for the other party .
It is just like collective bargaining .
One side comes along and says , ' we want a 5 % pay rise ' , and the other side says , ' we can only manage 2 % , and even then some firms will go bankrupt ' .
And then agreement is reached on 3.5 % .
Everyone knows at the start what will happen , and here too everyone knows at the start that the opening gambits amount to theatrical posturing , which is abandoned as soon as the smoke signals of a viable compromise appear , and these smoke signals often emanate from the Commission .
Of course , that is fair enough , and probably unavoidable .
It is just that when this lasts for all the time available and we have to come back three times - and two of the meetings are completely unnecessary , because they consist of mutual reproaches - I think our time , yours and that of the Commission and the Council , is too valuable for that .
In that respect , Mrs Fontaine , the meeting which you chaired was a laudable exception .
It did last a whole day , but I would much rather that it takes a day and an outcome is found , than that the meeting breaks up after three or four hours with everyone saying to themselves , ' that will give them something to think about ! ' .
In reality , nothing at all has been achieved .
If we want to do something about it , we could perhaps arrange the procedure in such a way that such formal positions are presented by individuals where necessary .
They would act as messengers , as it were : they hand over the document , fanfares are sounded , and they go their separate ways .
Once matters become serious , the real heroes come along , sit down and see to it that a result is achieved in one day .
That , to my mind , would be the best approach .
This case was a very difficult one : it was straightforward neither in general terms , nor as regards the substance .
I admit that the Council had difficulty in accepting this new idea of satellite-based communications .
Parliament had great difficulty with the institutional issues , and the Commission had great difficulty in maintaining its flexibility , which is particularly necessary in a sector like this , where technology is developing so quickly .
So it proved as complicated as the negotiations with Morocco on tomatoes .
However , given that it is a complicated sector , the outcome is very positive .
I should like to thank Parliament once again and , Mr President , I hope that I have performed my role to your satisfaction .
I have one further question for Mr Bangemann : the telecoms sector comprises hardware , software and manpower .
Where do we go from here ?
How will you attempt to ensure that this sector is managed equally successfully in the future ?
I shall be very brief : all the distinctions which we are working with today are likely to fade away in the future : in other words , whole systems will be developed where it will no longer even be possible to distinguish the hardware , or infrastructure , from the content , or software .
We are therefore assuming that in the future , we shall no longer be able to apply all today 's distinctions , but will have to devise entirely new methods .
But we are looking into this , and will soon report back to you . Convergence will be our watchword .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item on the agenda is questions to the Commission ( B4-0165 / 97 ) .
I give Mrs García Arias the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , I should like to ask a question on a point of order before this session begins .
One of the Commissioners here today is Mr Van Miert .
I have heard it said that preference is given to questions which are related to a particular Commissioner and this is quite right .
As a result , I still do not understand why questions 77 and 78 , put by Mr Joan Colom i Naval , and the first question put by myself , on changes to the rules on television decoders , have not been included in the set of questions put to Mr Van Miert and have been placed under the heading ' Other questions ' .
Mr Van Miert is taking these questions along with Mr Bangemann .
Therefore , Mr President , I think that these questions must be included in the debate with Mr Van Miert , because the subject matter of these questions is Mr Van Miert 's responsibility .
Mrs García Arias , if you so wish , when the Commissioner is here , I shall give you the floor but I must tell you that the matter of which questions are allocated to the different Commissioners is a decision of the Commission , not the European Parliament .
The Commission disagrees with you and feels that your question comes within Mr Bangemann 's competence and not Mr Van Miert 's .
The European Parliament has no powers to change decisions concerning Commissioners ' competences .
Mr President , on many occasions we have seen this question dealt with by the Spanish press either directly or unofficially , both by Commissioner Bangeman and Commissioner Van Miert .
I understand that you are telling me that it is the Commission which is responsible for deciding which Commissioner should answer which questions ; but , when we , as members of this Parliament , decide to put a question to Mr Van Miert we do so regardless of whether we also want to put a similar one to Mr Bangemann .
Mrs García Arias , there is an agreemetn between the two institutions that the President of the European Parliament decides the order of the questions and it is for the Commission to decide who answers what questions .
Question No 30 by Laura González Álvarez ( H-0339 / 97 )
Subject : Suspension of World Trade Organization ( WTO ) proceedings against the US in connection with the Helms-Burton Act
Can the Commission provide information on the grounds for suspending the proceedings brought against the US within the WTO in connection with the application of the Helms-Burton Act ?
Has the Commission taken account of Parliament 's resolutions on the Helms-Burton Act ?
Is the Commission aware that a Spanish businessman has been detained in the US under the Helms-Burton Act ?
Given the understanding reached between the Commission and the United States and the commitments undertaken in it by the United States , the Council agreed that the current WTO panel proceedings in respect of the Helms-Burton Libertad legislation will now be suspended but , if action is taken against EU companies or individuals under the Libertad Act or under the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act , or waivers as described in the understanding are not granted or withdrawn , the Commission will request the WTO to restart or re-establish the panel which will then follow its natural course .
The Commission always takes into account the resolutions of the European Parliament when formulating its proposals .
The Commission is aware of the arrest of a Spanish citizen , apparently under the so-called Trading-With-the-Enemy Act .
This legislation existed prior to the Helms-Burton Act .
Commissioner , you have nearly answered our questions but I would just like to say a couple of things to you and put another question .
First of all , I think that most of the members of the European Parliament - and public opinion - welcomed the decision by the European Commission when , in a laudable exercise of independence , it complained to the World Trade Organisation .
And I think that many of us welcome this because it seems that for the first time the European Union was facing up to a decision by the United States which clearly violated international law .
It seems to us that the Helms-Burton Act not only violates international law but it is also an immoral law .
It seems that this agreement with the United States has been reached on the basis of a freeze of Title 3 and on the basis of a possible revision by the United States Congress - which of course has a Republican majority - of Title 4 .
Are you sure that this revision is going to take place ?
And in any case , should we not appeal against a decision to imprison a Spanish businessman on the basis of the Helms-Burton Act ?
First of all I should like to say how much I appreciate the support that you have given to the Commission and the understanding that was reached .
I fully agree with the honourable Member about the unacceptability not only of the Helms-Burton Act , but also of the D 'Amato Act covering Iran and Libya .
That is why we took action of an unprecedented kind not only in the WTO , but also in European Union legislation .
The understanding between the Commission and the United States is not a final settlement but a preliminary step .
If we do not make the progress we hope to make then we have the full right to return to the WTO .
If action is taken against European companies we certainly will do so .
The particular case of Mr Ferrerro , who was arrested , was under legislation which was on the American statute book long before the Helms-Burton Act .
It is not the subject of the dispute between the European Union and the United States .
As I understand the position , the Spanish Government is giving consular assistance to Mr Ferrerro and is in touch with his defence attorney .
Commissioner , referring to the situation of the Spanish businessman , I think you referred to application of legislation which was on the United States Statute Book before the Helms-Burton Act and that , in any case , his defence was a matter solely for the Spanish Government .
My question is this : do you not think that in the exercise of European powers a European citizen - who has been imprisoned over restrictions on international trade - should not also deserve the support of the European Commission and , in any case , the European Council since this is a European citizen we are dealing with ?
I can understand , and have every sympathy for , the viewpoint put forward by the honourable Member and , of course , have every sympathy for the Spanish citizen in question .
But it is not the case that every time there is an allegation of illegal activity under a law outside the European Union that the Commission or the Council of Ministers is asked to act .
It is only if there has been a breach of obligations under the WTO .
In the first instance one would expect that question , if it arose , to be raised by the government of the Member State of the citizen concerned .
So far there has not been a suggestion that this is a breach of United States international obligations which necessitates or requires action by the European Union .
I remain open to the examination of that question if it should arise .
Question No 31 by Michael Elliott ( H-0334 / 97 )
Subject : Import tariffs
Could the Commission confirm that , following the introduction of European legislation to prohibit the use of hormones in livestock farming , the USA applied extra duties payable on a range of products imported into the USA from the European Union as a compensatory measure ?
Would the Commission say what the products were , how much money was involved and whether this practice has been challenged through the WTO ?
Mr President , it is true that on 1 January 1989 the United States imposed unilaterally a series of retaliation measures , consisting in the imposition of a 100 % duty on European Community exports to the United States of beef , ham , processed or preserved tomatoes , coffee , low-alcohol drinks , fruit juices and pet foods .
The United States calculated that these measures were worth 97.2 million dollars .
The United States made two small reductions for ham and tomato juice amounting to a further 4.5 million dollars , having reached an agreement in 1989 that the export of hormone-free beef from the United States to the European communities would be allowed .
On 17 April 1996 , the European Commission asked for consultations to be carried out , within the framework of the WTO , on these United States measures , on the basis that these measures were contrary to its obligations towards WTO .
Later , given that no progress was made on these consultations , the Commission asked for a group of experts to be set up .
The United States withdrew these measures unilaterally on 15 July 1996 .
I am most grateful to the Commissioner for that answer but we have learned in the last few days that it seems the WTO panel will find against the Commission on the complaint taken out by the USA on the issue of EU meat imports containing hormones .
I believe that the vast majority of Members of this Parliament would wish the Commission to appeal against this shocking decision .
So , I ask the Commission to indicate which measures it would take to appeal against any such decision by the WTO .
Secondly , will the Commission ensure that when changes to GATT are being negotiated , the health and welfare of European citizens and their farm animals can be properly protected and not susceptible to the kind of commercial pressure which seems to be being exerted under GATT by the United States ?
Mr President , in answer to the second question , the European Commission 's position is well known .
We were in favour of developing and strengthening the World Trade Organisation , as a general principle , and actually we think that the arrangements provided for by that organisation are the ones which should enable us to find a solution to the problem which you have pointed out .
Of course , in this complicated world of trade relations , the European Union , Mr Elliott , will sometimes win and sometimes lose .
Those are the rules of the game and I hope that this one should not come as a surprise to you .
That said , there is no doubt that , at the World Trade Organisation , attention should also be paid not only to questions of free trade but also , of course , those which might , above all , concern matters over which European public opinion is highly sensitive and which of course , refer to questions as important as consumer health .
Mr President , Mrs Ferrer , under Articles 5 and 30 of the Treaty , it is the responsibility of the Member States to take the necessary measures to guarantee that individuals cannot take action which could interfere with the proper operation of the internal market and the free circulation of goods .
Replying in more detail and having made the principle quite clear to the answer which you have put on Spanish fruit and vegetables , including strawberries , and their transport across France , in exercise of its powers and precisely because the French authorities have not intervened to put an end to the repeated excesses committed by groups of farmers against the farm products of others Member States , in this case from its southern neighbour , the Commission has taken proceedings to make sure that France respects the obligations by which it is bound .
A decision by the Court of Justice in Luxembourg is now awaited .
The Commission has therefore made use of the only legal instrument which it can under the Treaty and , of course , the Commission must hope that a judgment will be delivered .
We are right to hope for this , believe me , because the Commission is in no way passive on this and logically it is paying particular attention to the development of the campaign for marketing fruit and vegetables and in particular raising the awareness of the French authorities , with the independence with which the Court of Justice delivers judgments - which will imply a series of legal consequences and pecuniary ones too - in favour of those who have suffered from this type of attack and we simply hope that , through this co-operation , a much more positive attitude will be taken by the French authorities in the future .
Commissioner , there is no doubt that , in this case , the Commission 's powers are limited . And it seems that it has done what it had to do .
However , this is going to take two years before the Court of Justice .
In the meantime lorries have been set fire to , lorry drivers transporting fruit , especially strawberries , across the border have been the object of violence .
Unfortunately this year , these attacks have once again begun and at least one lorry has been attacked .
Therefore , I would ask you , on behalf of those who have also asked the Commission to take action on this matter , the Federation of Fruit and Vegetable Producers and Exporters , not only to look into this question but also - and I make an appeal to you - to make sure that the Council puts an end to these events which provide such a negative image of European construction and all that it stands for .
I can confirm to you the Commission has been informed that , on 24 April last , a lorry loaded with 21 tonnes of tomatoes was detained and attacked on the motorway between Avignon and Marseille .
The Commission immediately contacted the French authorities .
However , I must say truthfully and in order to put the facts rights , that the judgment delivered by the Court of Justice is logically going to be decided by case-law , Mrs Ferrer , by tradition and on the basis of the precedents of former judgments by the Court . And here I must , therefore , try to be as neutral as possible because this is the real situation - but it could , in fact , hold this state responsible for the damage which has been suffered on its national territory and offer appropriate compensation .
I must point out , regardless of the fact that these attacks should never take place , that is true is that the state concerned by these attacks systematically meets all the demands for compensation .
The Commissioner says that people can claim compensation but he will be aware of the situation of the British lorry drivers who were held up by the French lorry drivers ' strike .
There an agreement was made on compensation .
It was agreed that claims for less than £ 250 a day could be accepted without question .
It was also agreed that claim forms could be designed in English and supporting documents and evidence submitted in English .
And yet the French authorities are now insisting on breakdowns for small claims and insisting that claims be submitted in French .
UK lorry drivers are being discriminated against and I would like to ask the Commissioner what action the Commission will take to make sure that the French Government does not actually hold up the process with complicated requirements and indeed whether he will give this House an undertaking that he will intervene with the French authorities to ensure that justice is done in the case of the British lorry drivers and indeed their Spanish colleagues ?
Again I insist that the Court of Justice still has not taken a decision .
However , there is already a series of Court of Justice decisions according to which , when there is a violation of Community legislation by a Member State , it is possible to ask a national court to make that Member State pay appropriate compensation .
In accordance with French law , the French state is responsible for any damage caused to persons or goods as a result of the use of force or violence during demonstrations or similar protests .
As a consequence , this type of request could be made by the British lorry drivers .
I do not think that it is an act of discrimination that claims in France should be submitted in French ; this is a matter of French national law and it seems to me totally logical that compensation claims ...
( Interruption for technical reasons )
Just one moment , Mr Marín .
It seems that there is a technical problem in the English interpreting booth .
You must wait until it is put right . We should not forget that the English have the English disease which means that they do not know any other language apart from their own .
( The session was suspended from 5.45 p.m. until 6 p.m. )

As I see that Mr Marín has taken advantage of the interruption to reply directly to certain members , I give the floor to Mrs Hardstaff .
In fact my question was very much on the same lines as that of Mr Watson and the Commissioner has been kind enough to come round and explain individually .
So I withdraw .
As the authors of questions No 33 and 34 are not present , the questions fall .
Question No 35 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0303 / 97 )
Subject : Priority measures for northern Morocco
The economic and social situation of northern Morocco has been deteriorating increasingly and promises of imminent regional development and Euromediterranean investment have failed to reduce the prevailing scepticism .
What investments have been made in the last three years ?
When is the long-awaited road from Tangier to Oujda , which is crucial to the economic development of the region , expected to be completed ?
Is the Commission aware that the few major companies in the region are closing down ?
What is the timetable for the completion of EU-funded projects ?
What projects are planned over the next few years ?
Through its programmes the Commission is paying considerable attention to economic and social development of the northern provinces of Morocco , in accordance with the priority given by the Moroccan authorities themselves to the subject .
Between 1993 and 1996 the European Union financed projects totalling 118 million ECU in total value .
In addition there have been European Investment Bank loans which , over the same period , came to 267 million ECU plus 471 million ECU coming from the Member States .
In other words over the last three years projects and programmes have been implemented to a total value of 857 million ECU , a third of which approximately was made up of loans .
As far as the completion of the Tangier-Oujda road is concerned , which would be an important factor for ending the isolation of the northern provinces of the country , no firm date has yet been set for work to begin .
On the other hand , the Commission is aware of the difficulties confronting Moroccan enterprises in that area , as you pointed out in your question .
As for the timetable for projects to be financed in the northern Moroccan provinces , as well as programmes whose completion is planned over the coming years , these were established in the Indicative Programme 1996-1997 which was recently established by common agreement between the Commission and the Moroccan authorities .
In particular , this programme provides for a project of integrated rural development and a project for setting up industrial areas , which used to be called development ' poles ' .
Further various national projects have also been undertaken in the northern Moroccan provinces .
As you will see the amount of investment over the last three years has been quite considerable and I would also say that , within the programming which was completed a month ago , we have also included a project for integrated rural development in this area as well as the creation of an industrial development zone .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for this reply which is both practical and sets out some of the priorities .
However , I think that there is still a problem in terms of the difference between approved investment and what is perceived as regional development .
This question reflects the true feelings in that area which is undoubtedly one of scepticism , of terrible doubt , among those who ought to be the beneficiaries - in other words , the ordinary people - because in reality that regional development has not actually reached them .
Believe me , Commissioner , we could also approve of projects on paper but this is not a fact .
Therefore my question has a completely constructive aspect and I am looking for a reply to this enormous problem of developing the whole of the Mediterranean area , because we are making a start but we have no power really to deal with the reality on the ground .
You have not actually given much precision or at least as much as I would have liked about practical projects and the timetable involved .
But that is not what is lacking .
I see that there is agreement , as you yourself have stated , between the European Union and the Moroccan authorities and this is quite satisfactory as far as I am concerned .
But what we really now have to do is tell the ordinary people living in the northern Moroccan provinces that this is so , in order for them to be able to take part as we would like , because so far they have seen nothing of the things that we have decided .
That is the problem .
I have to tell you that , in terms of the 1993-1996 projects , on health and family planning , job creation , forestry eco-systems , farming credits and reconversion , the fight against drugs , drinking water and drainage systems , rural roads and tracks and a small involvement by NGOs , as well as intervention by the Farming Intervention Fund and the National Farming Credit Bank , this has already been done .
As for the timetable for 1996 and later : this is now being prepared , because only just before the Malta meeting was the programming completed together with the Moroccan authorities .
This is a partnership and , of course , this has to be discussed and negotiated with the Moroccan side .
A 40 million ECU programme has been established for integrated rural development in the northern part of Morocco and , also together with the Moroccan authorities , a 24 million ECU programme has been established to create an industrial development zone .
This is something which is going to be done
As for the roads , I should also add that a programme has been established already , to the tune of 30 million ECU , which is to be signed very soon , and the first stage has already been agreed by the Moroccan Government .
To the extent that the Moroccan Government asked for an extension to the current road programme and inclusion of the Tangier-Oujda road , in reply to the Moroccan request the Commission might well include some parts of the road , at the same time , I must tell you that we wish to use up all of the money from the MEDA Programme on cement , on infrastructure , because we feel that Morocco has a sufficient level of development so that most of the infrastructures already started can be completed not by means of donations but by means of the loans from the European Investment Bank .
We think that this is a problem of balance .
Of course , I think - and as far as putting this into practice quickly is concerned this is up to the will of the Moroccan Government - the most that we can do is to guarantee visibility which means - if we are to do this as well as we can - that we must conduct the same campaign as we did with the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds : every time that there is a road we should put up lots of placards along the road .
However , I think that it is very difficult - not only in Morocco but in any country around the Mediterranean - to make public opinion see - only two or three months following programming - that these European Union backed projects actually have immediate effects on their way of life , in the case of people living in the mountains or on small farms .
This is a process which will inevitably have to be carried out in the long term .
Mr President , the Commissioner was unable to answer Question No 34 , but further to that question , I should like to take up the last point he made .
What matters is not just resources for infrastructure , but above all cultural cooperation , cooperation on education and training .
We initially made the mistake in Central and Eastern Europe of transferring more money , but neglecting education and training for the people .
Could you tell us about the cultural elements of our cooperation with Morocco and North Africa ?
I am very pleased to be asked this question because , bearing in mind the mistakes which had been committed in respect of countries in central and eastern Europe , the ' mise à niveau ' programme , to use the Moroccan terminology , in other words the programme for adaptation to a free trade zone , uses up nearly 80 % of all of the MEDA programme 's resources .
And yet precisely in applying the MEDA programme we are trying to avoid subsidies which should really be earmarked for the ' mise à niveau ' for vocational training , for increasing the standards , above all , of workers in the region 's countries , for guaranteeing the incorporation of new technologies , for preparing mentalities , for adapting the industrial fabric -that is where most financial aid has been concentrated .
What we are trying to do is to make sure that the infrastructure - the future infrastructure - in these countries enables them gradually to be incorporated into the system of low interest rate loans from the European Investment Bank .
This is the approach that we are taking .


I thank Mr Newens and Mr Bontempi for their questions and I shall try to offer some details on the subject which keeps coming up in order to say exactly what we are doing and what we think should be done .
You are perfectly aware of the common position of the European Union vis-à-vis Cuba , as was expressed by the Council of Ministers , on 2 December 1996 .
Every aspect and arrangement for relations with that country were specified on that occasion .
The Commission is and always has been in favour of pursuing dialogue with the Cuban authorities in the light of that common position and , therefore , on the basis of the latest information which is to hand : the drafting of the second report by European ambassadors in Havana - we are considering ( given that in June the six months for which that common position was in effect will be coming to an end , and coinciding with the time when the Council of Ministers - and I imagaine the European Parliament too - will be assessing the situation and will be taking initiatives ) carrying out an assessment of the ideas contained in the ambassadors ' report .
How are we doing that ?
At the moment , the European Commission is perfectly able to demonstrate that , bearing in mind certain very important points which we actually think are fundamental in terms of human rights , opening Cuban society , in respect , of course , of its national integrity , its way of understanding the revolution and its own future , bearing in mind certain requirements the Commission has nothing to regret because we have really made a very important effort in the last three years .
This is the first time that I am giving the European Parliament a concrete reading of the way in which humanitarian aid cooperation is being carried out with Cuba : between 1993 and 1996 we spent a total of 45 million ECU .
This aid includes food , medicine , medical equipment and health products .
The Commission is at present working out a global plan for this year which will come to approximately 8 million ECU and it will deal with the despatch of medicines , raw material for making medicines , food - especially soya oil , meat and milk powder - as well as health equipment for hospitals .
The distribution programme has already been worked out ; this will be carried out through hospital centres and pharmacists and will be aimed at the most vulnerable section of the Cuban population - in other words , babies , pregnant women , the elderly and the chronically sick .
This distribution and its follow-up will be carried out by 11 European NGOs which will make sure that the operation is carried out properly and so far they have not pointed out any problem connected with the US embargo policy .
As a consequence , in respect of the first and second questions which I was asked , we think that , at the moment , it is very difficult to determine exactly what the impact is going to be on Cuba 's relations wit the European Union .
Secondly , at the moment we are trying to assess the ambassadors ' report , which is a recent one .
Thirdly , we shall have to find some type of response given that the common position is only valid for six months and will come to an end in July - in other words something has to be done before July .
Fourthly , the humanitarian aid and cooperation programmes which we are developing have now reached a fairly considerable volume in our opinion and , as far as the execution of the global plan this year is concerned , the decisions which have been taken are the ones which I have just pointed out .
I thank the Commissioner for all the information .
In view of the fact that numerous countries in the world with which the European Union has cooperative agreements and close economic relations have much worse human rights records than Cuba , would the Commissioner agree that there can be no justification for rejecting a Cuban agreement on these grounds , although we will continue to raise the issues in question ?
Since the Cuban Government wants a cooperative agreement and numerous European Union Member States have trading agreements with Cuba , why cannot we achieve an agreement on this basis ?
I too would like to say that I quite understand the Commission 's position ; and I also look forward with some interest to the expiry of the common position .
It does seem to me , though , precisely because of the pressure exerted by the United States , that we are in danger of lacking a unified strategy on relations with Cuba .
The Helms-Burton affair on the one hand and the understanding reached on trade and the block on any possibility of joint action on the other , make me wonder whether , when the common position expires , it may not be appropriate for us to make a strong , independent effort to define a unified strategy for relations with Cuba , otherwise we shall always be at the mercy of the quota system .
I want to thank the Commission for its full reply .
However , while we can wait to see what happens on the trade front , I do not think that disease and sickness waits for us at all .
There must be a positive response .
As the Commission knows , the US has the genius of producing drugs and medicines much more cheaply than possibly any other country in the world .
But , there is an embargo on Cuba purchasing medicines from the US .
It is , in fact , now accepted that there is an international agreement based on human rights , to the effect that medicines must be permitted to move freely even in wartime .
That is being denied to the people of Cuba .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what actions he has taken to persuade the US to abandon its embargo on the sale of medicines , which are cheap for the US to produce ?
Can I take it that the Commission is giving an assurance that trade negotiations can go ahead , irrespective of the US position on the Helms-Burton Act , and that it will be protecting European companies ?
You have understood right .
This is included in the common position .
The common position says quite clearly that , to the extent that the dialogue with the Cuban authorities is advancing , if progress is made in terms of opening up Cuban society and the economy , then it will be possible to make decisions with an autonomous and specific decision .
It is indeed possible .
I should like to thank Mr Marín for his explanation .
You are right , Mr President , we are always happy to listen to him .
However , there is a concern which has been made clear in the questions put by my colleagues : how is it that , in the case of certain countries with which we have an agreement - I should not really give an example , but there is a very clear example , that of Turkey , with which we have a customs agreement - why is it that we do not ask them to respect human rights ?
Our Sakharov prizewinner , Leyla Zana was unable to come here to collect her prize .
However , we do ask Cuba to respect human rights .
Despite my question , I would like to thank Mr Marín for his explanations because it seems that there could be a possibility of dialogue and that is something that we would all applaud .
Of course , I admit that it is quite easy for anyone - and I hope that this is going to be resolved at the Intergovernmental Conference - to demonstrate that the European Union not only has double standards but also has treble or quadruple standards ever since what happened in Geneva on the human rights in China .
Since then , quite frankly - and I say this with respect to the European Parliament - it is quite difficult for any European parliamentarian , Commissioner or Member State , to try to say that we are coherent on this .
Undoubtedly we are not .
That is all that I can say .
Since the time allocated to this part of Question Time has been used up , Questions 39 to 41 will receive written answers .
Question No 42 by Mr Camisón Asensio ( H-0299 / 97 )
Subject : Support for renewable energy sources and the use thereof in rail transport
Does the Commission believe that appropriate measures are being adopted by the EU Member States to support renewable energy sources and the use thereof in rail transport ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission considers that the part played by renewable energy sources in the European Union 's energy supply system should be amplified .
This indeed , is one of the central messages of the Green Paper ' Energy for the future - renewable energy sources ' recently issued by the Commission .
In the past too , the Commission has maintained that renewable energy sources can contribute substantially towards achieving the aims of the Union 's energy policy , namely ensuring reliability of supply , increasing competitiveness and protecting the environment .
Community financial support for renewable energy sources is provided mainly from the programmes ALTENER and JOULE-THERMIE .
In our opinion , the use of renewable energy sources should be encouraged in all sectors , including the transport sector .
That branch is responsible for approximately one-quarter of total energy consumption in the European Union , and it is also the branch responsible for the most rapid increase of carbon dioxide emissions .
It must be said , however , that some progress has already been made in the direct use of renewable energy sources for road transport , such as biofuels .
In respect of rail transport , the potential of renewable energy sources is mainly associated with the production of electrical energy , and consequently , with railways powered by electricity .
In some Member States , the contribution of renewable energy sources to the production of electrical energy is , I must say , quite considerable .
As mentioned in the Green Paper , the Commission believes that there is scope for a substantial increase in the use of renewable energy sources , and we are moving in that direction .
The European Commission intends to submit a White Paper before the end of 1997 together with an action plan dealing with renewable energy sources .
The action plan will be based on the Green Paper , and on the results of the dialogue taking place throughout the European Union at this time on the basis of the Green Paper .
The White Paper will also contain a series of special measures for the promotion of renewable energy sources .
I can assure you that in that context , the Commission will give careful consideration to all options for the better use of renewable energy sources , and within that framework it will certainly consider the perspectives offered by the rail transport sector .
Commissioner , it is a fact that rail transport is nowadays the most flexible means of transport and that 48 % of European trains run on the basis of electrical energy produced in carbon-dioxide-free hydro-electric plants .
Given the situation , it is quite easy to see the important role that could be played by railways given the foreseeable demand for energy , without affecting environmental protection , in an attempt to alleviate the greenhouse effect .
This is even more important given the fact that the transport sector - as you yourself said - takes up a quarter - and I think that it probably takes up slightly more than that - of total energy consumption .
Therefore , it seems reasonable that our objective should be to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions by 15 % by the end of the year 2010 , adopt a coherent Community strategy in favour of renewable energies , which is fundamental , already putting into practice not only the programmes which you have already mentioned but also ' Altaner ' so that , once and for all , we can introduce stability and transparency into national measures to promote renewable energy sources .
Mr President , I do not have much to add to what the honourable Member has just said .
I only want to assure Parliament that the ALTENER programme will indeed be included among the programmes that will be contributing to the promotion of renewable energy sources .
Question No 43 by Richard Howitt ( H-0307 / 97 )
Subject : White Paper on voluntary organizations and foundations
Why has this White Paper not yet been published , four years after the initial consultation and exactly one year after the Commission stated it was ' likely to be agreed by the Commission in the very near future ' ?
In particular , when a draft was considered at a meeting of Commissioners ' Cabinets recently , what were the precise objections to forwarding the document to the College of Commissioners for agreement ?
Will the Commission now give a firm and final date when it will present the draft White Paper to a Commission meeting , to assist all those in the voluntary sector who feel that Europe does not care about them ?
Mr President , the proposal for a White Paper on voluntary organizations and foundations has been the subject of much deliberation over the past month , both within the European Commission itself and with the associations , bodies and foundations involved .
It was essential to ascertain the accuracy of the information included in the White Paper for all the Member States and in particular the new countries , Austria , Finland and Sweden , which were not members of the European Union at the time of the initial survey used as a basis for the preparation of the proposal we have before us .
The Commission , then , has developed new initiatives in recent months .
We have had many political contacts with that sector , and this too had to be recorded in the document .
The new internal and external consultations with voluntary organizations and foundations were essential mainly for two reasons : first , because of the enlargement of the European Union , and secondly , so that account could be taken of all the new initiatives developed by the Commission in the last two years - because I remind you that this document first appeared four years ago .
All these amendments have been brought into the final draft of the document which is now in the final stages of its submission to the Commission , and we expect that on 29 May , in exactly two weeks , we will have the opportunity to debate it in the European Commission , and I hope it will be adopted .
I thought the Commissioner was going to disappoint me and then , just as I was grimacing , he brought us a date of 29 May .
So I would like to warmly thank him for that and , of course , we look forward to it .
On a more serious note , I hope that the Commissioner will join with me in regretting the fact that we now approach yet another Intergovernmental Conference , where there has not been systematic civil dialogue of the kind that I know he and we in this Parliament are committed to , so that ordinary citizens and the voluntary organizations in which they are represented have not been given a real say in the future development of the European Union .
I am sure that he will agree with me that a clear and simple statute for associations will enable voluntary organizations and charities to be recognized as full social partners in our deliberations , to engage in the debate about the European Union , to be consulted about draft legislation by the Commission and to promote participation at the grassroots level which is currently so sadly lacking .
Mr President , I am glad that I did not disappoint you and I do indeed hope that the date I gave you , 29 May , will be the day when the European Commission adopts the White Paper on the associations and foundations .
I totally agree with you that this sector needs a new impetus , a new dynamism .
It may offer many alternative solutions at a time when we are trying to create jobs , and I believe that the European Commission will express a favourable opinion along those lines .
Let us then wait for a fortnight , and I hope that after that , all of us , the European Parliament and all the interested associations and foundations , will take part in a civil dialogue at European level in which we will be able to discuss and determine exactly what the future of the social economy and in particular the associations and foundations is likely to be .
I am also glad that we have a commitment to the White Paper .
Voluntary organizations are very innovative and important .
But I would remind the Commissioner that nearly a decade ago there was a promise on some kind of code for the status of volunteers .
Nothing has happened on that either and this needs to be looked into urgently .
Mr President , I share the concern of the honourable Member , a concern which I had indeed expressed myself from the other side of the House , sitting on the benches on the left of Parliament , during the past decade .
As you know , however , a great many discussions within the European Commission have been needed in the past to address these problems , discussions which , as is evident , did not result in any specific conclusion or any specific proposal .
I hope that the White Paper we are about to produce will provide the best and I would say the most modern approach possible to what the honourable Member was asking for .
Question No 44 by Mr Alex Smith ( H-0370 / 97 )
Subject : Matters arising from Commission liaison with IAEA
On 12 and 13 December last year , a high-level Liaison Committee meeting of the Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) took place in Brussels to discuss cooperation between Euratom and IAEA inspectors at European Union nuclear plants .
According to a minute of the meeting by IAEA 's Deputy-General , Bruno Pellaud , Euratom disagrees strongly with the IAEA on a range of sensitive issues , including IAEA support for Continuous Enrichment Monitoring ( CEMO ) to detect unauthorized levels of uranium enrichment at URENCO plants .
It also indicates the Euratom supports the German objection to safeguard verification of mixed-oxide ( MOX ) fuel , of UK origin , at the Unterweser power plant .
Can the Commission explain the steps taken by Euratom to resolve these problems ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me answer at some length , because that question relates to a very specific subject , and one which I would say is technically very difficult to explain .
The Commission would first like to point out that Mr Smith 's question is based on an internal memorandum of the International Atomic Energy Agency , which unfortunately became widely known .
That internal memorandum also became known to the Commission . But the Commission is not in the habit of commenting on the internal memoranda of organizations with which EURATOM cooperates closely and on a daily basis .
Now , as for the very specific questions put by Mr Smith , I will try to provide certain specific explanations on the substance of the matter , which is a very complex and technical one .
The questions raised relate to technical methodology .
So far as that is concerned , there is no doubt that where issues of safeguards are concerned , the two monitoring organizations sometimes have different views .
Those differences of opinion between technical personnel are quite usual , and should be regarded as positive provided always that they are motivated by the desire to secure more effective and productive safeguards .
Measurements of mixed oxide fuels , MOX , can be confirmed with greater accuracy and less effort at the fuel production plants , i.e. at the plants that produce fuels for reactors , than at the reactors producing nuclear energy , in which the fuel is ultimately used .
The measuring instruments at production plants can be fully installed and correctly calibrated , while at the reactors portable instruments are used with which the fuel , which is sometimes in water , is determined in a deficient way .
EURATOM carries out routine measurements of all fuel elements produced at the MOX demonstration plant of Sellafield .
Consequently , it does not believe that measurements need be carried out at the reactors themselves , provided it is ensured that what happens to the material is known at all times , and that its use is constantly monitored .
Since the policy of the IAEA is to concentrate its efforts on the issue of safeguards in countries with no nuclear weapons , a verification problem arose which led to the technical conflict you are referring to today with the question put by the honourable Member .
While EURATOM continues to believe that from a technical standpoint it would make much more sense to apply its own system of measurement , a compromise was established , one which allows the IAEA if necessary to carry out measurements of the fuel at the reactor site .
The IAEA , in exchange , agreed to give serious consideration to the measurement method used by EURATOM in future cases .
At this point , Mr President , let me stress that the issue was never one of denying the IAEA access to the reactor for verification purposes . It was a question of technical methodology .
The next issue is of similarly technically complex character .
The purpose of safeguards at enrichment plants is to detect any undeclared high levels of uranian enrichment .
That aim can be achieved by various means , one of which is the entirely new approach involving the analysis of high-yield trace elements or environmental sampling .
Before the new methodology became available numerous means had been developed , such as continual enrichment monitoring , which in EURATOM 's view and on the basis of its experience , seem less reliable , are relatively expensive to put into effect , and are less transparent in terms of calibration .
Consequently , EURATOM hesitated to bring such mechanisms into routine use . It preferred to continue its monitoring at the Capenhurst plant , to accumulate more experience .
However , the IAEA views the matter differently .
Yet , it seems to me rather appropriate that EURATOM must hesitate to use instruments and equipment for safeguarding at nuclear plants , which are not entirely reliable , are very expensive to operate , and are not transparent in terms of their installation and calibration .
However , the highlevel Liaison Committee agreed about the need for a broad review of all aspects concerning the implementation of safeguards at enrichment plants .
I am sure that this review will prove particularly useful and it is a good example of the nature of the cooperation between EURATOM and the IAEA in their work in the sector of nuclear safeguards in the Community .
Mr President , in closing , I should like to repeat that the issues to which the oral question relates concern a difference of opinion between the two bodies responsible for safeguards , regarding a matter of technical methodology .
At any rate I would like to express my concern at the fact that information of such a delicate character was not protected sufficiently by the IAEA .
I thank the Commissioner most sincerely for that very comprehensive reply .
It must be something of a record to receive a six-minute reply at Question Time .
The reason I raised this question is that MOX fabrication and use is currently expanding significantly all over Western Europe .
Because fresh MOX fuel contains unirradiated plutonium , which is perfectly suitable for a crude nuclear weapon , and this issue was rated ten years ago as a high priority in an IAEA implementation report , I am somewhat concerned that we still fail to see a resolution of it .
How is the Commissioner going to take into account the fact that ordinary nuclear reator sites become direct-use material storage sites ?
Is he taking that into consideration ?
Mr President , I should like to assure Mr Smith that the European Commission and EURATOM will continue their efforts and monitoring in all the plants , including the new ones , to ensure that they respect new technologies and technological development .
We will of course continue the supervision of Sellafield , and that is what we are doing , we are doing it already , we are doing it consistently , and we will continue in the same way .
I welcome the assurance from the Commissioner that he will monitor all plants .
I suggest that he look at the Hunterston nuclear power station where a reactor had to be shut down in March of this year .
Hunterston is in my constituency .
I do not know if it has been brought to his attention in his capacity as Commissioner responsible for energy but perhaps he would look at what happened there with the United Kingdom authorities .
Mr President , I should like to assure Parliament and Mr McMahon that EURATOM 's services continually and ceaselessly monitor the operation of all the reactors , including those which are closing down .
We continually monitor the development of technology and the operation of reactors at all levels .
Our basic aim is to conserve the environment and protect the health of citizens , as well as to ensure that the best possible technology is used in the sector of nuclear energy .
Question No 45 by Mr Hugh McMahon ( H-0287 / 97 )
Subject : Public services charter
Can the Commission inform Parliament of the reasons for its failure to adopt a public services charter ?
Would the Commission not agree that the maintenance of public services at affordable prices , as laid down in a Community Charter , is valuable for Europe 's citizens and is an important part of the internal market ?
The services of general interest are an important element of the European model of society .
In its communication of September last year on services of general interest in Europe , the Commission clarified the principles of its policies and set out its objectives for the future .
This communication stated in particular the following :
The provisions of services of general economic interest of high quality at affordable prices is an essential objective that has to be guaranteed in the context of the internal market .
The EC Treaty , and more precisely Article 90 , already provides for a satisfactory equilibrium between , on the one hand , the objectives of market integration and free competition , and on the other hand , objectives of general economic interest .
The Commission considers that Article 90 has proved its worth in guaranteeing that balance .
The definition of objectives of general economic interest is in principle a national competence that has to be exercised by Member States in respect of the EC Treaty rules .
Any harmonization of these objectives at EU level has to take into account the specific circumstances of each sector .
Sectoral directives such as those proposed for the telecom and postal sectors are therefore the appropriate instrument to achieve this objective .
The Commission actively supports , within the framework of existing competences , in fields such as environment , consumer protection , economic and social cohesion or transeuropean networks , a positive policy pursuing objectives of general interest .
The Commission considers further that an explicit mention of a positive commitment to the promotion of services of general interest should be added in a new paragraph in Article 3 of the new EC Treaty which is currently being negotiated .
In this context the Commission presently does not envisage adopting or proposing any other measures of a general character such as a public service charter .
We favour an inclusion in Article 3 of the existing Treaty through the current intergovernmental negotiations .
Having said this , the communication of the Commission of September last year which I referred to earlier left the option open .
If , for instance , Member States refuse to include such a reference in any article of the Treaty one might consider transforming the communication into a kind of charter but since they are apparently willing to discuss its inclusion in the Treaty we would favour that option .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
Can I take it that the Commission is actively pursuing the matter at the IGC of treating this as part of the Treaty ?
This is all I would like confirmed .
Should that fail to come about , what will the Commission then do ?
The answer is yes , but as I said we favour an inclusion of a reference in Article 3 .
Some others apparently would prefer a reference in Article 8 .
This is presently still being discussed .
The most important thing is that such a reference is included in the new text .
We do not think we absolutely need a charter , but having said this the communication of the Commission commits the Commission to pursuing this kind of balanced policy .
I thank Mr McMahon for raising this .
I am delighted to hear your upbeat and very positive reply .
You will be aware , I know , that I am dealing with a report that is going through Parliament at the moment on services of general interest .
I am going to be asking you to be very dynamic and very cooperative .
This is a very important area for us in the European Parliament ; it would like the Union to send out a very positive message of good news for all of our citizens which will more than counteract some of the bad news that they tend to be inundated with at the moment .
I am going to be asking you whether the Commission is prepared to be very openminded and take on board some really very innovative suggestions that are going to come out not only at the IGC but after that concerning the way in which we deal with public services within the European Union ; the way in which Commissioners themselves deal with them ; and the way in which committees ' structures within Parliament deal with them , in order to achieve cooperation between Parliament and the Member States .
So we are working hand in hand .
What we are doing is supplementing the efforts of the Member States .
I want to confirm the positive spirit in which the Commission tries to tackle this kind of problem .
Having said that , we have a disagreement , as you know , about whether or not Article 90 should be modified .
Apparently there are only a few delegations which favour that .
Most of the delegations are apparently prepared to follow the Commission in including a reference in Article 3 .
Some others might do so with regard to Article 8 .
Well , let us see how the debate turns out .
We are open-minded about it .
Providing something is included in the Treaty , it will be helpful .
For the rest , I firmly intend to continue to adopt a balanced approach and to keep an open mind , while also trying to take into account services of general interest in any policy we develop .
As you probably know , a special set of rules exists in the Community governing state aid to the motor vehicle industry .
This has been in force since 1989 and is designed to control and limit flows of state aid within this sensitive sector .
The Commission and the framework view any kind of operating aid very critically , since it relieves the company concerned of part of its normal operational costs and creates an operational advantage for this company on an ongoing basis .
This can be very harmful to competitors in a sector like motor vehicles , since production in this sector is typically organized at European level and ever increasingly at global level .
Transport aid should not therefore be authorized in this sector , even in disadvantaged regions .
The above-mentioned framework also provides that any existing operating aid should progressively disappear .
On the other hand , the framework has a generally positive attitude towards investment aid granted in order to overcome structural handicaps in disadvantaged regions of the Community .
This is therefore a highly sensitive global market in which an operating aid like this can easily bring about a significant distortion of competition .
The honourable Member also refers to the Commission 's conclusion that production in Umeå falls under the final assembly and not the production of components .
In general , a plan can be regarded as a manufacturing and / or assembly operation when vehicle bodies are constructed , painted , assembled or trimmed .
If these operations are separated in different plants , at different geographical locations , each of these plants ' activities falls under the definition of the manufacture of a vehicle .
In the opinion of the Commission , as well as of various experts of the automotive industry , the construction of completely built-up truck cabs corresponds to the manufacture of trucks .
Like any other integrated vehicle plant , the Umeå plant has a stamping operation , body construction , paint shop and a final assembly operation which a component plant would not have .
It therefore falls within the remit of the existing framework concerning the motor vehicle industry .
To be honest there are certain parts of the answer which I do not understand .
It was said in the Commissioner 's response that this aid is a cost advantage .
But in reality the transport aid which goes to Volvo in Umeå only corresponds to part of the additional cost involved in being located in northern Sweden .
It costs more to be located there despite the fact that transport aid is received .
It is therefore totally illogical to say that this distorts competition or is a cost advantage .
The only thing which I have seen in the material on this case which distorts competition is that the Commission has approved aid to Scania , another lorry manufacturer in Luleå , a town not far from Umeå .
I also dispute that there is any form of final assembly operation in the factory in Umeå .
I consider myself something of an expert on the issue as I worked there for five years as a cab fitter .
There is absolutely no final assembly operation of finished lorries , only component manufacture .
I also wonder why the background material is still marked secret .
Is it not reasonable that we elected representatives know the reasons for the Commission 's decisions and opinions ?
First of all , one should understand that we are talking about a sector for which there is a specific framework .
For other activities the Commission accepted that there could be transport aid .
But here we are talking about operational aid in a sector which is highly sensitive .
Can you imagine all automotive plants being given the possibility of compensation because they are located in peripheral regions in the European Union ?
This would completely distort competition in a highly sensitive sector where there is already overcapacity and where companies or sites located in regions eligible for aid can be given aid but only investment aid .
And that is exactly the situation here .
On the components question , making cabs , with all the different construction stages that involves , can hardly be considered as just making components .
No , this is part and parcel of the normal activities of the automotive industry .
The Commission has always applied the rules concerned in this way and it has to stick to its coherent position in this case as it has done in the past .
Having said that , since this was an existing aid - because when Sweden joined the European Union this aid already existed - we are prepared to discuss with the Swedish authorities how to phase it out and to consider a reasonable period of time during which this aid can be phased out .
That is exactly what we tried to achieve in discussions with the Swedish authorities .
Yesterday I was in Stockholm and talked to the minister responsible for industry in order to find out how we can sort out things in an amicable way .
I wonder if I can have an explanation of two points from the Commissioner .
The first question is : For what sector will you approve the use of Swedish transport aid ?
Is there any sector in the whole of the mechanical engineering industry in which you approve the current use of transport aid in Sweden ?
The second question concerns the final question from Jonas Sjöstedt which was not answered by the Commissioner and that is about the fact that the Commission 's decision in this case was obviously based on a consultative report .
The content of this report is being kept secret even from the Swedish Government .
I would like to ask the Commissioner if it is not totally unreasonable that individual governments , which after all are the masters of this Treaty , cannot see background reports which can determine the living conditions and job opportunities for thousands of people in a particular region .
Firstly , in reply to the first part of the question , transport aid can be given and therefore this region in Sweden benefits from a kind of special treatment .
It can be given to activities which are not in highly sensitive sectors , such as steel or automotive activities .
For example , in the case of a steel plant , the Commission could not allow transport compensation aid because it is subject to a specific state aid rule .
The same applies to the automotive industry and , therefore , although the general regime allows this kind of compensation for transport , it is not allowed for sectors such as steel and the automotive industry .
That is the reason why we have to negotiate with the government to find a solution which can be mutually acceptable .
Your question refers to an expert opinion prepared by consultants for the Commission .
Let us be honest , if the Swedish Government , or any other government , seeks an expert opinion , it is absolutely free to do so and can keep it to itself .
No one is obliged to make it public or to send it to the Commission .
Such an expert opinion , which has been based on information given by the company and the Swedish Government , involves highly sensitive information , which the company will certainly not disclose .
Therefore , we are only using the expert opinion to help the Commission to sort things out .
On the basis of this expert opinion , my officials went to the region to see for themselves and we adopted the position I described in reply to the previous question .
So , the expert opinion is used only to help the Commission to sort things out and to make an assessment .
The other question now is : what comes next ?
Either we find a solution through a mutually agreed formula , which we favour , obviously .
If that cannot be done , then the European Commission has no other choice but to open the procedure .
Again , we would like to avoid that and , therefore , in the coming weeks we will try to find a solution under which there will still be aid for some time but it will be reduced and phased out in due time .
have any negative impact .
Regional political aid , including transport aid to companies in the North of Sweden , is an important part of this .
Is the Commission aware that in the whole of our country , public opinion in the North of Sweden is the most critical of the EU ?
Is the Commission also aware that the interpretation which is now being made and which threatens to prevent regional political aid to Volvo will make that opinion even more negative , since it is a betrayal in view of the promises which were made before membership ?
Is the Commission really not prepared to review this proposal which DG IV has given ?
Firstly , there cannot be any misunderstanding about what was agreed during the accession negotiations .
I was already in charge of this file and although we accepted in principle that transport aid could be given for these peripheral regions , it was on the explicit condition that this should not be the case for sensitive sectors like the automotive sector , the steel sector , the shipbuilding sector where specific rules exist .
There are specific rules here and as everyone knows they take precedence over the general rules .
This was made abundantly clear over and over again by me and by my officials .
So I am astonished that some people were surprised that later on we said that for the automotive industry itself and not components as such , operational aid can no longer be given although investment aid can .
For some reason which it is not for me to judge , the Swedish Government refrains from giving aid for investment but is prepared to give aid for operational costs .
That is for the Swedish Government to decide .
Some time ago the company concerned made considerable additional investments so the government could have given some aid for this .
But they preferred to continue to give operational aid which I suppose they must know is not acceptable under the rules of state aid in the European Union .
That is the context .
We are not saying that the plant cannot be given aid but this kind of ongoing running aid is not acceptable because it was not acceptable in the past .
The rules have been applied in a consistent and coherent way everywhere in the European Union and therefore we have to seek a solution with the Swedish authorities to phase it out .
If in future there are additional investments in Umeå , they would be free to give investment aid .
I can understand perhaps that you , Commissioner , are surprised that we are surprised .
But you must understand that the message you are now delivering is complete news to me since even during the Membership negotiations it was said that the steel , cars and shipping sectors would not be entitled to transport aid .
As for the secrecy stamp on the report the Commissioner says that governments also have secret reports .
But it is after all governments which are in charge of the Commission and not the Commission which is in charge of governments .
It is individual governments which are the decision making bodies .
The reason that we want this report out in the open is not because we want to reveal any business secrets which Volvo may have - the Swedish government will not do that .
The reason is that the Swedish government believes , with good reason , that this report contains serious errors .
It is these which we want out in the open for discussion .
I think the Commissioner should have some understanding of this view .
A little question : If you , Commissioner were asked by the Chairman of the Council to make this report public at least for the Swedish government would you do so ?
I cannot help it if in some areas the rules of the game are apparently not as well known as I would like them to be .
There are specific rules in the steel sector as many people in this House know .
The principle is that no state aid can be given .
There will be a question about shipbuilding .
There is a seventh directive which sets the framework within which state aid can or cannot be given .
This is the way we have operated for many years .
As far as the report is concerned , it is an expert opinion for the use of my services , on top of which I asked my staff to go down there and see for themselves in the plant .
They received all the relevant information .
They kept me informed and it is on this basis that I told the Swedish authorities that we still had a problem which needed to be sorted out .
As long as operational aid is being given in this sector , it is flying in the face of one of the basic rules applied in the automotive sector .
In order to find a solution to phase it out , we will be flexible .
In the meantime the government can reflect on other ways and means to help the region .
But this is the responsibility of the government and not of the Commission .
It is not up to us to impose any conduct as far as that is concerned .
For the rest , we have nothing to hide .
I can prove to you that in these kind of cases we have always operated in a coherent and open-minded way .
Question No 47 by Mr Hans Lindqvist ( H-0301 / 97 )
Subject : Commission review of aid to industrial firms in northern Sweden in respect of transport overheads
The Commission 's DG IV has reviewed the aid granted to certain industrial firms in northern Sweden in respect of transport overheads , and a report suggests that aid to the Volvo factory in Umeå should not be permitted .
The granting of such aid to firms in northern Sweden is an important element of Swedish regional development policy and plays a major role in attracting industrial investment to the region .
The aid only partly covers the additional cost of siting production facilities in the north of the country .
Why were the findings on which the decision was based not published immediately , and why has the proposal that aid to the factory in Umeå should be withdrawn been made at this particular time ?
This is still the same subject .
At the present moment there is no decision .
We signalled the problem when we agreed during the accession negotiations that there should be a possibility of giving transport aid and that sensitive sectors would be excluded as agreed .
Later we found that transport aid was still being giving to the Volvo plant in Umeå .
Therefore , we said there is a problem , let us look into it and see how we can sort it out .
This should not lead to the conclusion that for other activities in the region concerned , transport aid cannot be given .
I confirm that this kind of aid can be given but not to the sensitive sectors .
It took some time because we wanted to conduct this investigation seriously and , as I said , we asked for an expert opinion .
Later on - rather unusually as we only have a limited number of staff - given the sensitivity of the case , I asked my people to go there and see for themselves and check it on the spot .
That is what happened .
Only then did we find that there was still a problem and then we signalled to the government that either we would sort out a mutual agreement or we would have to open the procedure and pursue the case further .
That is all I can say .
It is desirable to shed proper light on this issue .
But I still do not have an answer to my questions since the questions related to why the report which formed the basis for this decision cannot be made public immediately .
This question has been partially but not fully answered .
The second question concerned the issue of why the proposal for withdrawal of the aid from the factory has come now .
Like my colleagues I am surprised that this has happened some time into the period of Membership and that there is no reason why it should happen at precisely this moment .
It could be that this is in the consultative report but as we do not have access to this - it is deemed , for some reason , to contain information which we should not see - I must ask again : Why can we not see the background material ?
Perhaps it would facilitate this debate and make the issue clearer .
The other question which I would like an answer to is : is this the beginning of further reduction in transport aid for Sweden ?
I thought I had already answered the question several times .
During the negotiations it was made abundantly clear - and I was there myself - that transport aid would be allowed , but not for sensitive sectors .
I cannot help it if later we discovered that operational aid was maintained in the transport sector to this plant .
When we discovered that , we said that it was flying in the face of what had been agreed and in any case it is in contradiction with the framework .
So a solution had to be found .
But since the aid existed before the accession we were prepared to look for a solution whereby the aid can be phased out .
This happened some time ago .
Last year we asked an expert to give some advice to the Commission , for example on the matter of the components .
Apparently some of the components come from the south of the country and go to the north .
Then , as I mentioned earlier , I asked my people to go down there and this took some time .
Then there was a discussion with the government and we told them they would have to offer a solution .
This has gone on for months .
I told the government I would have to open the procedure .
Since there was still some hope that a defensible solution could be negotiated , I was prepared to wait before opening the procedure in the hope that an early solution could be found .
I hope a solution can be found in the coming weeks .
If that is not the case , then I have to be abundantly clear .
This case is dragging on too long and I will have to propose to the Commission to open the procedure .
I think that the Commission 's response is inconsistent on several important points .
Transport aid has also been given to Scania , one of Volvo 's competitors which is located quite close to the Volvo factory , where rear axles and chassis for heavy goods vehicles are manufactured .
They do precisely the same as in Umeå , in other words make components for heavy goods vehicles .
Scania gets a yes , Volvo in Umeå gets a no .
There has been no explanation given for this .
The other point for which there has been no explanation is the fact that this will distort competition .
The aid which they receive is only a small part of the additional cost for transport in Sweden .
The third point is that you really could give the report to the government ; it is not going to reveal any secrets .
But not even the government has been able to see the report .
This strengthens the view that the Commission has something to hide .
If you stop this transport aid , you will destroy an important part of Swedish regional policy .
This is very , very serious .
I think that the Commission should consider its social responsibility .
Remember Vilvoorde !
Yes , just think of Vilvoorde , because in Vilvoorde it is not possible to give state aids , not even investment aids , my dear friend .
You can do so - but then do you come here and try to teach me lessons about it ?
We have applied the rules coherently .
It has nothing to do with me , if the rules of the game have been explained time and time again and you still do not know what they are even today !
Those rules existed before Sweden joined the European Union .
Sweden accepted them .
As far as I am concerned , all I am obliged to do is apply them in the same way , coherently , everywhere .
In other words , if you have any criticism to make , you will have to go elsewhere .
I do my job seriously as I always have done , and therefore I cannot accept your criticism .
That has to be made clear .
You said , Commissioner , that other transport aid is not out of the question in the region .
I hope you realise that there is a risk that tax-free shopping will cease on 1 July 1999 and that then there will be an obvious need to give aid to traffic between Umeå in Sweden and Vasa in Finland .
Have I understood the Commissioner correctly in that this means you will not oppose general aid for transport between Umeå and Vasa if tax-free shopping ceases on July 1 1999 ?
I confirm again that for other activities not belonging to sensitive sectors this transport aid can continue .
So that is out of the question .
It is only for sensitive sectors like the automotive industry where there are specific rules , where a framework has existed since 1989 , that this is not allowed .
This cannot come as a surprise , because it already existed and it was explained that after accession this type of aid could no longer be given for activities such as car production .
Investment is a different matter , but no operational aid can be given .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions 49 to 87 will receive written answers .
The question time is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Public service , public supply and public work contracts - water , energy , transport and telecommunications markets
The next item is the joint debate on the following recommendations for second reading :
A4-0158 / 97 , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directives 92 / 50 / EC , 93 / 36 / EC and 93 / 37 / EC relating to the co-ordination of procedures for the award of public service , public supply and public work contracts ( C4-0038 / 97-95 / 0079 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Langen ) ; -A4-0159 / 97 , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 93 / 38 / EEC on co-ordinating the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water , energy , transport and telecommunications sectors ( C4-0039 / 97-95 / 0080 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Langen ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the House is sparsely populated at this hour .
It is nevertheless a pleasure for me today to recommend these two directives , which have been under discussion for some time in the parliamentary committees responsible , as well as in the dialogue and the controversial debate with the Commission .
We are discussing two directives in all : to summarize , one deals with public works , supply and service contracts , and the other is the so-called sectoral directive , which covers a number of sectors - water , energy , transport and telecommunications .
The agreement which made it necessary to adapt the directive dates back rather further : it is the WTO Agreement , ratified with Parliament 's assent in March 1994 , which entered into force on 1 January 1996 .
At that time , the signatory states undertook to open up their markets to firms from third countries .
The total value of the contracts covered by the market liberalization measures that were agreed is put at some ECU 350 billion per year .
By virtue of the existing internal market arrangements in Europe , the contracting entities concerned in the European Union have been required to give only limited additional undertakings .
The question arising from the outset was : how , particularly in the light of the sectoral directive , can we guarantee reciprocity ?
On the one hand , European contracting entities were obliged to accept bids from third-country firms , but on the other , European firms were also at liberty to take on contracts in third countries .
In our view , this balance was not achieved in the first draft of the directive , because the Commission was seeking to do more than merely regulate what is in effect a relatively straightforward state of affairs .
This led to somewhat lengthy deliberations in Parliament .
Indeed , given the significance of these directives in what is a very difficult overall area , they took an inordinately long time .
As I said , the reason for these debates between the Commission and Parliament was that the Commission was seeking to regulate a state of affairs which did not arise under the GATT Agreement .
We reached an understanding with Commissioner Monti , and I am very grateful to him for his willingness , after the initial round of discussions , to accept most of Parliament 's arguments .
We then agreed that , even if the Commission was unable to present an entirely new draft of the directive , it would incorporate the bulk of Parliament 's arguments in its revised version .
The Commission was true to its word .
Therefore , after somewhat protracted deliberations - lasting almost two years - we are now in a position to discuss at second reading a common position based on a revised Commission proposal , which now forms a sound basis for discussion .
A few controversial points still remain , which I should like to go into now , and which were also subject to amendments in Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ; however , now that these points have been defused by the Commission , they are no longer serious enough to prevent Parliament from going along with the common position .
So much by way of introduction , before I comment on the amendments and also on the different views of various groups .
One of Parliament 's main concerns was that European Union firms should not be put at a disadvantage in relation to firms from third countries .
We rejected tougher measures being applied to EU firms but not affecting firms from third-countries , because this would lead to European firms suffering from distortions of competition .
The question which arises here in the sectoral directive is whether the whole issue of the balance which was to have been established under this directive between public contracting entities on the one hand and private contracting entities on the other in these four sectors belongs in the sectoral directive any longer , now that several markets have been liberalized and state-owned companies have been privatized to a large extent , for instance in the telecommunications sector .
But that is a subject to be discussed in the debate on the Green Paper .
The main bones of contention still outstanding are the technical dialogue and the question of whether entities should be allowed , in complex technical cases , to seek technical advice from firms intending to bid for the contract at a later stage and , if so , under what circumstances .
We are convinced that the Commission 's original version was inappropriate , as it would have been detrimental to tenderers .
The Commission has removed this provision from its text and referred to it instead in the recitals in a way which is quite acceptable , but basically carries very little weight .
That is why , as rapporteur , I felt that this recital - the tenth in one directive and the thirteenth in the other - could be deleted altogether .
There would in practice be no change to the legal situation affecting firms .
An amendment by Mr Tappin , who takes a different stance , was discussed in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and here the question is : can corruption be excluded through arrangements for the technical dialogue ?
I believe that other measures are necessary for that purpose , such as the administration of justice by the courts in the Member States , which are in a position to combat corruption effectively .
The technical dialogue is not the right approach , because there will undoubtedly be loopholes .
Mr Tappin and I tried to find a solution , and this is certainly something to which we can address ourselves together when it comes to considering the Green Paper .
In the context of this directive , we were of the opinion that we should opt for the minimum solution and leave the technical dialogue as it is , without any additional provisions , and that includes the recital .
Over and above this key point , the most controversial one , there are certain obligations to which firms are subjected under the sectoral directive , in respect of statistical reporting and the requirement to inform unsuccessful applicants of the reason for their rejection .
Personally , I believe that the inclusion in the sectoral directive of a provision going beyond the scope of the GATT Agreement could constitute grounds for complaints to the WTO panel .
That is why , Commissioner , we and colleagues from the other groups have decided not to agree to the main point of the compromise amendment from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , calling for publication of the names of firms which have given advice in the tender process .
Since this is the second reading , any amendment must achieve 314 votes .
Some of the less significant amendments on statistical reporting obligations will undoubtedly be successful .
On the key points , I believe , this House will come round to approving the Council 's common position on the basis of the Commission 's latest proposal here in the House .
In this respect we have , I believe , arrived at a reasonable overall solution after much debate . I should once again like to express my personal thanks to Commissioner Monti for his political wisdom , which eventually prevailed over the rather rigid attitude of his technical staff at the outset , thus leading to a satisfactory solution .
You have followed the matter through , even though last year you were unable to find a majority in the Commission in favour of withdrawing the proposal completely .
Thank you very much indeed , and I hope that this will serve as an example of how , in spite of conflicting views , satisfactory compromises can be found !
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Langen for his introduction .
There is very little disagreement between the Socialist Group and the EPP Group .
However , we have found ourselves in an invidious position over the difference of opinion we have , as shown in the vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on Directives 92 / 50 / EEC , 93 / 36 / EEC and 93 / 37 / EEC , where we voted for transparency , and Directive 93 / 38 / EEC , where we did not .
We have placed ourselves in a difficult position on this .
As Mr Langen said , I have sought with him to reach a compromise .
I have tabled an amendment which I hope will achieve that and I urge colleagues in this Chamber to support this amendment .
My reason for tabling the amendment is because , during the first debate on the Langen report , the Commission 's text called for a ban on any technical dialogue between a contracting entity and anyone who wanted to bid for the contract at a later point .
This meant that all the top companies had to exclude themselves from the revising process if they wanted to bid .
This would have stifled innovation and was totally contrary to the best business practice .
However , we were always aware of the problems inherently possible in allowing dialogue .
Giorgos Katiforis outlined them well when he spoke of technical dialogue being used for the setting of impossible standards and of not being able to do anything about it because everything tended to be shrouded in secrecy .
These are the problems of corruption and the reason that we need safeguards put into place .
My amendment seeks to address the problems of competition distortion and secrecy , while supporting the principle of innovation .
It has been tabled with reference to both Langen reports and recitals .
The amendment details the ' advice which may be used in the preparation of specifications for a specific procurement ' , that is to say , it effectively sets parameters for a call to tender .
We want to publish who has given the advice , not the advice itself .
Anyone can give advice and still bid for the contract , as long as the advice that has been given does not preclude others from competing fairly .
This language is as close to the Commission 's text as possible , in order to ensure that the same interpretation of precluding competition is applied .
If it was possible to make a legal judgment on precluding competition before - and one has to assume it was , since it has been part of the standard directives for many years - it should still be possible now without adding to the legal traps of those directives .
I stress that the second part of my amendment states that ' the buying authorities publish , along with the call for tender , the names of those firms or persons who have advised in the drawing up of the specifications ' .
This does not mean that the adviser has to disclose the nature of the advice , for technical secrecy can be maintained - just that the advice has been given .
This should do something to combat the secrecy element .
Publication will be made by the buying authority at the time it publishes the call for tender , so there will be no additional bureaucracy involved .
Because it is the contracting authorities who publish , this will not affect international competition and , incidentally , the United States already has such a requirement for transparency , with which the EU tenderers have to comply .
Procurement involves 11 % of the European Union GDP or ECU 720m of EU taxpayers ' money .
After the first reading of the Langen report , the Financial Times of 31 January 1996 accused the European Parliament of being the lapdogs of industrial lobbyists .
At the time I refuted it .
Now , I am sad to say , if colleagues vote against this amendment , which is designed to achieve honesty , openness and transparency , they will have a hard job refuting those allegations this time .
In the interests of harmony , I urge all Members of the European Parliament to support my amendment to both reports .
Mr President , I must begin by congratulating Mr Langen on his reports , which place the problems in the right perspective , and by expressing my agreement with the meaning of the proposed amendments , without going beyond changes needed to comply with commitments made at the World Trade Organisation .
Given the amount involved , worth in the case of the European Union 720 , 000 million ECU , approximately 11.5 % of all purchases , the equivalent to the combined GDPs of Spain , Belgium and Denmark , these public contracts call for special treatment by our leaders , as it is impossible to accept the fact that , until recently , only 2 % of all contracts were reached with foreign companies .
We can already see the results achieved by the Directives which have already been approved and which are now in force , reflected in the number of public calls for tender announced in the ' Official Journal ' up from 12 , 000 in 1995 to 95 , 000 in 1997 .
The percentage of purchases made from foreign firms has more than doubled , which means that the supplies of public bodies have been greatly improved , while the benefits have also been passed on to the ordinary public in those other countries in terms of both quality and price of services .
Along these lines , it is in turn desirable that enlargement of the market should be extended to third countries , as agreed between 22 of the countries taking part in the Marrakesh meeting , which means that we must now make necessary amendments to Community directives .
But I do not think that it is necessary to go from a minimalist position to one in which third countries have the same opening to markets and exactly the same guarantees if the established rules are not fulfilled .
Even within a country such as the United States of America there is even greater compartmentalisation in calls for tender without an ' Official Journal ' to publish them and given the whole of its geographical area ; nor is there a common body on the lines of our Commission or our Luxembourg courts , in order to guarantee the uniform compliance with rules at the various stages of action : national , state or local .
From a position of legitimate demands , we are naturally defending interests of our economic agents .
But we are also defending the interests of the citizens of third countries who will definitely benefit from buying European products and services , in many cases offered in more favourable conditions in terms of quality and price , as can be seen at this moment in time with the worldwide success of so many European Union companies , despite the difficulties they have to overcome .
Mr President , in 1995 to 1996 Parliament expressed its reservations about provisions relating to dialogue on the technical specifications and modifications to be made to calls for tender for public contracts - Appendices 12 to 15 of the Directive - in the belief , shared by many experts , that certain aspects of the proposal for a Directive would greatly hold up technical progress and cause considerable harm to the competitiveness of European industry .
In November 1996 , following Parliament 's rejection , the Commission presented a modified proposal for Directive 93 / 38 .
As for both of Mr Langen 's reports , our group is overall favourable to Mr Langen 's position .
However , we have a couple of reservations about the forthcoming vote .
In the case of the second Langen report , our group would be unable to accept the new recital proposed by Mr Tappin which , if it were adopted , would be very dangerous for European companies .
The publication of information about innovative ideas by a European company , be it small or large , wishing to test it in the framework of a technical dialogue with a network industry , is unacceptable for that company .
It would be tantamount to supplying information to competitors and discouraging technical dynamism ; in this way , the innovative ideas of European SMEs might be taken up by competitors , including those in third countries .
In the United States and Japan , however , no publication is provided for and network industries freely dialogue with their national suppliers in order to establish technical specifications .
In the position it is to adopt , the European Parliament must not compromise European innovative capacities and play the game of third companies , especially the United States , to the detriment of European industry .
Finally , Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 , introduced by the Economic Committee , make a distinction between public and private companies ; although the former are subjected to an obligation given that they alone are affected by the WTO-GATT Agreement , it is also true , on the other hand , that Article 222 of the Treaty expressly provides for equal treatment in this Directive - and this must , in our opinion , be maintained - for public companies and private companies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , on behalf of the Commission and on my own behalf , I should like to thank Mr Langen for his report and for his highly praiseworthy efforts to bring the respective positions closer together .
As the European Parliament will have noted , the amended proposals submitted by the Commission and the Council in the form of the common position very largely take into account Parliament 's wishes .
I in turn , Mr Langen , pay tribute to the spirit of co-operation that you and this House have brought to this stage of the procedure .
Having said that , there are still certain differences between the common position and the proposed amendments : some proposals can be accepted but others call into question the structure and logical basis of Community arrangements and cannot therefore be accepted by the Commission .
Finally , there are other proposed amendments which seem to be too mutually contradictory for the Commission to support them .
The Commission has constantly endeavoured to bring credibility and consistency to the Community rules on contracts , two essential requirements if those rules are to be correctly understood and applied .
We therefore hope that the European Parliament will review some of the proposed amendments in the light of the fundamental theoretical reasoning on which the Commission 's position is based .
I can tell you now , in broad outline , what the Commission thinks of the various amendments .
The Commission accepts Amendment No 3 to the so-called traditional directives on work , supplies and services relating to the inclusion of the German Ministry of Transport in the list of central procurement agencies .
Similarly , the Commission could take a favourable view of Amendment No 2 in both reports whereby Parliament , by introducing a recital into the directives , adopts the aim of promoting access for small and medium-sized undertakings to public contracts by providing them with appropriate training and information materials .
It is however open to question whether a recital , inserted into the directives on contracts and divorced from the regulatory context of those directives , is the most appropriate and effective way of achieving the legitimate objective in view - an objective which the Commission expounded at length in its Green Paper on contracts , suggesting lines of thought and making specific proposals .
With regard to information to be supplied to undertakings , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 4 to Directive 93 / 38 on the ' special sectors ' , amendments designed to restrict to the State awarding entities alone the obligation to provide essential information such as information on contract awards , reasons for rejection of a tender , the advantages and features of the successful tender , etc .
In adopting the ' special sectors ' Directive and extending its application not only to State awarding entities but also to entities which are not State entities in themselves but operate under special or exclusive powers granted to them by the State authority , the Community legislator - the Council , in other words - in co-operation with the European Parliament , intended to treat these two types of entity in the same way , thus putting an end to an argument that has lasted for more than thirty years .
By introducing this equal treatment , the Community legislator avoided the creation of forms of discrimination between Member States whereby the same sector is administered in some States by government entities but in others by entities that are not public but operate under special or exclusive powers . The intention was also to avoid forms of discrimination , and resulting distortions of competition , between sectors subject to the Directive or entities operating within the same sector .
The amendments in question , which as I have said relate to a fundamental and certainly not secondary provision , disrupt the equilibrium at which the Community legislator was aiming and violate the principle of equal treatment enshrined in the Directive .
The same can be said regarding the obligation to submit statistical data to the Commission , which is the subject of Amendment No 5 to the ' special sectors ' Directive .
More detailed though still brief considerations apply to the question of the technical dialogue , in respect of which we have two , apparently conflicting , proposals for amendments : Amendment No 1 proposes the deletion of the recital in the ' special sectors ' Directive which notes that the technical dialogue cannot , within the meaning of the current Directives , preclude competition ; but Amendment No 6 to the same ' special sectors ' Directive and in two very similar alternative versions - Amendments Nos 1 and 4 to the traditional Directives - on the other hand , proposes the introduction of a new recital laying down the limits of recourse to technical dialogue and introducing a rule of transparency which will certainly not be ineffective - the obligation to make public the commercial interest which those undertakings that have provided a technical opinion have in the contract in question .
These proposed amendments , I say again , are mutually inconsistent , and this inconsistency cannot be explained on the basis of the admittedly undeniable differences existing between the current Directives in respect of the regulated sectors .
Allow me to remind you that the text of the Commission 's initial proposal was quite similar to that of the recital now proposed by Parliament , with the exception of the publication rule , which was not included in the Commission 's text , the latter confining itself to reproducing the appropriate provision of the GPA .
In order to take due account , inter alia , of the reservations expressed by the European Parliament regarding the rigidity of that provision , the Commission weakened its wording and scope , converting it into a recital which was confined to noting that the relevant obligation derived directly from the Directives and the Treaty and so did not call for a specific regulative instruction .
I have summarized briefly the route by which we arrived at the recital in the common position .
Why have I done so ?
To emphasize that this recital represents a half-way point , equidistant between Parliament 's two proposed amendments - as it were , an informal advance compromise between those amendments .
A case , if I may say so , of the happy medium .
The solution proposed by the common position also has a further advantage : uniformity of the text , which is the same for all four Directives , in compliance with the cited principle of consistency upon which the differences existing between these Directives can have no effect .
I therefore ask the European Parliament , on the grounds of equilibrium and consistency , to accept the proposal by the Commission and the Council regarding the technical dialogue .

There is one absolutely final observation I should like to make : within the Community , and I refer here to the concerns which I believe Mr Porto was expressing in his speech , the GPA creates rights in favour of contracting suppliers and service providers established in third countries that are party to that agreement - Canada , South Korea , the United States , Israel , Japan , Norway and Switzerland - rights which derive exclusively from the GPA and not from the Directives on public contracts .
The Directives , therefore , do not attribute any new rights to thirdcountry undertakings , nor on the other hand do they deprive them of those rights which they already enjoy under the GPA .
In contrast , Directives on public contracts are exclusively concerned with regulating relations between contracting entities and undertakings in the European Union .
These relations , obviously , are not affected by the GPA .
It is maintained that some third countries that are signatories to the GPA do not guarantee complete and correct application of that agreement .
Canada , for example , is said not to intend to comply with the obligation to make its decentralized authorities subject to the agreement , while the United States for its part has apparently decided not to amend its legislation .
These charges , if confirmed by investigation or on appeal , will have to be dealt with by means of the protective machinery provided by the GPA itself and by the World Trade Organization . They cannot be dealt with in the context of the procedures for amending directives which , I must emphasize , do not regulate relations between the Community and third countries .
In conclusion , Mr President , after so much talk of technical dialogue , let me once again express my appreciation to Mr Langen , Mr Tappin and all their colleagues for the quality of the political dialogue of co-operation on this subject which we have had , and which has not always been easy .

Commissioner , could I make two further points on our proposals on the sectoral directive , regarding the obligations to submit a statistical report , to provide information to successful and unsuccessful tenderers , and for public contracting entities to do so promptly .
This amendment was adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , because we believe that this is the part which is covered by the GPA Agreement on government procurement .
This artificial balance created by the sectoral directive has long since been overtaken by the agreements arrived at between the Commission and Parliament , and by developments in Europe , and we wish to confine ourselves to the part which still requires regulation , without upsetting the balance , which is what you fear .
I do not believe that the matter can be so serious , and would therefore ask once again that when we vote tomorrow , the Commission should reconsider its attitude for the next round .
The second point concerns the technical dialogue .
You are right : the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy did vote somewhat differently - albeit by a slim majority - on the general directive than on the sectoral one .
Mr Tappin 's amendment was an attempt to find a mid-way solution between these two opposing positions .
We shall see tomorrow if there is a majority in favour of one of these solutions .
However , it is clear that both positions cannot command a majority at the same time , since they are mutually exclusive .
In that respect , you were right to draw attention to the inconsistency between the amendments which have been tabled .
But that is the outcome of the discussions in committee , and tomorrow we shall have a more positive result .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Obstacles to transnational mobility
The next item is the report ( A4-0148 / 97 ) by Mrs Todini , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the Commission Green Paper ' Education - Training - Research - The obstacles to transnational mobility ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0462 - C4-0580 / 96 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report which I have the honour to present contains the message we wish to send to the Conference to be held in Maastricht from tomorrow on the very subject which we are debating this evening .
That Conference will base its conclusions on the reactions of all the Member States and their duly appointed national co-ordinators , the institutions and all other parties interested in the subject .
Our message comprises , first and foremost , total support for the Commission 's initiative . I must say that the Commission has provided us with an excellent analysis , proposing nine lines of action and , by way of encouragement to continue with this work , making highly specific proposals for the elimination of obstacles to the mobility of students , teachers , researchers , voluntary workers and trainees .
Our committee - the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media - emphasizes the essential role of mobility in the creation of a genuine citizens ' Europe .
One of the most exciting ways of enabling young people to adapt to the European employment market is to give them a genuine opportunity to participate in European Union study programmes .
We are therefore stressing the need to reduce socio-economic obstacles to mobility , so that these Community programmes , instead of being addressed solely to a specific elite , which is unfortunately what is happening today - will be genuinely available also , and especially , to the less well-off and to those who have not yet been through higher education .
We are all aware of the successes achieved by the Community programmes - SOCRATES and LEONARDO , for example .
We know , among other things , that in the future the most difficult obstacle to overcome will be inadequate funding - and not just in the future , because it is a very real obstacle already . That inadequate funding is , in part , due to the increasing number of applications - which is certainly a hopeful sign - but more so to a decision by some Member States not to increase the Community budget in future years .
The Community programmes have aroused much interest and offered hope to many young people , and the Council may have to face up to the risk of disappointing them by denying them the funds to bring those hopes to fruition .
We shall shortly be supporting the action programme ' European voluntary service for young people ' which is soon to be enthusiastically defended before this House by our colleague Nicole Fontaine .
In that case , too , there will certainly be a need for various guarantees to ensure all participants the necessary legal certainty regarding the right of residence , social security and tax status .
We are also calling for the simplification of the way in which these programmes are administered and the project presentation procedures , and for the speeding-up of the distribution of funds , because - quite apart from the problem of inadequate funding - there are problems in distributing the funds available .
Another point which our committee strongly emphasizes is the need for progress in implementing the system of reciprocal recognition of diplomas , professional qualifications and apprenticeships .
We support the Commission 's recommendations and exhortations regarding the concrete creation of a European area of professional qualifications , with the generalized use of the so-called ' teaching credit unit transfer system ' , drawing on the system that was brought into being within the framework of the SOCRATES programme and has thus already proven its value .
I must say that very little progress has been made with the comparability of professional qualifications and the validation and certification of qualifications and skills acquired during basic training or in-house training .
We are therefore hoping that every possible effort will be made to move further towards the reciprocal recognition of training modules and apprenticeships , partly - or , better still , especially - by means of clear and specific conventions recognized by all the Member States .
As far as grants are concerned , we call upon the Member States to abolish the practice of territorial grants and , instead , to support the transfer of a young person who decides to undergo a period of training in another Member State .
In addition , I particularly stress the need to improve the dissemination of information on Community programmes for young people .
I believe that this kind of information needs to be decentralized , provided at local and regional level by structures like libraries or neighbourhood associations .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commission 's opinion about the proposal we put forward in paragraph 36 , where we call for the setting-up of a Co-ordinating Committee with the power to develop the proposals contained in my report , as suggested at the Council meeting in May 1996 .
In conclusion , let me say that six amendments have been received and will need to be considered during tomorrow 's vote .
Of those six amendments , I feel I can accept Amendment No 1 , tabled by Mr Dupuis and Mr dell 'Alba on behalf of the ARE Group , since , from a general but sufficiently specific point of view , it highlights the problem of linguistic communication , and Amendment No 6 , from Mr Monfils of the Liberal Group , since I regard it as being absolutely in line with the content of the report itself .
Mr President , first of all I should like warmly to congratulate Luisa Todini on her excellent work on this Green Paper .
I am also saddened by the fact that this report is being debated so late at night , which seems to reveal the lack of importance attached to a human Europe but , at least , some of us are and we are particularly attached to it . Therefore I welcome the Commission 's initiative and the desire shown by Commissioner Cresson to make Europe progress and bring it closer to the ordinary people .
I should also like to say that , although the Green Paper offers a good analysis of the current situation and the difficulties posed to people who wish to be more mobile , it proposes possible actions which seem to me still to be too abstract and distant .
That is why I ardently support the proposal by the rapporteur to introduce a binding timetable and create a coordination committee so that this action can come about effectively and in practical terms by means of rapidly applicable measures .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I shall stick in particular to the social and human aspects of mobility .
There are still a number of lacunae here .
It is inconceivable that students moving around Europe should not be covered by a coordinated social welfare scheme .
That is why we propose to extend the benefit of Regulation 1408 / 71 on social security for migrant workers to students affiliated to a specific national scheme .
Similarly , it is incomprehensible that , nowadays , an unemployed person looking for work in another European country should lose the right to benefits after only three months .
We therefore insist that this regulation be revised so that unemployment benefits continue to be paid for more than three months in the case of unemployed persons moving around Europe in search of a job or training .
Finally , when it comes to vocational training itself , a large European programme is absolutely necessary in order to facilitate the mobility of apprentices and trainees , as well as recognition of their status and an encouragement to any companies , especially small and medium-sized companies , which take them on .
Mr President , those are three concrete proposals which should make it possible to make progress towards human and social Europe , a Europe to which our fellow citizens are especially attached .
Mr President , one of the key aims of cooperation on education and research policy in the European Union is to promote transnational mobility .
For individual EU citizens , the possibility of completing substantial parts of their training in another Member State is one of the most important and welcome aspects of freedom of movement within the Union .
European integration and the People 's Europe , freedom of movement and international competitiveness all require that mobility between countries should be largely unhindered .
Moreover , the European dimension in education is becoming an increasingly important criterion for the quality and appeal of vocational and general education and research .
The teaching of European awareness , language skills and knowledge of the various political , legal , social and economic systems in Europe , and also the understanding of our European neighbours ' ways of life , should be expanded and given further support .
National systems need to focus more clearly on European developments , without becoming involved in issues of subsidiarity .
Regrettably , however , a whole range of administrative and political obstacles still crop up regularly in the work of both the Committee on Culture and the Committee on Petitions .
It is clear from the petitions we receive that , for whatever reasons , a growing number of EU citizens are keen to take advantage of their right to free movement .
Sadly , many of them are still encountering major obstacles .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's initiative of a Green Paper to stimulate a broad-based debate on ways of eliminating obstacles to mobility at national and European level .
You will appreciate that I cannot go into full details here and now , and can only pick out a few points .
In recent years and months , we have discussed at length the procedures for the recognition of diplomas and certificates of qualification , and I think that a good deal has been achieved in this area .
The large number of petitions nevertheless shows that there is still much scope for action and improvement .
In my experience , the lack of flexibility in recognizing vocational qualifications is by far the greatest obstacle to mobility .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur that the Member States must take action to improve the equivalence of vocational qualifications by increasing the transparency of certificates and course contents .
I also noted with interest the suggestion of introducing a European status of trainee .
I think that if this were handled properly , it could be a further step in our efforts to make vocational training more practically useful .
However , the details of the Commission 's ideas still need to be clarified and discussed .
The Green Paper says nothing specific as regards either the term ' trainee ' or what the suggested trainee status would entail .
The legal position of trainees must be such that a traineeship represents an attractive alternative to a university education and is promoted as such .
It should be stressed that the main purpose of such a status would be to promote mobility , and that the term ' trainee ' would have to take account of the dual system of vocational training in Member States such as Germany and Austria .
On no account must this system of industry-linked training be jeopardized by European legislation .
Nor should the Member States ' responsibilities for shaping the content of their education systems be restricted by such a status .
The proposed mobility scheme for trainees is welcome in principle , especially as it will be a means of reducing the imbalance between mobility measures in the university sector and in non-academic vocational training .
Compliance with the existing framework conditions for vocational training in the Member States would , however , be the prerequisite for such a programme .
I therefore welcome the initiative of establishing a Europe-wide trainee status .
Trainees should be offered the same opportunities for mobility as other citizens of the Union .
In my personal view , the term ' trainee ' should not be too narrowly defined , so as to ensure access to these programmes for people who are perhaps not trainees in the usual sense .
This is particularly important given the need for lifelong learning , and I am very pleased that my amendment to this effect was adopted in the Committee on Culture .
I should like to raise one other point which , in the information age , I feel is inseparable from the debate on mobility : the use of modern communication technologies .
These afford a new , virtual form of mobility , even in cases where physical mobility is not possible .
The mastery and use of information technology should therefore be actively encouraged at an early stage , and at best in childhood .
I would end by saying that I am in favour of both the Commission proposal and Mrs Todini 's report .
I am grateful to everyone concerned for their excellent work .
Mr President , first of all I extend my congratulations to the rapporteur on her report .
As she says in her explanatory statement , this is the kind of Green Paper that should be published more often .
That is certainly a sentiment that I concur with .
To my mind , the European Union and the European Community before that have too long been too concentrated on money and business .
The free market has been only a free market for goods and capital .
This report , when implemented and operating , will go a long way , I hope , to opening up Europe to more people in the European Union , particularly young people .
It contains , as the rapporteur has outlined , a whole range of positive proposals .
I would like to draw attention to some that I think are particularly important : the call for support for persons with children to enable them to take up the opportunities that training in other countries provides ; the need to extend entitlement to unemployment benefit - again very important for those in most need ; the need for Member States not to discriminate between training at an establishment in their own country and those in another ; the whole question of social protection ; and perhaps most importantly , the call in paragraph 29 for a much greater emphasis on the European dimension to education , making certain that we introduce language teaching certainly at a much earlier stage than happens in my own country .
Those of us with a background in education are absolutely convinced that education is the key to overcoming ignorance and , in turn , to tackling the real problems of racism and nationalism , which , if unchecked will be a serious problem to the European Union .
I am not sure whether this report would have helped a group of young people from my own constituency in London who were due to visit Parliament here tomorrow .
Although the group were all legitimately registered students at the College of Northwest London in Wembley , some were denied travel visas to France and so the whole group has had to withdraw from a visit to Parliament .
I am investigating exactly why this has happened but I would hope , if this report does not cover what has happened there , that this regrettable situation can be amended in some other way .
My group will be opposing Amendments Nos 2 to 5 .
History has showed repeatedly that efforts to suppress languages breed contempt .
I believe efforts to impose languages would equally create resentment .
I do not believe that Esperanto is the answer .
If it was the answer then the question must have been a particularly peculiar one in the first place .
I believe we should be looking to support major languages and certainly lesser used and historically traditional ones .
Amendment No 1 , though , is covered by paragraph 29 , to which I have referred .
However , this report shows the continuing need for more financial investment in education and training .
That runs through the report .
I and my group will be recommending acceptance of this excellent report .
Congratulations again to the rapporteur .
Mr President , mobility is an essential condition for European construction .
The ordinary people of Europe should be able to choose their place of residence , work and training , not only by personal preference but also in order to extend their opportunities for study or work .
On the other hand , it is only if we exchange knowledge and experience between organisations in large and small countries , between the richer and poorer countries of the north and south , the centre and peripheries , that we can bring about a genuine European spirit .
Today , pilot programmes for exchanges between young people , students and apprentices , researchers and teachers , are isolated cases and they should instead become the rule rather than the exception within the European area .
With the possible integration of Schengen into the acquis communautaire , now surprisingly nearer to completion , we will at least have the free circulation of goods and persons which characterises a genuine European area without frontiers .
For a country like Portugal , the acquisition of experience in foreign centres , laboratories , universities and companies , as well as welcoming nationals from other European countries and the dynamization that that brings about , are part and parcel of its project for European integration .
If integration and cohesion are the basic objectives of the European Union , then mobility is one of its main instruments .
There are three groups for whom there are especially acute problems of mobility at the present time .
Young people : students , trainees or volunteers ; researchers and university scholars , and the unemployed .
What are the problems facing these groups of ordinary people ?
They face difficulties of recognition and validation of certificates , problems of social security , taxation problems and , last but not least , problems of linguistic preparation .
These difficulties were all identified years ago but there seems there has been no way of solving them so far .
Why ?
Because the States lack the political will .
Nothing justifies prolonging absurd situations such as those of young volunteers who have to pay taxes on their maintenance grants , or researchers who have to give up a project because of tax burdens , or unemployed people in search of work who are forced to return to their home country after three months ; many , many of the situations of this kind exist .
On various occasions , the European Parliament has dealt with obstacles to mobility from different angles .
Once again , apart from this excellent report drafted by Mrs Todini , on the Green Paper on Education , Training and Research , only a little while ago , in the Committee on Culture , we voted on the Fontaine report on recognition of higher education diplomas .
But unless our Member States show greater political will to eliminate difficulties , Commission and European documents will remain dead letters .
And if this happens , future generations will definitely hold us responsible for that failure .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the Commission 's Green Paper and Mrs Todini 's report analysed very well the obstacles to transnational movement and the challenges in the field of education and research .
We now have enough clarity and information about the situation .
The measures proposed must ultimately be put into practice with the help of a specific timetable and a coordinating committee of the Member States .
There are still many defects to be ironed out .
The priority task is to create a clear and sufficiently broad legal status for trainees and volunteers .
Anyone participating in education and programmes must be guaranteed and consequently the structures in this area must be harmonized .
Childcare and part-time working should not be a hindrance to participation .
It is also important to promote existing opportunities for international exchanges in apprenticeship .
Application procedures must be simplified and payment speeded up .
It is also essential to make the provision of information more effective .
Young people must be guaranteed equal opportunities , irrespective of where they live , to obtain information and to have access to EU education programmes .
This calls for the regionalization of information and the creation of a comprehensive service network .
The most important area in which improvements are needed , however , is the budget for education programmes .
All the other activities put together cannot have much influence unless the funding of the programmes is increased so as to reflect better the intended objectives .
The programmes are now causing disappointment to many people , and the budget for Socrates , for example , is completely inadequate relative to the number of applications and the level of support needed .
Social background and prosperity should not determine participation on the programmes .
The EU 's education and training programmes are an excellent instrument for building up mutual understanding , tolerance and thus security .
The Member States should therefore be required to promote them when budget decisions are taken in the Council .
The removal of obstacles to education and research exchanges will be of benefit to all .
Mr President , we agree with the assessment of the Commission 's Green Paper contained in Mrs Todini 's excellent report , especially regarding the Commission 's proposal to create a European ' qualifications space ' .
Mrs Todini , in her motion for a resolution , might have been more forceful in criticizing the inactivity of the Commission with regard to the comparative elaboration of professional qualifications on which all mobility hypotheses are based .
This is a challenge affecting an increasing number of young people : we need only consider the number of students who , in recent years , have made use of the Erasmus programme to enable them to complete their studies in another Member State in order to understand that this desire for mobility - the desire to be citizens of Europe in the fullest sense - is deserving of special attention both from the Member States and from our European Institutions .
We are in agreement with the rapporteur when she focuses attention on the training and mobility of young people from less privileged backgrounds , those who are not entering higher education , mature students , the handicapped and persons with dependent children .
But we cannot escape the fact that there are still administrative and political problems of every kind , as is apparent from the work of the Committee on Petitions .
Let me cite the example of foreign language lecturers at universities in the Member States , and in Italy in particular .
The rapporteur 's call for a comparative study on working conditions in this category , with a view to eliminating any discriminations and guaranteeing real mobility , seems to us a matter of the greatest urgency and importance .
I must congratulate Mrs Todini on the sound opinion she has produced .
Transnational mobility is indeed fundamental to continued unification in Europe , which ultimately stands or falls by the sympathy and understanding of its citizens , and increasingly - as far as employment and training are concerned - by the readiness of young people to move about .
The promotion of mobility is in fact a form of employment policy .
This needs to be more widely recognized , and does not only apply to Europe 's border regions .
It is curious to note that in many cases , the movement of goods and capital through Europe is less problematic nowadays than that of persons .
I can also see a danger here - and it has already arisen - that if , for example , young people undergoing vocational training are given privileged access to exchange opportunities , then inequality of opportunity in education , which has been reduced considerably in Europe in recent decades , will be resuscitated as a paradoxical result of European contacts .
As we have seen , less than one per cent of young people in vocational training outside universities now take part in exchange programmes and - as has already been mentioned - young students are in effect excluded because ERASMUS grants are worth no more than pocket- money ; furthermore , some countries do not allow grants to be taken abroad .
We are all in favour of a European labour market , but we are not giving unemployed people an opportunity to improve their communication skills through language tuition in neighbouring countries .
We really do need rules on the freedom of movement and a departure from the principle of territoriality .
It is also extremely irritating that - apart from these legal hurdles - many administrations in Europe still harbour an inbuilt resistance to freedom of movement .
It is equally irritating when , as happened recently , students are kept waiting for their residence permits for no good reason , or the mutual recognition of diplomas for access to the regulated professions in European countries is either delayed or simply refused out of an egotistical desire to put up barriers .
I hope that we can make some headway here and bring about improvements .
I also hope , however , that the Member States themselves will enhance the European dimension of their education systems , rather than relying unduly on the Commission 's efforts to Europeanize syllabuses .
This requires better foreign language teaching , first and foremost .
Finally , I would urge that in future , more funding should be earmarked for exchange programmes in the EU budget .
I see nothing specific on this point in the Green Paper .
The question is , are the exchanges which we are demanding to remain a pilot project , or are they to be offered much more widely one day ?
Just think that , to put it starkly , less money is being spent on SOCRATES than to support European tobacco-growers .
I could imagine that the Structural Funds might also be drawn on for exchange programmes - in terms of employment policy - so as to give a fair chance to a maximum number of school pupils , trainees and students who cannot rely on parental aid for educational visits abroad .
The amount of funding for our educational programmes should be increased to meet this need .
Last but not least , please bear in mind that information on mobility schemes in Europe needs to be improved substantially and a much better placement system created on the ground , particularly in companies .
As has rightly been pointed out , although these programmes are being overhauled , many people in Europe are totally unaware of their existence .
Mr President , removing obstacles to the free movement of persons is one of the main objectives of European integration , defined in the Treaty of Rome .
However , there are so many obstacles to free movement that I wonder whether free movement really exists at all .
Students , researchers and teachers who wish to travel to another EU country to train under an exchange programme are not always accepted .
Conversely , not all countries have people wishing to go to them .
It is absolutely essential that language learning be supported .
The idea of prioritizing the teaching of the lesserused languages is important because it promotes exchanges to all countries .
Attaining an excellent level in two foreign languages at middle school level is , however , an impossible ambition .
Account needs to be taken , for example , of individual differences and differing opportunities to learn .
In my opinion , efforts ought also to be made to find a lasting solution to the problems of taxation and social security .
In particular , practice on the direct taxation of researchers differs considerably from one country to another and may lead to situations in which a high level of taxation directly prevents movement to a particular country .
Moreover , the refusal to grant unemployment benefit to persons participating for more than three months on a course in another European country is hardly likely to encourage applications to study abroad .
At present , it is hardly possible to speak of the equivalence or mutual recognition of research and vocational diplomas .
I hope that the Commission will take some real measures to remedy this situation .
Voluntary work , which is very closely linked to these exchange programmes , is also not recognized in all countries .
I should also like to know whether the budgetary resources are adequate .
The exchange programmes , which are continually growing and in which there is an increasing interest are unable to cover participants ' expenses .
This leads to social inequality . That being so , not every student has the opportunity to take part in activities which develop an international outlook .
Another argument for increasing the level of appropriations is to enable the Baltic countries to take part in the exchange programmes , a development which I would be very keen to see .
Human resources are the European Community 's great strength , and everything must be done to improve the efficiency with which these resources are used .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Todini .
I think this is a good report which addresses some very important problems about which much has been said this evening : qualifications , diplomas , foreign languages .
But I also believe there is one huge omission which the rapporteur has tried to make good by accepting one of the amendments tabled , though I feel this is not enough .
That omission relates to linguistic communication .
In a European Union where there are already 15 Member States and 11 languages , soon to be increased to 25 Member States and 20 languages , I think we can no longer go on pretending that no problem of language and of linguistic communication exists .
After all , we in this House encounter problems of interpretation every day - as happened this afternoon , for example , when the English booth ' blew up ' .
We form part of a small group , representing less than 1 % of the European Union , which speaks a second language and has the ability to understand a third , but this is a small , closed society which fails to realize that for 99 % of the Union 's population the problem of linguistic communication - when people move countries and go abroad , whether as tourists or looking for employment or in other situations - is a very fundamental one .
So I believe that we can no longer close our eyes to this problem but must face up to the need to offer all our citizens - not just the small percentage that can go to Oxford or Harvard to study foreign languages - the possibility of sharing a common language of communication .
This is a taboo which must be broken - I call it a taboo because the concept of a neutral language of communication is associated with Esperanto , an old invention which has not enjoyed a good press but , even so , probably represents the only way , in a Union of 25 Member States with 20 different languages , of providing everyone - including those less privileged persons who lack the resources to go to the United States or to the better foreign universities - with the possibility of communicating with the other citizens of the Union .
Thank you , Mr President .
We are glad that Parliament has attached so much importance to the Green Paper , and I should like to thank the various committees for their contributions , and especially the rapporteurs - Mrs Todini , Mr Desama , Mrs Hermange and Mrs Heinisch .
In the course of the consultation procedure a substantial number of reactions and contributions have been received , the quality of which will enable the Commission to arrive at a better definition of the issues at stake and the lines of action set out in the Green Paper .
This procedure forms a counterpoint to the conference which opens tomorrow at Maastricht and which is called upon to play a key role in confirming the results achieved hitherto .
I would again like to emphasize the importance of the free movement of persons , especially as regards groups that have not previously been sufficiently taken into consideration : young people undergoing training , teachers , the unemployed working to obtain qualifications , and researchers .
On this same subject of individuals and freedom of movement , I should also like to say how much I agree with what has been said by some Honourable Members , to the effect that so far much greater progress has been made with the free movement of capital , goods and services .
I would like to assure you that , especially in the area about which we are talking this evening , Commissioner Cresson and indeed the entire Commission - as I can testify in my capacity as Commissioner for the single market - are doing our utmost to make good this defect ; the action plan for the single market which the Commission is submitting to the European Council in Amsterdam places great and central emphasis on the free movement of persons , and the ' Citizens First ' communication initiative supported by the European Parliament is designed to promote awareness and encourage people to use those opportunities for mobility which already exist today .
Regarding Parliament 's contribution , I should like to highlight the very positive reaction by Mrs Todini at the start of her report where , very perceptively , she stresses the concrete and functional nature of the Green Paper .
I welcome this reaction on behalf of the commission - it accurately reflects the keen interest aroused in the Union by the Green Paper .
There are four central themes that guide the Commission 's actions .
The first is improving the availability of information .
On the initiative of Mr Elchlepp , Parliament calls attention to the need to improve the dissemination of information on the opportunities the Community programmes offer to young people who want to spend a period training abroad .
In this context , the proposal is that intermediate structures should be set up at local and regional level to provide appropriate contact points for the largest possible number of people .
In this connection , the report by the Veil group on the free movement of persons contains a number of proposals relating to the Eures network - proposals which the Commission substantially endorses and which include the strengthening of links between the network and the other Community programmes and initiatives .
With a view to taking advantage of existing structures rather than creating new ones , the Commission is proposing to examine the means to be applied to improve co-ordination between all the networks that are already operational .
Improved utilization of new technologies would make it possible to make these networks even more accessible to the general public .
The second objective is to reduce linguistic barriers .
The Commission is glad to note that this objective - which the Commission itself strongly advocated in the White Paper ' Teaching and learning - Towards a cognitive society ' - finds favour in principle with Parliament .
We take due note of the reservations expressed in Mrs Hermange 's report regarding the objective of fluency in two Community languages in addition to the mother tongue .
But we take note with interest of the support for the idea - previously expressed on the occasion of the debates following the White Paper - of acquiring passive knowledge of a third Community language .
It must be recalled , however , that in the light of the present wording of Articles 126 and 127 the Community 's scope for action in the linguistic field is substantially confined to the Community education and training programmes , Socrates and Leonardo .
Even so , the action undertaken in this context is of considerable interest .
In one area to which Mrs Todini referred , the learning of a foreign language at an early age at school , there are for example some fifteen European pilot projects currently being developed under the Socrates programme .
The third objective is to institute a system for mobility candidates .
This applies to researchers and to apprentices .
As far as researchers are concerned , the opinion put forward by Mr Desama will encourage the Commission to submit to Parliament , at an early date , draft measures capable of eliminating the obstacles described in the Green Paper , and the Commission intends to take action on the opinion put forward by Mr Desama .
On the basis of the information we are now gathering from researchers and from experts in taxation and social security , the Commission will prepare a synthesis document intended for the general public .
As far as apprentices are concerned , at the initiative of Mrs Heinisch , the report calls for the adoption of a Community definition and an apprenticeship statute , and also for the implementation of a specific mobility programme for apprentices .
We are currently examining the details of a framework mechanism defining the optimum conditions for sandwich-course training at European level and mechanisms capable of creating the conditions to give apprentices mobility on a Community-wide scale .
Finally , the fourth objective is access to the Community programmes .
The report underlines the need to take greater account of the imperatives of equal opportunity and equilibrium in social policy in connection with the Socrates and Leonardo programmes , to improve access to these programmes and hence substantially to reassess the appropriations intended for them .
From this standpoint , it is simultaneously being proposed that national and Community subsidies should be increased .
In this respect , the Commission entirely endorses the views of Parliament .
We hope that we can rely on the fruitful support of Parliament to enable future proposals in this field to be implemented .
Parliament 's comprehensive and detailed report offers the hope of close co-operation along these lines .
Finally , Mrs Todini mentioned paragraph 36 .
With regard to that paragraph , which deals with the Co-ordinating Committee , the Commission can express agreement with the idea of a body designed to facilitate a degree of coordination and follow-up , and practical implementation , of the lines of action proposed in the Green Paper .
The Commission will give the most careful consideration to the best ways of organizing this kind of steering operation , with which the European Parliament will certainly be fully associated .
However , as regards the type of committee proposed by Parliament , the Commission cannot yet give a definitive opinion .
The reason is that , as I am sure you will appreciate , it is difficult to give an opinion on this matter before we know whether the type of committee proposed is compatible with the procedures in force and with the principles of the Treaty .
In conclusion , I can tell you that the Commission will in due course , during the Luxembourg presidency , be submitting a detailed analysis supported by a series of proposals for implementing the Green Paper .
As proposed by Parliament , moreover , this proposal for implementing the Green Paper will be linked to a timetable , and I need hardly say that Parliament - which I thank again for its most valuable contribution - will be kept regularly informed of progress .
Mr President , I should first like to thank Honourable Members , and especially the Commissioner , for having shown such detailed understanding of the fundamental aspects of this report .
We therefore look forward to hearing in due course what positive steps can be taken regarding the Co-ordinating Committee .
I will take advantage of the Commissioner 's presence to say that all of us have indeed complimented the Commission on publishing such a useful and specific Green Paper .
I must be somewhat less complimentary , however , about the fact that , very often , there is a lack of co-ordination between Community institutions .
A specific example is the fact that the Maastricht Conference on this very subject opens tomorrow .
We are debating the report on mobility today and will be voting on it tomorrow , making it difficult for the Maastricht Conference really to take account of the European Parliament 's work .
As the Commissioner well knows , the work done on the Green Paper by the Committee on Culture has been timeconsuming and technical . Had the Green Paper been referred to that Committee rather earlier , perhaps things would not be quite so last-minute .
Maybe we could have concluded our work and our discussions a little earlier , so that the Maastricht Conference - which , as I said , opens tomorrow - could have taken better account of Parliament 's efforts .
At all events , we are arranging for the final document to be available tomorrow , before 2 p.m. if possible , in the hope that the European Parliament 's efforts , intentions and proposals can be appropriately taken into consideration .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 10.28 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes for yesterday 's sitting have been circulated .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were adopted )
Madam President , I should like to ask the Bureau finally to take steps to ensure that Parliament 's staff - I am not referring to the Members - are actually able to set foot in the restaurants during their short lunch-break .
Yesterday at 12.30 p.m. , all the restaurants were full of visitors groups , so that Parliament staff had to queue for half an hour and spend at least another ten minutes finding a seat .
That is just not acceptable .
From 12.30 p.m. onwards , the restaurants are chock-a-block with visitors , and that can no longer be tolerated .
I note your request .
I would simply point out that , as you know , we completed the voting rather quickly yesterday and everyone - visitors , staff and Members of Parliament - left at the same time .
Madam President , we agreed at yesterday 's conference that we would ask the President to write a letter about the fire in Turin cathedral .
Could you confirm whether this has already been done or is at least in hand ?
The request has been recorded , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , and the letter will be written , but we cannot go any faster than we are already going .
Madam President , I wonder if you could help me .
There has been some difficulty over the Israeli delegation which was meant to be going to Israel from the 1 to 5 June .
For some reason or other , at very short notice , this has been changed to the 3-6 June .
This is very disruptive to Members who had already made arrangements to go on that delegation .
I gather that the decision has been taken without consultation of the Bureau of the Israeli delegation or with any members of the delegation .
I would ask you , as President here today , to have an investigation into why this has happened because not only is it disruptive to Members here but it is also extremely discourteous to our Israeli hosts .
Mr Provan , we are obviously not going to get into a debate on that point .
You want us to make enquiries , and we will .
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
I must inform you that , under Rule 47 , paragraph 2 , second indent of the Rules of Procedure , I have received the following objections , tabled and justified in writing , to the list of subjects for the next debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
On item V - Discriminatory measures by China against certain EU Member States - I have an objection from the Group of the Party of European Socialists which seeks to replace this item by an item entitled ' Western Sahara ' and to include the item on China under Human rIghts .
If that is clear to everyone , I shall put that request to the vote .
Madam President , I wonder whether we are actually allowed to add an eighth item under human rights ?
I know that Mr de Vries and others always object if there are more than five items , and I just wonder whether it is allowed under the Rules of Procedure .
I do not understand , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
We are not adding an item .
Perhaps I did not explain myself very well .
The proposal is to replace the item on China with an item on Western Sahara and to add a sub-item on human rights , which is in fact the item on China .
Now , this is what we have just done on some other items .
I assure you that this is perfectly in order under the Rules of Procedure .
I checked that before putting the matter to the vote .
( The motion was rejected )
Madam President , perhaps I did not express myself very well , but what we have done today is to include seven items under human rights instead of five .
I thought we had an agreement here in the House that we would never have more than five .
We keep adding more and more items under human rights every time , which rules out any chance of a proper debate .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , we are not going to get into a debate on this .
Actually I think the Conference of Presidents could look at this matter for next time , so as to harmonize things .
Madam President , I wish to clear up a misapprehension .
Item No 5 which is listed under the heading China is in fact a call for political solidarity by European Member States with those states threatened by Chinese retaliation in trade or other terms as a result of the UN Human Rights Conference in Geneva .
It is a political question about European solidarity with Member States such as Denmark and Holland and not in fact , strictly speaking , about human rights in China at all .
You know very well that we do not hold debates about objections , we just vote .
You were actually giving an explanation after the vote and I had a lot of trouble following you .
I did think it might be a point of order , but it was not .
Decision on urgency
Madam President , this is a very important Commission proposal .
We have begun our work in committee , but we shall not be ready by the second May part-session .
Our earliest possible deadline is the first part-session in June , so we shall complete our work then . I would therefore recommend that we reject this request for urgent procedure , but undertake to debate this proposal at the first part-session in June .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Common security policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0162 / 97 ) by Mr Tindemans , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the formulation of perspectives for the common security policy of the European Union .
Before giving the floor to Mr Tindemans , I would simply like to express my regret that the Council did not consider it necessary to attend this extremely important debate .
I had to say that .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it was decided at the Maastricht summit that the European Community was now to be called the European Union and was to have a common foreign and security policy .
What it talks about in the texts is a security policy that could be developed into a common defence policy or even a common defence .
Now , I am sure , since I believe the vast majority of Members here share my views , that I am not alone in thinking that when heads of state and government meet at important summits like Maastricht and take such well-publicized decisions , we have to take them seriously .
We have to assume that they mean what they have decided and that they know what is involved .
The decision was taken at Maastricht , and the question now is how it should be put into practice .
When looking at this issue I have tried to avoid going into the institutional aspects as much as possible .
We all expect these to be examined at the Intergovernmental Conference , the IGC , which was announced at Maastricht as the forum where any problems with the texts , such as inaccuracies or incomplete or unclear sections , would be dealt with .
We in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy felt that as the directly elected representatives of the people , we simply had to state our position on such important issues as security and defence .
We have to say what we think is right for the people and what is essential for our security , and particularly our internal security at the moment , which is of great concern to us all .
The report we produced in the committee is an own-initiative report , rather than a response to a Commission or Council text , such as the Titley report on the arms industry which is also on this morning 's agenda , and which is a response to a text by the Commission .
In this case , it was the Committee on Foreign Affairs itself which had a number of ideas on security that it wanted to put forward .
There was unanimous agreement in the committee that we should draw a distinction between security and defence for the time being , devoting this first section of the report to security and then later , after the Intergovernmental Conference , when we know whether any important decisions have been taken on the subject or not , producing a second section on defence . The two sections together would then be taken as a statement of Parliament 's views .
It is extremely important for Parliament to have a position on such sensitive but vital issues as security and defence .
This , then , is the first section on security .
The government leaders and the French President tried to establish a position on security as early as the Lisbon summit in 1992 .
We in the committee and in the Subcommittee on Security and Disarmament , which has worked very hard , felt it was our duty to visit the headquarters of NATO , the Western European Union and the Council of Europe : we really left no stone unturned .
We felt that we needed to provide a clearer definition of what security really meant for us , and we hope that the Council , the summit and the IGC will also give this question rather closer attention .
We have looked at both external and internal security , although less time has been devoted to internal security , important as it is .
We all know that people in the Member States are currently very anxious about national security , but because it is to be specifically dealt with at the IGC and there is some talk of a separate pillar being created for it in future , we thought we should concentrate on external security for the time being .
What can we in the House say about this ?
As we all know , security is clearly more than just a military issue .
It is also clear that security affects living conditions , employment , public health , the fight against poverty and unemployment , and so on .
We say this , but we must also not forget that the whole purpose of the construction of Europe was to bring greater prosperity and peace .
One of the reasons for founding the ECSC was to establish a policy of peace , to prevent any further wars in Western Europe or between Member States and to establish a different structure from the past .
So everything we do in Europe is in pursuit of peace , security and greater prosperity .
Think of the White Paper on growth and employment - everything we do in the various committees is designed to create the best possible conditions we can . However , when it comes to external security , our security at international level , there is a military aspect too .
I think we all felt ashamed that the European Union failed to assert its presence in the conflict in the Balkans , and that it took the United States to restore peace and push through an agreement .
And today , are we not ashamed about what is happening in Central Africa ?
What is our position ?
What is our policy ?
I think it is now clear that no foreign policy in the world stands a chance of succeeding if it is not backed up by military force .
This is not something I welcome , it is simply a statement of fact .
We are one of the world 's major economic powers , and we hope that we shall grow in importance further still if we enlarge .
It would therefore be very cowardly of us if we could not , or dared not , accept any responsibility on the international stage , or if we had only a security or defence policy without a common foreign policy .
This is the main thrust of the report that we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on Defence and Disarmament have been busy preparing for some considerable time now .

We have put forward a number of very serious proposals , and we hope we will win a large enough vote to force the Council and the European Council to take account of what this House and the people 's representatives say , and that we can establish talks between the Council and Parliament on the best policy to pursue .
If we adopt a position here today which forces the Council - despite being absent from this debate - to take account of our report , we shall be helping to give Parliament greater dignity , influence and importance .
It will mean that we have managed to produce a report which no one can ignore on a very sensitive and difficult issue .
People will at least know what we think about security , and we shall see how this can be further developed in future .
I cannot emphasize enough what an important issue this is , and it is also a debate in which Parliament could greatly enhance its reputation .
Thank you , Mr Tindemans .
I think your speech was much appreciated , but in future I would like the groups to inform the Members properly of the speaking time allocated to them .
Quite clearly Mr Tindemans did not know that he only had six minutes .
He went well over time and I did not stop him because I did not think he was aware of it .
Madam President , I think that this morning 's debate is a very important one on a subject which should also be high on the agenda for the Intergovernmental Conference : security and the role of the European Union .
My group feels it is important to stress that for us , security is more than just the efficient organization of the military aspects of our security policy .
We see it as a broad concept covering economic instruments , environmental instruments , conflict prevention , peacekeeping , and so on .
So for us , security is more than it was originally intended to mean , in other words it is more than just military security , which I think is a significant point in the position we have adopted as a group .
We welcome the fact that Mr Tindemans ' report also focuses on security policy , rather than the defence aspect of the development of the Union 's second pillar .
We feel this is extremely important .
We now wish to focus the debate on security policy in the broader sense , which for the Union means Petersberg missions .
We think that the European Union should give itself the possibility of taking independent action , such as occurred in Bosnia under NATO , and in order to do this it needs more instruments .
As we have said before , it is better to try to develop prevention measures as part of our security policy , but if prevention fails , then the Union must be in a position to carry out Petersberg missions , in other words peace enforcement and peacekeeping , on its own .
This is my group 's position , and it is also where we feel the emphasis should be placed in the present debate .
We are rather more reluctant to discuss what the Union 's defence policy or common defence should mean in future .
It is not that we wish to avoid the issue , but we think that we should be focusing now on the Petersberg missions , particularly since the European Union has not been able to pursue an effective policy in practice in recent years .
But if we give the Union the right instruments now , we hope that it will be able to use them and show people that genuine progress has been made on our security policy .
And once we have made progress , then we can start talking about what to do next .
But I think we first need to give our own people a more reliable impression of the Union 's ability to carry out Petersberg missions .
Of the several amendments which my group has tabled , I should like to draw your attention to two which we feel are particularly important .
The Tindemans report leaves it open to the European Union to carry out Petersberg-type measures without a mandate from the UN or the OSCE .
We do not agree with this .
Secondly , the report contains a passage on decision-making which proposes that the Council should be able to take majority decisions on important questions like Petersberg missions , in other words issues with military implications .
We do not agree with this either .
But otherwise we would congratulate Mr Tindemans on the work he has done over the last few years in preparing this report for Parliament .
Madam President , firstly , I would like to pay tribute to the rapporteur , Leo Tindemans .
We should give serious consideration to any report bearing his name .
His experience at the highest political levels over the years in matters European renders his views particularly important .
His report is a comprehensive one , which makes an important contribution to the debate on the evolving EU security policy as defined by the Maastricht Treaty and accepted at the time by all Member State governments .
In the limited time at my disposal , I want to concentrate on his proposal in paragraph 6 for the carrying out of a feasibility study into the establishment of a military and police unit responsible for keeping and restoring the peace .
The role of the United Nations in conflict situations around the globe provides us with many examples from which we can learn and build upon to define the EU peacekeeping role .
For example a United Nations peacekeeping force in the 1960s in the Belgian Congo ( now Zaire ) oversaw what may have been an uneasy peace but , nonetheless , a vital one .
UNIFIL procured for South Lebanon decades of stability , notwithstanding the horrific civil war which that country endured until recently .
UNFICYP was another success , as was the operation of the UN force which assisted and oversaw the end of the Iraq-Iran war .
In all of these instances a cessation of conflict had generally been brokered by the UN itself and a form of peace had ensued .
The authority and success of the United Nations peacekeeping units was not based on the strength of their arms but on the moral clout of the UN , and this , in turn , was based on the acceptance by the conflicting parties of the political neutrality of the UN and its genuine wish to secure the peace .
Offhand I can recall only one instance where the UN moved from a peacekeeping simpliciter to an operation with an element of peace enforcing and that was in Sudan several years ago and , by all accounts , it was an unhappy and unsuccessful intervention .
This experience raises a fundamental dilemma for the EU : would its military and police operations be exclusively peacekeeping or should it have a peace-enforcing capability ?
It is not appropriate for a polity like the EU , with its proper and legitimate aspiration to be a world force , to be benignly neutral in the UN mode .
For example , let us not forget the recent conflict in the Balkans where we were criticised for our impotence .
Furthermore , what would or should be the role of the EU if a vital interest such as our energy supplies or our telecommunications links were threatened ?
These are issues which we need to address .
This is precisely why a feasibility study to explore the dimensions of that role would be extremely valuable .
However , it must not get bogged down debating institutional points concerning relationships , for example between NATO / WEU , and the national idiosyncrasies of some Member States relating to their security obligations .
The function of such a study must be to clarify the basic principles for the EU - the logistics of implementing that policy can come later .
Madam President , well done Mr Tindemans !
He has just realized , along with Mrs Hélène Carrère d 'Encausse , that it is increasingly difficult to draw up perspectives on common security that are in any way credible , for lack of agreement on the objectives .
The fate of Leo Tindemans ' report provides a perfect illustration of that deplorable state of affairs .
The first version of the report was decisive and straightforward , with constructive proposals and vision .
But after its passage through the committee what is left is a toned-down and rather timid text , certainly a fine reflection of the temptation to succumb to the lowest common denominator approach which our Parliament now seems to share with other institutions of the Union .
By proceeding in this way our Parliament has abandoned its role of providing political impetus , which still remains after all , and will for a long time , its chief mission in the context of the CFSP .
Rather than identifying and clearly stating the difficulties and political obstacles which stand in the way of the CFSP taking shape and substance , we prefer to skirt round them by subscribing to the illusion of a Europe at peace internally and externally , which can economize on the defence and security effort .
We are being lulled into a dangerous state of illusion and this is no way to succeed in liberating ourselves from the oppressive goodwill of our American allies who will continue to defend our security .
It is significant that the Americans themselves are beginning to get annoyed at the European hesitation waltz and our determined failure to emancipate ourselves , except in words .
In the circumstances , one of the innovative proposals of the Tindemans report , the integration of Petersberg missions into the treaty , may actually be twisting our rapporteur 's intentions to some extent .
It is certainly desirable to confer on these missions the status of common action and thus extend the panoply of our means of intervention , but given our patent lack of resolution , it is a good bet that what could be an important breakthrough will only be window-dressing in the end , and consequently a pointer to our indecision .
Madam President , we debate the Tindemans report in circumstances especially significant for the security of our Union .
For one thing we have an Intergovernmental Conference advancing at a snail 's pace on this chapter , but , most important of all , we are rapidly approaching a NATO summit which is going to widen that organization geographically and strengthen its functions .
The conclusion is clear : if Union security remains a runt policy after the IGC , the security of our continent and the geographic area of the European Union will end up being exclusively run by NATO .
I believe this goes against majority public opinion in our countries , and it is against our own interests of course .
We cannot entrust the post-Cold War security of our continent to an organization like NATO born of the Cold War , dominated by a power external to the region , the United States , and continuing to base all its activities on the outdated concept of nuclear deterrence .
NATO security and defence cannot possibly have a European identity .
That identity must exist inside the Union .
A Union capable of understanding that security is not a military concept but an all-round concept based on trust and preventive diplomacy .
The European Union ought to be promoting a new model of pan-European security , developing the OSCE by reforming its decision-making processes and increasing its capacities and resources , and coordinating the armed forces of Member States to perform ' Petersburg ' missions - but always at the request of the United Nations or the OSCE .
Without CFSP there is no political union and vice-versa .
The Council , which is not here of course , should understand that .
Your first draft of this report , Mr Tindemans , in which you called for the creation of a defence identity for the European Union , was met by massive criticism in committee .
Your actual task was to develop a concept of security for all the citizens of Europe .
Europe must remain a civil power .
What you are doing , however , is building another fortress Europe , and in your report , you have taken defence to mean the defence of the special interests of the EU Member States , in other words of resources , sea lanes and transport routes .
Is what you are constructing here intended to be a new front between North and South ?
Is Europe - a Europe of peace , law and freedom as it was founded , a civil Europe - supposed to become a military union ?
That is what your report suggests .
You clearly state at a number of points that the goal is a defence identity .
The three-stage integration of the WEU - which will be dissolved as such next year - is designed to breathe new life into it , enabling it to carry out independent intervention tasks .
However , we - the young generation - do not wish to return to the traditional , outmoded system , where security means our own security alone .
We have long been aware that dictatorships can also be overcome by peaceful means .
There is now the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , which has developed ways of breaching walls so that threats are no longer necessary .
A comprehensive joint model of security for the twentyfirst century will not entail a division between internal and external security , but an indivisible security order , a security order that tackles the causes of instability where they really lie , namely in the economic , social and development fields .
The range of civil instruments at our disposal must undoubtedly be extended .
The creation of a European civil peace corps is an important project in this context , and it will need us to exercise all our political , financial and material power .
Madam President , I too wish to associate myself with those who have spoken before me in congratulating the rapporteur .
I think this is a good report .
Like Mr Goerens I just think it could have been less conditional .
I think that there was a majority in Parliament to eliminate the few remaining conditional statements .
Essentially I want to say two things .
The first is not a criticism , but perhaps an appeal to our socialist friends , to Mr Wiersma .
If we are going to talk about Petersberg missions I think we must equip ourselves to carry them out and , in my view , we cannot accept unanimous decision-making in the Council if we really want Europe to be in a position to accomplish these missions .
My second point is addressed to our friends the Greens . It is clear to me that a peace-keeping operation is inconceivable with just a civilian force .
The Bosnian experience demonstrated that .
So did the Rwandan experience .
To carry out this kind of mission , there has to be a military force to back up the civilian force . A civilian force alone is certainly not up to the task .
Mr Commissioner , I would like to draw your attention to paragraph 6 which asks the Commission and the Council to carry out a feasibility study into setting up a corps responsible for keeping and restoring peace .
I hope we will receive a response from the Commission on this point .
I think this is one of the conditions for allowing Europe to intervene , so that what recently happened with Albania is not repeated , when we were not in a position to react as a European Union , but had to delegate the task of facing that crisis to the Member States .
There should be a European instrument for crisis management , alongside majority voting in the Council , of course .
If the Commission could respond to us on that point , I think it would be an excellent step forward .
I hope our socialist friends will understand that without institutional means and majority decision-making capacity , we will continue to find ourselves in the same situation as we are in today , with Europe incapable of doing anything at all .
Madam President , I am not sure that we should be happy to accept the decision to confine this report to common security aspects alone , without also considering the question of defence policy , especially since recent experience in Bosnia - and , indeed , the present Albanian problem - show the need for a common foreign policy and suggest that no more time should be wasted in agreeing a common defence policy .
As we know , the two issues are indissolubly linked .
However , the method adopted by the rapporteur does have one positive aspect in allowing a definition of what the Members of the Committee on Institutional Affairs have called ' the essence of the Union 's security ' , meaning the whole set of basic guarantees which enable the Union to exist and to adopt the form of a legal system which is able to live and develop freely and to assert its identity on the international scene .
We must , though , be aware of the fact that a common security policy cannot in itself safeguard the European Union against all threats .
The question of defence will therefore have to be dealt with as soon as possible , by convening a conference similar to that held in Messina in 1955 with a view to defining the gradual merging of the Western European Union into the European Union in the context of a common defence policy .
The possibility for the Union to decide to implement humanitarian and aid missions , to keep the peace and to administer the WEU will represent the first significant expression of the security and defence aspects of the Maastricht Treaty .

There is another question , too , among the many referred to in Mr Tindemans 's report , which is not mentioned in the chapter on the internal security of the Union : I refer to secessionist movements , whether violent or otherwise , which are sources of instability and disintegration that are difficult to reconcile with the democratic development of society .
A Europe reduced to trying to contain a series of secessionist aspirations would certainly lack the credibility needed for the balancing role that should be entrusted to it .
National entities resulting from secessionist divisions would undermine internal security , based as they are on egotistical local interests or even on ethnic prejudices .
The European Union must therefore confront these dangers and work to ensure that , within the context of political union , we preserve those forms of autonomy and subsidiarity which recognize certain differences but , at the same time , that we guarantee the protection of internal security as an inalienable benefit for the development of the Union and its people , and for the integrity of States .
Madam President , this report is clearly better than the proposals which have been debated several times in committee .
But there are still proposals which are unacceptable .
Sweden has made its position on the Common Foreign and Security Policy clear through its proposal , in conjunction with Finland , to the current Intergovernmental Conference .
As a non-aligned State which aims to remain neutral during a war , Sweden cannot accept the development of a common European defence position within the framework of the EU or via organisational integration of the EU and the WEU .
There can be no doubt about this .
The proposal for a conference to discuss a common defence policy and a common defence position cannot be accepted .
The EU must not be allowed to develop a military organisation alongside the United Nations which competes with it .
The future role for EU security policy ought to be to work for peaceful solutions to conflicts , to develop institutions which will detect conflicts early and resolve them using political and economic methods , to take upon itself peace keeping operations and humanitarian initiatives and to manage crisis .
Petersberg missions should only be carried out with a direct mandate from the UN or OSCE .
It is unacceptable that the Union should act independently outside the framework of these organisations .
The proposal for a common European military and civil corps is neither well thought out nor capable of implementation in practice .
Future security policy must be expanded from its traditional focus on military state security to encompass security for people and security for the planet .
Common security and all embracing security is built on co-operation , the creation of trust , openness and on disarmament and requires completely different tools from military security .
In order to resolve conflict by peaceful means the EU ought to develop a broad spectrum of preventative measures which allow early warning , conflict resolution , mediation and political and economic aid instead of clinging to the military solutions of the cold war .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Tindemans on his work , which is appearing at a very important time , precisely because it recommends a number of proposals for the formulation of a common security policy .
I too am sorry that the Council is absent from this debate .
Some representative of the Council should have been here out of respect both for the issue and for Parliament , especially since the Council in particular bears the burden of a series of serious failures in the area of security policy .
The report by Mr Tindemans contains several particularly important points .
The first is its methodological approach , in other words the distinction between general principles and particular headings , relating mainly to the consideration of areas that are the focus of crisis , because it is precisely these that pose some threat to European security .
Speaking of general principles , I would like to dwell on two of these .
The first is the concept of territorial integrity , a concept which is very important and certainly , in my view , the core of any common security policy .
However , here we need imagination and an eye on the future , because the tools , the weapons systems that present the prime threat to territorial integrity have developed and compel us to change views that until now have been traditional .
The second is the concept of preventive diplomacy , which I think is the most important proposal , because prevention means avoidance of the disagreeable facts which nowadays make up the picture of the international system .
However , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , prevention means procedures , it means information , contacts , specialization and analytical consideration of all the causes of a crisis , things which of course - and needless to say , the Council is not here - have not existed so far .
Another point is the proposal and introduction of measures to build trust as an established factor , which has already been tried in previous difficult times , but which can clearly contribute to creating the conditions required for the problems to be addressed .
And the last point , Madam President , concerns the ' Particular Headings ' .
The Balkans : a failure of the European Union .
The Mediterranean and the Middle East : a second failure .
It is not enough to appoint mediators overnight and by means of untransparent procedures , we must have specific proposals .

Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Tindermans on the excellent report he has produced , even though I too have certain reservations , especially regarding the fact that this version has been watered down and incorporates numerous changes introduced by the Committee on Foreign Affairs . In particular , I am not happy that this version has become somewhat illusory in mingling a whole series of issues such as organized crime , prostitution , the economic crisis and racism .
I do have my doubts about this .
But , clearly , the day of reckoning is at hand .
The Intergovernmental Conference is not producing the results for which we hoped , and the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty are not really being appropriately taken into account in the context of a common security policy .
Clearly , without a security policy there can be no defence policy , and without a defence policy there can be no common foreign policy .
So Europe , which could be a giant - and is a giant in part - in economic terms is a political dwarf ; or more precisely we have fifteen political dwarflets , the fifteen Member States , bickering in the interests of their own little egos and counting for absolutely nothing in international terms .
For this reason , I also appreciate the vehemence with which Mr Tindemans has stated this problem .
This is a point on which we must be clear , dispensing with ambiguity .
Preventing conflicts and finding peaceful solutions to them - peace keeping and peace making - cannot be just a rhetorical exercise .
How many times have voices been raised in this House - and I turn to the Members of the Socialist Group - who have been seriously perplexed , as evident again today from what they have said - about the question of resolving conflicts and restoring peace and democracy .
None of this can be just a rhetorical exercise .
There is a price to be paid for this policy , and anyone who has the courage to invest in operations like Petersberg or the other operations , like those of NATO which , whatever anyone may say , now represents the one great bastion of security for Europe , as it does elsewhere , anyone who has the courage to invest in the security policy and so in the capacity to intervene and to export peace , democracy and freedom , is working for the only possible future for a Europe which is an area of democracy and freedom .
I believe , then , that the WEU must be harnessed to the service of the CFSP , and that there must be not just cooperation between the WEU and the European Union but real , genuine integration with , maybe , the possibility of creating an opt-out - giving those countries which are unwilling to participate in military peace-keeping initiatives the right to withdraw .
It is essential here that Parliament should adopt a clear position and call upon the Council to face up to its responsibilities .
Mr President , I take this opportunity to express my great appreciation for Mr Tindemans before this packed and enthusiastic House , but at the same time to express my regret at the fact that his excellent initial effort has been mutilated in committee .
Nor does it seem to me that the admittedly numerous and wordy amendments can restore its original force and substance .
We are missing an important opportunity today to show that Parliament is capable of venturing beyond the narrow confines of its own affairs .
What we are going to propose to the Intergovernmental Conference on the subject of the CFSP is little more than a plaintive murmur , before which not so much as a leaf will tremble .
On this subject , a Parliament which is still a slave to its political and ideological prejudices and to empty defences of national sovereignty is expressing an opinion that is destined to leave no trace in the historic record of European integration , endeavouring as it does to fill the void of its political proposals with a few feeble practical ones .
No , we have no need to strengthen co-operation with the WEU , but only to integrate it into the European Union .
This body , extraneous both to the Union and to NATO , revived like Lazarus after 40 years of slumber , is today incapable of taking control of the mission to Albania , totally consistent though it is with the Petersberg undertakings .
No , we have no need for any surveillance or analytical capacity if we then lack the will and the political and military machinery to react .
No , we have no need of a European humanitarian core , a futile addition to the proliferation of so-called strengths - which are really weaknesses - of European cores .
What we do need is a clear , authoritative common foreign and security policy , and the will to provide it with all the necessary instruments that will make the European Union not just a market , which it is , not just a gigantic central bank , which for better or worse it is going to be , but an international political entity of the first magnitude with greater and greater autonomy .
Theodore Roosevelt told the United States that his foreign policy would be ' talk soft and carry a big stick ' .
Unfortunately , the foreign policy of the European Union seems to be : ' talk a lot provided you don 't carry a big stick ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , I know it is very difficult to keep to one 's speaking time , but I would like to draw this problem to the attention of the groups .
I think there must be more vigilance in future .
It seems that an hour and twenty minutes of speaking time was not used yesterday because the speakers were not here .
By contrast the timetable is very tight today .
I think we must have another look at all this so that we can devote all the time they deserve to important debates .
For my part , I must do my best to ensure that speaking time is respected by all .
Madam President , Mr Tindemans has said that security is not only a military question .
Quite right , but this must then also be acknowledged in the EU 's relationships with other countries .
The deepest gulf in standards of living on the EU 's borders is on the border between Finland and Russia .
Russia is no longer the evil empire , but 90 % of its population is experiencing social insecurity .
The cost of living has risen six-thousandfold , life expectancy for men has dropped to 57 years and 60 % of the population earns less than ECU 500 a month .
This gap in living standards is a very serious threat and in Finland we have wished to meet that threat by peaceful cooperation and neutrality .
To us , military tension in the north would mean an increase in insecurity and for this reason we have wished to maintain our neutrality .
If NATO is enlarged to include Poland , the Czech Republic , Hungary and Slovenia , it will still not reach Russia 's borders .
If NATO is enlarged to include Finland , then it will .
In proposing the merger of the EU and WEU , Mr Tindemans is trying to get Finland and other neutral countries into NATO by the back door .
Mr Tindemans and Mr Titley , in their report , advocate a common defence and a common military complex .
These reports would turn a civilian union into a military union .
Some large countries seem to be pressuring the Finnish Prime Minister into approving the merger of the EU and the WEU , but the Prime Minister 's position does not have wide support in our country .
We Nordic MEPs from several countries have agreed on a joint explanation of vote , in which we express our hope that this report will be rejected .
Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur on his thought-provoking report on European external and internal security policy .
I shall concentrate on internal aspects .
The threats and dangers we face today from terrorism and the activities of organized criminals in drug-trafficking and other areas are extremely far-reaching .
Coming as I do from Northern Ireland , I am very conscious of the network of international terrorism and terrorists ' ability to bypass and defeat cross-border controls , and to get round whatever security Member States and the European Union try to impose .
Their weapons of death and destruction are brought into our environment .
It is of little consequence if they bring material for making bombs or weapons for shooting and killing : the threat of terrorism creates fear and instability in our communities and gives rise to total insecurity in those communities .
It eats away at the very fabric of our society and creates suspicion , tension and distrust .
The European Union cannot ignore such a challenge to its position .
If there is to be trust and respect , it must come from all Member States .
They have to face up to the threat that international terrorism presents to us all in the European Union .
This is a problem that will not disappear .
It must be faced head on .
Some Member States have not covered themselves with glory in these matters in the past .
I now turn to the matter of drugs . In my area this problem has not loomed large , but drugs have become a massive problem in society .
We need stringent controls and inspections .
We have to protect our people from this danger , from those on the outside who wish to destroy our societies and our young people .
In conclusion , I support this report as far as it goes , but there is a lot more that should be done .
There are many challenges ahead to combat the many and varied attacks on our society .
We must do all we can to bring about a society in which we can all live together .
Madam President , Mr Tindemans ' report on the common security policy of the European Union is welcome .
I feel like saying ' at last ! '
Surely it is about time the peoples of Europe took hold of their destiny ?
Or should we always continue to leave our security in the hands of Mr Bill Clinton ?
Contemporary history demonstrates every day that European and American interests are usually different .
So the role of world policeman cannot be reserved exclusively to the Americans .
I am glad Mr Tindemans , who was an enlightened Foreign Minister in my country , Belgium , insists on a strengthening of the operational structures of the WEU , on better cooperation between the European Union and the WEU , and on the creation of a European military and civilian peace-keeping force .
As my French grandmother , who was also Dutch-speaking , used to say , ' Wie geen put graaft oor een ander valt er zelf in ' - which translates as ' if you do not dig a hole for the other fellow , you are liable to fall into one yourself ' .
I also subscribe to the rapporteur 's determination to make the Mediterranean countries respect the relevant UN resolutions , which the State of Israel obstinately ignores .
Finally , I share the opinion that control of migration from the southern shores of the Mediterranean depends on improving the standard of living of the inhabitants .
However , I deplore the excessively important role NATO is still expected to play in the security of our peoples .
I think it would be more appropriate to strengthen the WEU and enlarge it to include the countries of central and eastern Europe .
And to end , I would like to express regret that this report has overlooked an internal danger threatening several Union countries : the rise of separatist forces , which Belgium is experiencing , as everyone knows , but Spain , Italy , even France and the United Kingdom are not spared either .
Madam President , first I want to express my appreciation for Mr Tindemans ' report and announce that the Spanish socialists are going to vote for it .
Our main reason for doing so is that Europeans , who have made war on each other for centuries , can formulate and develop a joint security policy for the first time , based on responsibility and solidarity , instead of each seeking individual hegemony .
There is another important reason : the Intergovernmental Conference is about to conclude and we are seeking to apply a Treaty on European Union which establishes common citizenship , the single market and the single currency . With money and life in common , it is striking that we are so reticent about establishing common security when that is the only thing that can really guarantee this Union stability and a future .
I think we should remember that our citizens ' main concerns are employment and security - domestic security , of course , but external security too .
And there is also another fundamental reason : now the Cold War is over , we Europeans cannot systematically delegate responsibility for our protection and security to a partner and protector , however strong and powerful .
We must shoulder our responsibilities .
And our first responsibility is to stabilize the continent of Europe .
We have a passion for self-flagellation and regularly recite the litany of our failures as a European Union .
What we never say is that we need to stabilize the Baltic , we need to stabilize the Mediterranean , we need to guarantee security in Central Europe , we need to show solidarity when there are problems on the borders , and recently there have been problems in Italy and Greece , and there is anxiety - which has been expressed here - in Finland .
There is only one way to do all that : as the old saying goes , unity is strength .
That is the specific justification for concern about security policy - and a security policy which is all-inclusive and pacifist , but credible too .
Just as health policy cannot be based on prayer or rain dances , but needs hospitals and doctors , security policy will only be credible if we all support it with all our strength .
And this means integrating the WEU finally into the Union , as affirmed in the Maastricht Treaty , and developing our capacity for mediation and peaceful intervention , supported by the strength that comes from solidarity and union .
Madam President , Mr Tindeman 's report makes a very constructive contribution to the debate on security policy and to its development .
Several months ago President Clinton met President Yeltsin in Helsinki to discuss European security policy .
This was not a bad thing in itself , but we must be mindful of the risk that European security policy will be decided over the heads of Europe .
Weakly developed co-operation in this area means that Europe 's contribution is becoming more and more fragmented and the opportunity for influence is being reduced .
There are obvious large scale advantages within security policy which , through increased co-operation , could be better used to strengthen Europe 's role and the opportunity to make our own contribution .
Point 7 of Tindeman 's report states ' ..... the natural solidarity between Member States in itself constitutes an important factor of security in as much as it acts in synergy with the security guarantees provided under the WEU and NATO and from which states of the European Union which are not members of those organisations already directly benefit ' .
This is true but in order to avoid misunderstandings it ought to be pointed out that those countries which are not full members of NATO or the WEU are nevertheless not trying to hitch a ride .
Sweden has maintained an extensive defence organisation which has had a stabilising effect in Northern Europe .
Swedish defence spending per capita has been higher than in many other countries .
If we look at the current situation there are further opportunities for these countries to contribute to security policy through active and perhaps even imaginative co-operation within the framework of the Petersberg agreement .
Expanded co-operation within the Third Pillar to combat organised crime and terrorism is to be welcomed .
Membership of the EU , participation in the PFF and association with the WEU will give those countries which have remained outside military alliances greater experience of participating in a co-operation with mutual obligations .
The report includes a separate section on the Baltic region .
The Baltic countries and the EU can make an important contribution in this sensitive area by creating various networks , some of which may even take the form of military co-operation , in order to increase regional security .
Several such initiatives are already underway .
The new security policy conditions which have ruled since the end of the cold war have given rise to new debate even in Sweden .
There have been considerable changes in Sweden 's attitudes to co-operation , even military cooperation .
In his well balanced report Mr Tindeman is facilitating this gradual but obvious change and I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must join the chorus of compliments and congratulations addressed to our rapporteur , Mr Tindemans , for this very important own-initiative report , which comes at a key moment in our foreign policy .
If the Union really wants to preserve , sustain and strengthen stability and peace , we must take urgent and unambiguous action to define our common foreign and security policy - a policy which is really able to function , and one which addresses the question of defence , especially as regards disarmament , conflict prevention and the creation of trust .
The Union must contribute not only to the stability of the European continent and the neighbouring regions but also to that of the Baltic Sea region , the Mediterranean basin , the Middle East and the Black Sea region , with a view to guaranteeing the continuance of peace , basing its actions on the principles of the CFSP and also on the principles of the United Nations Charter .
In this connection , I would stress how important the Mediterranean is to the security of the Union , as was previously made apparent on the occasion of the Barcelona Conference .
We would do well to create security structures in the Mediterranean basin which supplement the existing Euro-Mediterranean agreements , improving the economic and social conditions and , in particular , controlling the immigration flows and the trade in armaments .
My fervent hope is that the Intergovernmental Conference will lead us to conclude an agreement designed specifically to endow the European Community with the necessary machinery for the implementation of a genuinely common foreign and security policy , an agreement concluded jointly between all the Member States and thus a credible and practicable one .
It is important , in any case , that our actions should be co-ordinated and complementary and consistent with other Community policies , since a single foreign policy measure or a single development co-operation policy measure or a single humanitarian aid measure may produce results quite different from what we would like and what we have agreed .
Madam President , I entirely accept the Tindemans report , especially the points which the rapporteur has made in his speech today , and I regret that we have had to remove the section on defence policy .
I really cannot understand this reluctance , since I believe it is a question of seizing an historic opportunity : the opportunity of being able to hope legitimately , for the first time , that by applying common European decision-making structures and capabilities we can make the use of force to achieve political goals impossible .
That is our historic opportunity .
All the Member States , including those which are neutral , should therefore participate in this common foreign and security policy , including the defence dimension , because that represents the great step forward .
The benefits of neutrality , which is important to us and which has a long tradition , pale into insignificance behind the great hope and the broad security dimension which the CFSP can provide .
We can ensure that Europe 's power is used to pursue the peacemaking objectives of the United Nations , the OSCE and the European Union itself .
I am therefore in favour of the neutral Member States also participating in the common foreign and security policy , and of the merging of the EU and WEU .
I am in favour of cooperation between ourselves and NATO , but I also believe that security cooperation with Russia must take priority over expanding NATO .
Security in Europe is not possible in opposition to Russia , but only in collaboration with it .
Madam President , I would first like to stress the importance of the Council 's essential absence in contrast to the parliamentary consistency of Commissioner Van den Broek , who continually reminds us of it .
This ultimately downgrades Parliament 's debate to a coffee-house discussion , and the Bureau in particular should take some measures to demonstrate Parliament 's power to the Council .
My second point is that on the Committee on Foreign Affairs I witnessed the effort made by the rapporteur , Mr Tindemans , to produce a report with broad support , to stress that there are points which merit our active support , such as the issue of political solidarity , and the defence of the frontiers and territorial integrity of the Member States .
Thirdly , along with the whole of my Group , I too would like to say that overall , I oppose this report and will not vote for it because in my opinion , despite its initial intentions , it ultimately downgrades the principle of political security , but rather , favours easy recourse to military security .
Other colleagues have raised the question whether we could deal with Yugoslavia or Zaire without military measures .
My answer is yes .
It would be yes if there were any appropriate , correct and level-headed political intervention by the European Union and the Member States , if it were not for the superficial and very rapid recognition of the former Yugoslavian republics or the support by Member States of the European Union for the degraded Mobutu regime in Zaire , when perhaps the political security we ought to support would have given us much better results .
Madam President , in the light of the Union 's lamentable foreign policy performance , especially in the Balkans , the need for Europe 's people and politicians to pull together in the security field , to install more rapid and effective decision-making mechanisms , and to speak with one voice on the international stage is greater than ever .
The report by Mr Tindemans provides an excellent basis for this .
Naturally , this issue poses a particular challenge to those Member States which are still officially neutral .
In Austria , the current security debate among the government parties somewhat resembles the confusion of tongues in Babel .
The pronouncements of those responsible change virtually every day .
It is dishonest , populist and improper to tell one 's own citizens that it is possible to join NATO and still preserve a modicum of neutrality .
It is improper to look for a free ride in terms of security policy from the other Member States .
We cannot call on our EU partners for solidarity and support when we have a crisis , and then invoke our neutrality when another country needs our help .
Austria has to make up its mind !
The Freedom Party is the only Austrian party with a credible and honest policy in this respect .
We are a very reliable partner in any sensible projects which form part of European integration .
Madam President , Mr Tindemans is to be congratulated on the diligence and intellectual rigour with which he approached this contentious subject .
However , it is to be deeply regretted that so many of my group 's amendments were rejected at the committee stage of this report .
There are a number of reasons why Labour Members of this House are unable to support the report as it stands before us today .
We all agree that the Common Foreign and Security Policy must be strengthened .
The nub of the problem is how this can be achieved while ensuring a broad consensus amongst EU Member States .
Mr Tindemans ' report on a common security policy for the EU contains some unacceptable elements .
The reference to qualified majority voting to joint actions under the CFSP goes beyond the position of the Socialist Group and the new British Labour Government .
Nor is it appropriate , in my view , to refer to the EU undertaking peace-restoring missions as distinct from peacekeeping and peacemaking operations .
The emphasis on maintaining the EU 's territorial integrity and an economic security clause designed to secure the EU 's communications and supplies implies a defence capability for the European Union .
This is confirmed in the explicit reference to establishing a European core of civilian and military units responsible for ' keeping and restoring peace ' .
With respect , this is not the message this House should be sending to the Amsterdam Summit in June .
It is unfortunate because there is much in the report to commend .
This includes references to disarmament and arms control , nuclear nonproliferation , inequality and protection of the environment .
But on balance it is impossible to agree with important sections of this report .
The Tindemans report has laid down the parameters for debate although I and my group - and especially the Labour Group of MEPs - still await a report on security policy more in tune with Europe 's aspirations for peace and security in the next millennium .
Madam President , the Tindemans report comes at an opportune time , six weeks before the end of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Should this report be defeated in the House , the European Parliament would appear in a very poor light , since it would then have missed an opportunity to gain a hearing and to be taken seriously on a key aspect of European policy , namely foreign and security policy .
We should welcome any politically realistic positions adopted by Parliament which ensure that the common foreign and security policy does not remain a hollow phrase .
The Tindemans report considers in a balanced way the need for arms control and nuclear non-proliferation , as well as the Union 's capacity to act .
Its central message that the protection of the Union 's territorial integrity must form part of the CFSP , possibly leading to a common defence policy , represents a quantum leap for European security policy - from a non-binding ' may ' to a binding ' shall ' .
We also support the gradual integration of the Western European Union into the EU , and the dovetailing of the WEU and NATO that is required , as well as the incorporation of the Petersberg missions into the EU Treaty , since this would underpin the credibility of European security policy .
Austria does not wish to be a beneficiary of European security policy , but is keen to play a full part in that policy .
I therefore very much hope that the Tindemans report not only gains support in the European Parliament , but also helps to foster the debate in Austria itself on our country 's security policy position as a future full member of the WEU and a member of a newly reformed NATO , so that it can play its proper role in Europe 's security order .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Tindemans on the fact that his report has at last made it to a plenary debate .
I consider that the division of the report into two parts is a successful solution .
I am pleased that , in the discussion in committee , the report 's security policy aspect broadened and became more diverse .
In spite of this , as a member from a neutral Nordic country , I am unable to approve all its details and I cannot give it my support .
The debate going on in the EU about security policy is made more difficult by the widely differing promises on which it is based .
With some people , the thought uppermost in their minds is federalist theory and its concomitant objective that the EU should become a great power with a single defence policy and defence .
I am one of those who criticize the EU 's foreign security policy from a practical point of view and wonder what security threats we are actually faced with .
There is no sign of a military attack on the horizon .
On the other hand , our security may be endangered by the uncertainties arising from the development of Eastern Europe and particularly Russia .
These threats cannot be removed by transferring the EU into a military union and a military great power .
By these means we might even aggravate them .
We can overcome these threats only by tightening pan-European cooperation .
Finally , I hope that all members will support my amendments aimed at ensuring that the Barents Sea area is given the place in the report which it deserves .
Madam President , in the one minute I have at my disposal , I should like to say that anybody talking about security policy in Europe today should wonder , first , about the dangers involved for Europe 's peoples by the rationale expressed by the report , according to which , if an external policy is to be reliable , it should not exclude a priori any solution concerning how it is to be implemented .
In other words , the European Union is openly threatening the use of arms to impose its will , and this indeed , by means of autonomous activity .
Secondly , nowadays who needs cold-war organizations such as NATO and the Western European Union and their enlargement ?
From whom do they wish to protect the values - as they say - and fundamental interests of the Union ?
Madam President , Europe 's peoples have no need of an international police force , but what they need is policies to address the very acute economic and social problems of our times in accordance with the interests of the peoples , and collective security institutions for the peaceful solution of differences without the threat or exercise of violence .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Tindemans ' report attracts our severe disapproval .
Not to repeat my colleague Mr de Gaulle 's excellent remarks on defence , the fundamental element of national sovereignty , I shall content myself with observing that what Mr Tindemans is advocating is the total integration of our nations into the Atlantic system of internationalist coercion .
And to drive us faster down this road they top it off by playing the good old refrain about the spirit of the treaties going beyond the letter of the treaties .
Although we are not yet bluntly told that the Member States must submit or resign , the fact is the spirit of what is being said is not far away from that .
But the most extraordinary thing is the introduction of the famous dogmatic incantation condemning so-called racism and xenophobia .
Mr Tindemans mentions popular discontent giving rise to reactions of racism and xenophobia .
Mr Tindemans is partly right : there is popular discontent , and it is increasingly strong .
But this discontent is in fact swelling against genuine , authentic , violent racism , which no-one here wants to recognize .
One very recent example of this took place at Montfermeil hospital near Paris , where groups of young people , to put it politely , formed themselves into a veritable commando ; not a prayer commando like those who are fighting abortion , a commando of louts , come to terrorize the patients and care staff for two hours .
Every day , Mr Tindemans , police stations are set on fire , fire engines are attacked , there is extortion in the schools and knife attacks - which ought to cause as much outrage as the one by an immigrant against a Minister of Culture . Poor children are knifed for not handing over their watches or jackets immediately , and it is never mentioned .
You see , Mr Tindemans , the man who is talking to you and the movement he is part of , are total strangers to racism .
Did you know that ?
Two black West Indians are on the central committee of the National Front .
One of them , my friend Stéphane Durbette , the youngest regional councillor in France , was beaten up , left for dead and sent to hospital , because a Socialist / Communist commando regarded him as genetically defective .
That is racism .
My three Indo-Chinese godchildren tell me about the racism they observe , not from the old French , but from communities which detest that quiet community of Vietnamese people who love France .
Many of the 3 , 000 orphans or destitute children I was concerned with during fifteen years of civil war in the Lebanon , tell me of their fears .
They tell me , they write to me : ' the same thing will happen to you in France as happened in Beirut ' .
You make timid mention of the tensions in the southern Mediterranean ; are you blind to fact that the atrocious and inexpiable struggles of the Algerian civil war , with throats cut as prescribed by the Prophet in the Koran , may spread to the millions of Muslims with dual nationality who live in my country with no sense of being French first or wanting to be ?
Every day , politicians are expelled from certain quarters , and not just from my movement . ' You do not belong here ' they are told .
It all started like that in the Lebanon .
Shortly before the fall of Constantinople , Mehmed II addressed these words to Constantine XI : ' both shores of the Bosphorus belong to me , the Asian shore populated by our Ottomans , the European shore because you are incapable of defending it ' .
Madam President , the European Union was changed when three non-aligned countries acceded in 1995 .
At the same time those three countries , by accepting the Maastricht Treaty , declared their political alignment to the principles of the Union .
Scandinavia would have looked totally different if the Swedes and the Finns had joined NATO or were to join in the foreseeable future .
We are looking forward to peaceful collaboration with the Baltic area and with a Russia grappling with the problems of a changeover to democratic and legally binding structures .
The Tindemans Report ostensibly dealing only with security seems partly to believe that security in Europe is enhanced by military means .
It therefore contains a glaring omission .
Security for all of us is dependent not only upon developments in Russia but also in the Ukraine and Belarus .
Presupposing aggressive Soviet intentions , for which there may have been some basis in the past , was the rationale behind NATO and Western European defence .
The situation today is radically different .
Enlargement of the Union is the best means to enhance security .
The NATO option is not .
Nor the idea , which crops up from time to time , of making the WEU part of the Union .
This said , proposals in the report for enhanced efficiency in peacekeeping and peacemaking missions are welcome and in line with the initiatives taken by the Swedish and Finnish Ministers of Foreign Affairs .
The Tindemans report , despite its many qualities , is a poor compromise .
Finally , there are quite a number of translation errors in the Finnish text of the report .
Peacemaking , for instance , is translated as rauhanhieronta which in English means peace massage .
I hope we do not need to go to a massage parlour in order to live in peace and security .
Madam Chairman , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his thorough work and calm approach to the development aspects of a common security policy at EU level .
The great achievement of the report is that it approaches the idea of security in a broad sense .
It is also important to stress that the ordinary citizen does not measure the significance of security issues solely in military terms .
The threats which citizens feel to their security are now primarily non-military in nature and relate , among other things , to environmental threats and nuclear safety .
The Treaty on European Union sets out the objective of a common foreign and security policy which may in future lead to a common defence .
There is no natural common European consensus about the real significance , interpretation and implementation of this objective and this should be more widely acknowledged .
The theoretical difficulty in shaping the future of security policy is of course obvious , because those involved differ widely in their objectives and resources .
A good example of this difficulty is the varying status of the EU countries in their relations with the Western European Union .
For this reason , the unilateral adoption of the Maastricht Treaty does not create a fruitful basis for further discussions .
Finland and Sweden have proposed in the context of the IGC that the WEU 's role in developing the common foreign and security policy should concentrate on crisis management tasks .
Mr Tindemans has also very tellingly stressed the tasks referred to in the ' Petersburg Declaration ' , which Finland and Sweden seized on in their proposal .
The theoretical approach to military security issues set out in the Tindemans report is either its strong point or its failing , depending on your point of view .
I hope that the very heterogeneity of the parties involved would lead to the terms being defined extremely carefully when talking , for example , of the Baltic region .
It would also be good to put some flesh on the bones of the strategic partnership between NATO , the EU and Russia , in place of the current terminological debate .
Mr Seppänen referred to the Nordic countries ' point of view .
This point of view is not , however , uniformly shared .
In Finland the debates on security policy , membership of the WEU and of NATO , divide opinions not only along party lines but within parties .
I support Mr Tindemans ' report , because I regard its basic assumptions as being to the advantage of Europe and Finland .
I hope that Finnish public opinion will also take notice of this debate .
Madam President , Mr Tindeman 's report is totally unrealistic !
There is no real basis for a Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Member States do not share the same outlook or policy interests .
The differences have been made clear for example during the Vietnam War , over the South African boycott , concerning Turkey , the Balkans , nuclear weapon policy and so on .
To create a sham agreement in these circumstances can only mean that the voices of the smaller Member States will be hushed , they will be outvoted , and some countries will be turned into satellites of the super powers .
In fact , the creation of regional blocs destabilises global security .
It increases the risk of aggressive and expansionist policies , for what we are talking about are expansionist policies and a new colonialism if the EU were to adopt the right to intervene independently with military force in countries outside their own territory .
Global security means rallying around a global organisation .
The United Nations , alone , is the people 's true forum in the work for peace and security .
Mr President , I shall be voting in favour of Mr Tindemans 's report , because I believe that it is only right that we should send a message to the Intergovernmental Conference and that message can only come from a Parliament which is pressing forward towards a common security policy .
Having said that , I do feel that the message - through no fault of yours , Mr Tindemans - is a weak one .
We are trying to talk about security and defence , but we lack the essential basis of the existence , or otherwise , of a European Union foreign policy .
That is the real problem , our real difficulty .
I would like to call upon all Honourable Members - and every persuasion is represented here , from one extreme to the other - to consider that we shall only achieve real maturity when we stop debating whether or not we should have a foreign policy , a security policy or a defence policy , and get down to the serious business of debating what that Union foreign policy should be .
I would say to all the Member States , large and small , and to every group and every Member of this House that believing that a foreign security or defence policy is beneficial to some and not to others is mistaken .
It is beneficial to the Union of peoples , the Union of States ; when we come to debate what form such a policy will take , then we will have truly grown up .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , reading the Tindemans report has left me with some positive impressions .
I am thinking here of paragraphs 20 to 32 , which describe the tasks relating to peace and stability .
I have also taken particular note of the reference to the Baltic .
The second point I welcome is the discussion of the joint analysis centre , and the third is the agreement on the so-called Petersberg missions .
I do not care greatly for paragraph 6 on the European corps and paragraphs 33 to 38 involving the defence policy .
The Western European Union and NATO should not be set up as two parallel , rival institutions .
I am extremely concerned that we must learn to walk before we can run , as the saying goes .
We must not develop the WEU in such a way that it becomes an integral part of the Union .
There is indeed reason to welcome the cooperation which has been established in the Baltic between Member States , non-aligned countries and NATO countries .
Through this cooperation - the partnership for peace - the Baltic battalion has also been created , which has therefore been possible without an actual Union army .
As regards the Balkans , I would like to say that there is still a greater need for peaceful economic efforts than for military ones .
This debate reminds me that we cannot even agree on a simple statement on human rights in China , so how are we going to be able to agree on a common foreign and security policy which has a military element ?
Mr President , Mr Tindemans is a champion of a common foreign and security policy in Europe , and in this respect we can and must support his report and congratulate him on it .
Our group 's support would have been even greater and more heartfelt if the following points had been taken into account . Firstly , the CFSP must be a common policy for all .
The neutral Member States , those bound by conventions and those abstaining in some areas must therefore also be given the opportunity to integrate into the CFSP .
Secondly , it must be quite clear that the civil components of the CFSP take precedence over the military components .
Military action has to be a last resort .
The civil components must be at the forefront .
And it must also be quite clear that pre-empting and preventing conflicts takes precedence over resolving them .
Thirdly , it must be quite clear that ' out-of-area ' actions should be carried out with the greatest care and only under the aegis of the United Nations or the OSCE .
Since a rapid military intervention force has been mentioned , it must also be quite clear that while we do need such a force , at the same time we need a civil corps whose task is peace-making in the broadest sense of the word , and which is not tied to the military components from the outset .
And I would repeat here , on behalf of my group , that while we welcome the progress on this issue , we are hoping for more impetus in this direction in the future .
This will undoubtedly not be our last debate on the subject , and we shall be holding further talks with Mr Tindemans and other colleagues in this context .
Mr President , I should like to begin by adding my congratulations to those already addressed to Mr Tindemans on his report , which has appeared at a very timely moment just before the Amsterdam summit and the important decisions on security to be taken at the NATO summit in Madrid .
I should also like to thank you for inviting me to attend this debate , since I am aware that the impetus needed for the process of developing a security policy should really come from the Council rather than the Commission .

Having said that , however , I would point out once again that the Commission has clearly set out its views on the future of the European Union 's common foreign and security policy in its report to the Intergovernmental Conference .
It goes without saying that , as the guardian of the Treaties , the Commission has no intention of dissociating itself from what the Maastricht Treaty says about the common foreign and security policy .
Mr Tindemans began his speech by referring to this , and all the Member States , both old and new , have given an undertaking to develop a common foreign and security policy and , in time , a common defence policy that could eventually lead , as the Treaty says , to a common defence .
I quite understand why Mr Tindemans felt obliged to refrain from discussing the defence aspects in this report , in view of what he rightly feels is their sensitive and controversial nature .
However , he also announced - and this is something I wholeheartedly support - that Parliament would be having further discussions on the subject of the defence policy at a later date , and I very much hope that I shall be able to attend that debate .
An integrated foreign and security policy naturally involves more than just the defence component .
The military aspects also affect the operation of our external economic and socio-economic policy and can therefore help to promote stability .
Everything the European Union has done in recent years in its external relations in the form of association agreements , partnership agreements and modernizing its cooperation agreements with the Mediterranean countries , everything it has done to strengthen relations in its immediate strategic environment , such as with Central and Eastern Europe , the Mediterranean , the Middle East , the Russian Federation and Ukraine - all this directly concerns its security policy .
I entirely agree with all those who have talked today about the need to pursue a policy of peace by economic means as well and to remove the socio-economic causes of instability , and I think that this is a field where the European Union is already doing a great deal for the outside world .
But where the Union visibly and tangibly fails is in the area of crisis management .
It uses its cooperation with other countries to do whatever is necessary to prevent crises , but if prevention fails , what then ?
Is the European Union , a world economic power , then left powerless ?
Is it incapable of organizing a rapid armed defence force when even the Security Council agrees that it is a good idea to send such a force to provide humanitarian aid for Albania ?
At such a time , the European Union clearly fails .
A great deal of attention , though never enough , is given to crisis prevention , but up to now we have never really wanted to give ourselves the instruments we need for crisis management and control .
The most glaring example of this happened recently with Albania .
Why did it have to be a practically anonymous force - and by that I mean a force put together on an ad hoc basis under the inspired and expert leadership of the Italians - why did it have to be this anonymous body that was sent in with the approval of the Security Council and the cooperation of the OSCE , rather than a force under the flag of the Western European Union ?
Because there was no political agreement , despite the fact that the practical possibilities were there : and just look at what is happening in Albania now .
This is the clearest possible illustration of the fact that the European Union does not need to turn itself into a world policeman or a military superpower to rival the United States .
The real question is whether the Union wishes to give itself scope in its common foreign and security policy to accept responsibility and take the initiative at international level when its own strategic environment is being destabilized .
I think it is extremely useful to examine this whole question and how best it can be resolved in future as an integral part of the comprehensive discussions on the future of an enlarged European Union .
I think that today 's debate on this issue has been a very useful start , and I sincerely hope that there will be a followup , based perhaps on what I hope will be very positive results in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is absolutely clear that the Union can never have a credible common security policy , let alone a common defence policy , if it does not first have a credible common foreign policy .
There are already proposals on the table , as the Baron Crespo report that we are to discuss later today underlines .
All in all , I think we have a great deal to discuss on this whole issue , but I am delighted that Mr Tindemans has set the ball rolling with this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon .
Defence-related industries
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Titley ( A4-0076 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on the challenges facing the European defence-related industries , a contribution for action at European level ( COM ( 96 ) 0010 - C4-0093 / 96 ) .
Mr President , first of all I wish to say how much I regret the fact that the Council has not seen fit to be represented during this morning 's important debates .
To turn to my report , at 7 o 'clock in the morning in the 1989 European elections , I was stood outside the Royal Ordnance Factory in Patricroft in Eccles in my constituency .
I was handing out my election leaflets to the hundreds of workers who were changing shifts .
By the 1994 European elections that factory had closed , another victim of the contraction of the European defence industry , which has seen some four out of every ten defence jobs disappear in the last ten years .
Now had that contraction had been simply the result of the peace dividend , the consequence of the very welcome ending of the Cold War , most people would simply shrug their shoulders and say that , regrettably , it was a price worth paying for peace and stability .
The situation , however , is not as simple as that .
Firstly , because the fall of the Berlin Wall has not led to peace and stability in Europe - rather it has led to a different sort of security environment .
Secondly , while it is true that global defence expenditure has gone down , this has not stopped the Americans from increasing their dominance of the world defence market .
Their large single market and single procurement agencies for the army , navy and air force have provided a favourable background for a radical restructuring and rationalization which have seen the creation of huge and powerful defence giants like Lockheed Martin .
European companies are being left trailing further and further behind , shackled by our fragmented structures , with fifteen different procurement systems and competing national industries which often duplicate the production of very expensive equipment .
We do not even buy from each other : only about 4 % of EU procurement comes from intra-EU trade , whilst 75 % of Member States ' imports come from the United States .
Now why is this important ?
Well , to begin with , the defence industry accounts for about one million , mostly very high-quality jobs , often to be found in the most vulnerable regions of the European Union .
The health of other industries often depends on it , for example , 70 % of military equipment sales comes from the aerospace and electronics industries .
It is a major technology driver in the European economy and , at its best , it is highly competitive .
The defence industry is of self-evident strategic importance .
If we become dependent on imported equipment , we risk not only compromising our security , but also undermining our ability to fulfil our international obligations under global security arrangements such as NATO , a point underlined last year by Admiral Norman Ray , the Assistant Secretary-General of NATO .
For all these reasons it is vital that EU governments recognize that the European defence , industrial and technological base is a vital strategic asset and that its maintenance is essential for the future of European security and defence .
I realize that this is a very sensitive subject : there are ethical concerns .
My report , however , is not about whether or not we should have arms but rather about where the arms we think we need should come from .
Nor does my report advocate giving public support to the arms industry , rather I argue that the industry should be open to the demands of the market .
My report is not anti-American : a viable European defence industry would be better placed to cooperate , as well as compete , with the Americans .
There are also , naturally , concerns about national sovereignty .
Hence my report deals only with the existing security architecture and does not advocate new EU powers .
I am , frankly , less concerned about who does what institutionally and more concerned about getting action taken .
The contribution Europe can make here is to identify a Europe-wide problem and to recommend Europe-wide solutions .
For that reason I congratulate the Commission on its communication , which is to be welcomed .
It has focused attention on the crisis facing the industry .
Now we need action .
Firstly , economic action : we need to break the shackles of national preference and open up the defence industry to the discipline of the single market .
Of course , account has to be taken of the sensitive nature of some parts of this industry , but greater competition will lead to considerable savings for the taxpayer .
We need to allow the industry to restructure through mergers , so that genuine European companies can emerge .
For these things to happen , Member States have to agree not to invoke Article 223 for internal EU activity , but to use it only to ensure reciprocal trading arrangements with third countries .
Nothing better illustrates the problems facing us than the contrast between the speed of American restructuring and the long agonizing of the French Government over the future of the Thomson Company .
There is also to be a political framework for the industry to operate within .
Amsterdam clearly has to identify and clarify the objectives and functioning of the CFSP , as well as the nature of the European defence identity in the light of the Petersburg and Berlin declarations .
We then need , through the WEU , to explore the operational implications of those declarations , and we need to ensure that there is a proper forum for defence ministers .
Recent years have seen some promising developments in arms cooperation , with the evolution of the WEAO and the Joint Organization for Armaments Cooperation .
Progress has been generally very slow , however .
Impetus could be given to the process if Member States were to adopt a joint action on armaments cooperation under Article J.3 of the Maastricht Treaty , and we need more synergy and less duplication in this area .
Finally , the different national regulations governing arms exports are a major obstacle to industrial cooperation .
The EU has already agreed eight criteria on arms exports .
Now we need to agree a common interpretation of them and then they should be turned into a legally-binding code of conduct .
No one should be in any doubt about the crisis facing the defence industry .
We need decisive action now by European Member States before it is too late .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate the Commission on this initiative , because we believe it has really cooperated as an institution to identify and put on the table a highly important and sensitive issue for the economy , and not just the Union economy .
I also want to thank Mr Titley for his magnificent report and for having reflected the feelings of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , incorporating virtually 90 % of the suggestions and conclusions of our committee .
The diagnosis of the situation in the armaments industry made by the Commission and the rapporteur is quite right .
It is a very important sector - 3 % of industrial GDP - providing significant employment ; there is major dependence on the United States and a distinct absence of intra-Community trade ; dispersion and lack of concentration weaken the industry 's position .
The reasons we are in this situation are partly attributable to the absence of a common defence policy , but not entirely so .
Of course , differences in procurement policies in the largest Member States and the absence of a common foreign policy or arms export policy are due to the lack of a common defence policy .
But there are other causes , like mergers requiring government authorization , differences between the States as regards ownership and the way this relates to the arms industries , and the absence of the transnational legal structures to permit such mergers , where there are still opportunities for action by the European Union .
We think the issue can be presented in this way and we agree with the rapporteur that the European Union should take steps with a view to putting the industry in a strong position to cooperate when a real defence policy comes into being .

Amongst the areas of action , many of which Mr Titley has already mentioned , I would like to stress two very specific points : the first is the use of the structural funds in the process of restructuring the defence industry under the Community industrial restructuring policy , and the second relates to research and development , where the European Union has a wide remit and which accounts for a large part of its budget , and coordinating all the programmes involving the defence industry or associated civil industry .
Mr President , the reduction of defence expenditure in the Union 's Member States , and consequently , the corresponding reduction of expenditure on defence research and technology , combined with the fragmented nature of the Western European defence market , have left the European defence industry in a situation of stagnation .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy was asked to respond to the Commission 's questioning of the extent to which the framework programme could help to revitalize the defence industry without putting its non-military aims at risk .
The answer concerns , first , the technological framework that influences defence research and , secondly , the framework within which the European Union 's security policy is outlined .
The framework for security is created by the demographic pressure that favours small systems of military organization based on professionals and volunteers , the need for the Union to compete in research and development with the USA and the Far East , and international competition to secure energy resources .
In addition , to address the future of Europe 's defence industry , we cannot ignore factors that will determine the mission of military systems , such as peace-keeping , the protection of energy resources , the suppression of blackmail and terrorism , surveillance , counter espionage and recognition at world-wide level .
Granted that in the future it will be difficult to define special weapons systems able to deal directly with the widespread dangers faced by the Union , covering the technological needs of the military sector is likely to demand a zero-reserve policy which will enable incorporation of the products of general research into new weapons systems , depending on the dangers emerging at the time .
In the technological context , where political technology is more advanced than military technology , defence capabilities depend on the reorganization of the technological dependence of the defence sector .
Based on the above , the question arises : to what degree should the fifth framework programme aspire to support collaboration between military and non-military activities .
The European Commission 's positive response and its proposals , though well-intentioned , are in the opinion of the Committee on Research and Technology rather inappropriate .
And this , because they imply the restoration of the importance of an armament economy , even though the peak technologies are becoming more and more non-military , and at the same time overlook the limited resources of the framework programme which make it inappropriate to seek new research links between the military and non-military sectors .
In conclusion , Mr President , I want to stress that the fifth framework programme could on the one hand continue to devote resources to research and technologies of combined utility , and on the other hand , help to convert defence-related industrial research installations .
Under no circumstances must we consider redirecting the Community 's research towards defence-related aims in particular .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Titley .
His report essentially endorses the Commission communication , from which it can be concluded that the Commission and its communication can be supported .
European arms policy has two dimensions : a strategic and an operational dimension .
The Tindemans and Titley reports are therefore linked and complementary .
This is the strategy which I am glad to say has been deemed appropriate .
European arms policy has both a strategic and an operational dimension because it is an essential part of the common foreign and security policy and also the common defence policy called for in the Maastricht Treaty , and it is therefore an urgent necessity .
Much of what we are debating today was decided with the adoption of the Maastricht Treaty .
It is now a question of implementing it .
The industrial aspect is especially important , because as everyone agrees - some welcome the fact , the majority do not - the European arms industry is fragmented , depressed and subject to the constraints of ever tighter budgets .
For the European Union and those Member States which have an arms industry , a European arms industry appears to be the only possible way of withstanding American competition in this sector in the long term .
European external trade is faced with a crucial choice : to abandon the arms industry , or to pursue new opportunities .
Shall we relinquish it to the United States , or perhaps to other countries that are filling the gap , such as South Africa , Russia or the Czech Republic , or shall we take up the challenge ?
Far beyond the arms industry , this is a crucial question for the external trade of the European Union , as well as Germany - if I may be allowed a brief national remark - the United Kingdom , France and other Member States .
However , this report is also an opportunity for the European Parliament , which is the only effective , democratic body able to discuss this issue in European terms and put forward European recommendations .
And despite the many concerns which have been expressed , I am confident that it will seize that opportunity .
Parliament must safeguard the Member States ' independence in the military and foreign policy areas .
It must call for conditions to be defined and measures to be taken that will enable the Member States to ensure the rationalization , organization and preservation of a competitive industrial and technological defence basis in Europe in relation to defence products .
This basis must be freely accessible to the participating Member States .
That , in short , is what should be said from the point of view of external trade .
We are well aware that the European arms industry is increasingly losing its competitiveness .
Anyone who wishes to reverse that trend must support the Titley and Tindemans reports today .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate the Commission on this communication and Mr Titley on the work he had to do to achieve maximum consensus and link in the various opinions from the committees involved .
I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs and I shall refer exclusively to institutional issues , but before I do I would like to make one comment : can the concepts of common armaments policy and European defence identity be separated from each other ?
I do not think so .
I believe it is a political decision , not a dogma , but we can hardly talk about a European defence identity without including a common armaments policy , because common armaments policy is an integral part of that European identity .
When we go back to our constituencies and our fellow-citizens ask us why Europe did not intervene in Yugolavia , why we have not intervened effectively in other parts of the world - I am thinking of the Gulf War , why we have to depend on others , one of the many reasons is that there is still no European identity and one of the fundamental ingredients is common armaments policy , so we must change our position on these issues .
Consequently , what needs to be done in the institutional area , Mr President ?
Article 223 of the Treaty of Rome allows Member States to take such measures as they consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of their security , including producing and trading in weapons , munitions and war materiel .
The way Member States have interpreted that article of the treaty consists of looking for some general principle whereby all areas relating to national security fall outwith the scope of the treaties .
So article 223 has been the great outstanding question of the treaty .
What needs to be done now ?
I think Parliament must act firmly and call for the deletion of article 223 , but I do not think this issue is currently on the table for the Intergovernmental Conference .
Hence our amendments , Mr President : first we ask for common armaments policy and a common European defence identity to be treated as one issue .
And at some stage in the future , and this is one of the amendments tabled to the Titley report , article 223 will need to be revised in order to achieve integrated production , trading and monitoring of armaments .
Secondly , we ask the Commission to initiate consideration of article 223 and in particular , to amend the list attached thereto , which has not been changed since 1958 .
And thirdly , Mr President , we also ask for the WEU to be incorporated by stages into the European Union , another fundamental factor for achieving what we all want , a Europe of tomorrow speaking with one strong voice and guaranteeing the freedom of all Europeans through its security policy .
Mr President , I should firstly like to congratulate Mr Titley on this report , on behalf of my group .
He himself knows how much effort it sometimes took to find common ground , but the central message of this report - that the European arms industry must resist the hegemony of the US arms industry - is the right one .
It is not that we wish to see the creation of monopolies , which then dictate prices to the Member States .
Europe must be very careful to ensure that a common arms industry does not turn into a set of monopolies with a dominant market position .
However - and after all , this report was dealt with by the Committee on Foreign Affairs - we cannot talk about the arms industry and arms cooperation without outlining the general context , which I see as follows .
Firstly , there is the question of disarmament .
It is not possible to talk about the arms industry and arms cooperation without declaring support for disarmament - as expressed by Mr Titley - throughout its various stages and especially , of course , in cooperation with Russia , since disarmament has to be a joint project .
Secondly , there is the very important question of controls on arms exports .
Efforts are being made in this area , but in view of the conflicts in a great many regions of the world , in view of the large number of dictatorships which unfortunately still exist and which sometimes use armaments against their own people , Europe , which has already laid down a number of appropriate criteria , must ensure that these criteria are strictly interpreted , binding and , of course , applied not only to Europe but to the entire world .
The legal and illegal export of armaments to crisis areas costs countless human lives , and often results in Europe subsequently being forced to combat its own weapons .
Consequently , there is a need for increased controls , and ultimately penalties for arms exports , especially to crisis areas , dictatorships , and so on .
Thirdly , and this is another important point , we are not going to see a process of rearmament that gives a general boost to the arms industry .
There is a need for sensible conversion programmes .
A UN conference on this subject was held recently .
Europe can serve as an example in this field , since part of its arms industry has already been sensibly converted in civil programmes .
I see that as a very important complement to the common armaments policy in Europe .
It must be made clear that the European Community is committed not to rearmament , but to disarmament , as I have already said .
We are strongly in favour of European arms cooperation , but we do not wish to see disarmament taking place at the expense of Europe and European workers alone .
In this sense , we are unequivocally in favour of sensible arms control and sensible arms cooperation on European territory .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is probably the first time that Parliament has discussed the arms industry , which is examined in Mr Titley 's excellent report on which I congratulate him .
It is a response to a Commission document , and having heard what Commissioner van den Broek had to say , I should like to thank him for his excellent speech .
I think that his words and everything that has been said in this debate , and in the Titley report , show that we are gradually moving towards agreement on a common security and defence policy to support our common foreign policy .
Progress is slow , but I think we will succeed in the end thanks to this excellent document .

In his report , Mr Titley says that a common foreign and security policy is really divided into three sections : a political section , a military section and an industrial , scientific and technology section .
That covers everything .
However , I would stress that arms cannot be regarded just like any other products or commodities .
A country may depend for its very existence , freedom or independence - though let us hope that it never happens again - on having weapons to defend itself or whatever it holds dear if it is attacked .
We therefore need to consider what our requirements are here in the European Union .
This is extremely important .
If we have to depend on other countries outside the Union , we can have no credible defence , since we can only buy whatever they are selling rather than what we really need .
It is also true , as many people here know - though I entirely agree that we must work towards disarmament , and I think we can achieve more if we have a common policy rather than all acting individually - that the armaments industry in Europe cannot simply be closed down if we want to have products that meet our requirements , but it is in grave danger at the moment .
There is a great deal of competition at European level , and we in Europe can no longer compete with what other countries are producing - I will not say which ones , but you all know .
So it is a particularly delicate issue , not just for defence , but also from the socio-economic point of view , since jobs are involved , as well as in relation to the arms trade and so on .
It is all very sensitive , but I think it is handled very well in the report .
There is not enough time to quote from the report , but Mr Titley also refers to some other very interesting aspects , such as our defence profile and relations between the European Union and the Western European Union .
I do not wish to go into this in detail , but these considerations could be very useful in future when we come to discuss defence policy .
So we in my group think that the Titley report in response to the Commission communication is an extremely important document .
There are many concerns to be taken into account : economic interests and employment , defence , disarmament - which is a goal we all share - and peace , which we all wish to help to achieve .
We therefore intend to vote in favour of the report , provided that nothing goes wrong in the meantime .
We are delighted that Parliament has been able to discuss such a sensitive issue , and we hope that we shall achieve a successful outcome .
Mr President , I feel sure that high-profile debates like these on the Tindemans and Titley reports increase our awareness and sense of responsibility with regard to a common European foreign policy .
Until such time as that policy becomes a reality , though , the defence industry must progressively and pragmatically move away from the national approach and adopt European programmes and rules .
Among the new European-inspired rules which I feel I must support is the principle of standardizing the common rules governing the purchase and exporting of defence hardware .
I also have no doubt - a point which is made in the reports - that we need to achieve and accept a technological interdependence between European States in matters of defence , which is a political project as well as a technical argument .
I believe that the criterion of a fair return on industrial investment in common European programmes should not be completely abandoned but should be integrated and quantified over broader time frames and planning scales .
I believe in - and support - the idea of a European Armaments Agency with technical co-ordination functions , similar to the European Space Agency , which would arrange multi-speed - if I may use that term - optional development programmes from which all concerned can derive some benefit , in some cases as reference shareholders and in others as minor but fully involved participants .
Finally , I believe it is inappropriate - and this is a suggestion that can be considered during the further course of the debate - to separate the defence industry completely from the aerospace industry .
After all , the two sectors often involve the same participants , and it seems to me that a logical process of European consolidation - squaring the circle in this sector , if you like - will be easier to achieve if all the players are at the same table and all their cards are on it .
Mr President , there is one sector of industry in Europe , the defence industry , which is facing considerable difficulties .
The reason for this is something which has been the most joyous event which has happened to us in Europe and in the whole world , namely the fall of the Soviet Union and with it the end of the cold war .
The demand for weapons is thankfully no longer what is was before the Iron Curtain fell .
But security in Europe is still dependent on access to weapons , which we Liberals well understand .
If Europe is not to be totally dependent on imports our countries must co-ordinate their research , development and production of defence material .
This is the basis for the Commission 's communication and the foreign committee 's report , a report which has been drawn up well by Mr Tindeman .
It is worth noting that increased co-ordination of defence material in Europe will , inevitably , lead to increased mutual dependency .
This must be recognised and accepted by all concerned .
Co-ordination of the European defence industry will be facilitated by growing unity based on the content of a Common Foreign and Security Policy .
It is worth noting that co-operation within the defence industry will itself act as a driving force and increase the need for a Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Article 223 needs to be revised and conditions created for common rules on export restrictions for European weapons , the implementation of which can be controlled .
In this way , Mr President , the world should see the more united Europe as a force and a partner for freedom , peace , security and common security .
The report which we are discussing is a step towards this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's 1996 communication ignores the close link between defence / weapons and national sovereignty and seeks to apply the principle of free competition to weapons for the sake of competitiveness .
The report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and security goes further , with a common arms policy and the revision of the treaty article on the essential security interests of each Member State .
For its part , the French government is restructuring the weapons industries , planning to cut 50 , 000 to 75 , 000 jobs , and privatize key sectors , despite the strong opposition of the employees and inhabitants of the areas involved .
Active militants for peace and disarmament , the French Members of Parliament in the Confederal Group of the United European Left - Nordic Green Left defend a military doctrine guaranteeing freedom and security against external threats .
We oppose restructuring and privatization measures and demand the maintenance of national capacity , which meets only 5 % of military orders , and its diversification into civilian industry , notably in the aeronautics , space and electronics industries .
At Community level we oppose any European defence policy which is bound to make us vassals of the United States .
We favour development of cooperation between the arms industries and research , and we call for the establishment of genuine Community preference .
Mr President , on the eve of the Amsterdam summit , Parliament is debating the Tindemans and Titley reports , two elements of a new foreign and security policy - or rather a military policy .
There is repeated reference to concepts such as a defence identity , or the Petersberg missions that we are obliged to carry out .
That means nothing more than making strike forces available for intervention .
A qualitative change in EU foreign policy is taking place here .
The European Union , hitherto a civil organization with its enormous single market , is now organizing itself into a hegemonic power .
This is perhaps the point of no return .
A defence identity in relation to whom ?
The Cold War is over .
Europe is still heavily armed , and if it wishes to protect itself against organized crime or arms smuggling , it needs not military forces , but police forces to do so .
Mr Titley said it clearly : this is about creating acceptance for the arms industry , so that it can determine foreign policy .
There is a need not for a defence identity , but for a European identity , for our citizens to accept the Europe that we wish to build on civil foundations .
For future intervention under the Petersberg missions , however , we need new strike forces , new ships , new satellites and the future large aircraft .
Four years ago , Mr Titley , you tried to set up a budget line for the future large aircraft .
This report is the key to ensuring the swift introduction of budget lines that enable the European arms industry to gain access to the EU budget .
Who is going to pay for that ?
We do not have the money in the social sector .
There are cheaper defence products , and we know from the MEDA programme that the funds made available to us there for such things as civil foreign policy , development policy and proper conflict prevention are inadequate .
A final word concerning democratic trends .
Mr Kittelmann referred to this .
The Intergovernmental Conference and this report are leading to the creation of a new Council of Princes of the Holy Roman Empire , in the sense that the EU Council of Ministers determines and controls foreign and military policies and ultimately approves the relevant funds .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since the fall of the Berlin Wall , we have gradually been making progress towards international agreements on reducing nuclear weapons and a total ban on chemical weapons .
I am wholeheartedly in favour of coordinating arms production , but our real goal must be to achieve further reductions and to increase the growing peace dividend .
I was initially pleased that a British socialist was to be the rapporteur , since I hoped he would be familiar with the history of his own party .
Labour was always the pioneer of the broken gun .
But instead I was completely amazed when I read his report .
As far as he is concerned , the armaments industry is an industry like any other , with all the bogus arguments which this implies .
Arms production , I read , is of vital economic importance in creating jobs , including in the supply sector .
He complains about the unequal balance of trade , unfair competition and the development of powerful equipment with the best possible price / quality ratio .
What really takes the biscuit is paragraph 24 of the resolution , where he says that Parliament believes that the restructuring of the armaments industry will result in greater value for money for the European taxpayer .
How cynical can you get ?
Next , there is the arms trade .
The SIPRI report from Sweden gives an annual overview of the trade in conventional weapons .
Mr Titley is wrong when he says that the end customers are always governments : in point of fact , many of them are dictatorships .
The report also does not say a single word about the massive trade in second-hand weapons , or the widespread practice of selling handguns in sections or as technical equipment .
There is no comment about the widespread practice of transit trade through friendly countries or countries involved in conflicts .
Arms are not washing powder .
They must be covered by strict codes of conduct , with an annual report to the European Parliament .
I shall therefore be voting for the amendments tabled by the Green Group , and if they are not adopted , I hope this report will be consigned to the rubbish bin where it belongs .
Mr President , the report by our colleague Mr Titley has the double merit of emphasizing the radically new character of the international context surrounding arms policy today and rehabilitating the notion of Community preference in this very sensitive domain .
It is a shame the draft resolution departs from the premises of the explanatory statement .
The new context is the fierce competition from American producers of defence equipment faced by European business .
This aggressive competition threatens to lead , in the future , to the disappearance of industries vital to our security and the independence of our national defence policies , if Europe allows the high-tech weapons sector to become the monopoly of a single power .
Although defence remains fundamentally a national prerogative and certainly not calling existing assets - which are considerable - into question , the massive cost of the new arms programmes should , however , lead us to identify the real common needs , determine what can be produced better together than by each alone , and what should be purchased jointly .
It is not a case of systematically Europeanizing all armaments production , as the resolution proposes .
On the contrary , the Member States should learn the lesson of the failure of many past attempts at cooperation - recalled by my colleague , Mr de Gaulle - and only engage in programmes corresponding exactly to needs , with a determination to complete them by making the necessary financial effort .
As well as producing together when it is necessary and possible , we should also purchase in common , buy European , practice European preference , in order to prevent certain Member States - as was again the case recently - purchasing American military equipment rather than European equipment of at least equivalent technological level and lower in cost .
The Titley report contains positive elements , but unfortunately it will not be possible to vote for it , because there are gaps in it , and because of its systematic approach and the federalist philosophy which underlies it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Titley 's report is based on the economic pillars of increasing efficiency , reducing costs and improving coordination and international competitiveness .
It should therefore be greatly welcomed .
Mergers of arms companies within the EU improve their competitiveness , especially in relation to US companies , which have been putting massive pressure on the European arms industry since the end of the Cold War .
On moral grounds , it is completely unacceptable for us to increase the production and export of armaments , on the flimsy and cynical pretext of securing jobs .
However , we should as far as possible manufacture ourselves those armaments which we definitely need for the protection of the European Union and its citizens - for military and economic reasons , as well as in view of the extremely tense jobs situation in the EU .
From Austria 's point of view , it could be asked whether the harmonization of arms export regulations called for in the report does not represent a further strategy - deliberately veiled from the Austrian people - for the progressive dismantling of its neutrality , and whether it would not be more honest to come clean with the citizens of the EU 's neutral states and allow them to decide whether or not formally to give up their neutrality in a referendum .
Mr President , the Commission communication , and consequently Parliament 's report on the arms industry and arms cooperation , have come at the wrong time and are guided by the wrong principles .
I should therefore like to express the misgivings of the German social democrats on this subject .
There must first be an agreement on the concepts of common security and defence before there can be any moves towards arms cooperation of a kind that can meet our demands , namely to encourage the disarmament that will produce the peace dividend which people have been expecting since the end of the Cold War .
The communication and the report are geared to arms production rather than conversion , to rearmament rather than disarmament .
At a time when the world is waiting for conversion projects for the arms industry and for clear signs of disarmament , these documents equate the competitive advantage of the arms industry with the competitiveness and viability of European industry as a whole .
In my view , that is not what is required .
What is needed is investment in conversion research and conversion projects .
In the end , no industry requires such a high level of capital investment for each job as the arms industry .
We should be supporting greater investment in environmental technologies , civil technologies and new materials , rather than in arms cooperation , because that will not generate the jobs that we are led to believe will be created .
Moreover , I believe that there is a tremendous danger that arms cooperation at European level will produce monopolies which will then be able to dictate fictitious prices for defence products to governments .
Also , undertakings which produce non-military goods will be exposed to cut-throat competition , because subsidizing the European arms industry for civil production as well will give it a competitive advantage over such undertakings .
I also believe that there is a great risk that arms cooperation of this kind will clear the way for an expansive export policy , and that competition between the European Union and the United States will jeopardize the adoption of a restrictive arms export policy in the EU .
In my view , therefore , this report fails to set out a forward-looking strategy for the European Union .
Mr President , Mr Titley has written an important report .
The European weapon 's industry faces a huge challenge .
Many companies have problems of profitability and restructuring is necessary .
The weapons industry has a special role to play in the security policy of individual countries and of the Union as a whole .
Equally the industry must , in the long term , operate under the same conditions as every other industry .
Attempts to support the defence industry using State aid costs money and makes it harder to maintain the right quantitative level on defence .
Company aid also tends to reduce industrial efficiency and leads to demands for ever more extensive aid input .
Besides , this is not just a question of money but of expertise as well .
Modern military technology requires more and more expertise .
It requires an ever increasing level of advanced electronics and gigantic information handling systems .
The boundaries between civil and military research are becoming much less clear .
One of the difficulties which the European weapons industry has is the fact that there is not the same background of research at elite universities as there is for the weapons industry in the USA .
Without going into issues concerning universities , I would like to point out that much of the USA 's advantage in this respect stems from the fact that the universities there are open to competition in a totally different way from the enormous state Universities in Europe .
This has led to greater efficiency in research and in the training of researchers .
The US advantage in the fields of electronics and information handling is clear to see and this has also given them precedence when it comes to new weapon systems .
US superiority has revolutionary significance for foreign and security policy , not just for their adversaries but also for their allies .
For defence material to be operational between defence powers there is a requirement that the material is made to the same level of quality .
We need to be bolder within the framework of European co-operation if Europe is not to become an even more of an inferior partner in the long term .
The Green group have put forward a number of proposed amendments to the Titley report .
If such negative views win approval , the USA 's hegemony will be further strengthened .
We must be careful that we do not reach a state of specialisation which means that the USA supplies the machines , in other words the weapons and Europe supplies the people , by which we mean the soldiers .
Sweden has a large weapons industry producing such specialised weapons systems as military planes , submarines , robots and artillery .
This investment is based on the fact that Sweden 's non-aligned policy requires that we are independent in this respect as well , or at least that we have sufficient capacity to be a suitably advanced co-operation partner to be able to buy the most modern equipment which we do not ourselves manufacture .
It has become even more difficult for Sweden , as well as for other European countries , to maintain such a broad weapons industry .
It is easy to express support for Mr Titley 's proposal for an action programme to make the European weapons industry a more competitive force and to contribute to security in Europe in this way .
Mr President , first of all , Mr Titley should be thanked for addressing this far from pleasant but absolutely fundamental issue .
This is an industrial sector which is frequently beset by crises .
It is one in which - to be quite frank - there are very often scandals .
However - and I would address this comment to our colleagues in the Green Group - as long as we need a military defence capability , there will have to be an arms industry .
As long as we are sensibly working together here in Europe , it is also necessary to organize European arms cooperation .
All this has been said repeatedly .
However , there are three points which I should like to stress .
Firstly , disarmament is of course the paramount issue .
We have overcapacity .
The aim of a common European arms policy must therefore be to reduce this overcapacity in an orderly way .
Secondly , we must pursue the goal of easing the pressure on public budgets .
It has frequently been the case in the past , and is probably still the case , that defence contracts are awarded purely on economic or employment policy grounds , and not with the primary - and sensible - aim of improving defence structures .
My third point concerns arms export policy .
A common European arms policy is a prerequisite for an export policy guided by the following principles : no arms exports to regimes which violate human rights ; and no arms exports to regimes which are totalitarian in nature or pursue aggressive policies .
Clearly , this is only possible if we conduct arms policy jointly ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , it seems that for the Commission a revolver is the same thing as a loaf of bread and a destroyer is the same thing as a hospital .
Because in the Commission 's communication on European defence industry there is only a single idea : to remove the distinction between warlike military production and non-military production , and on the basis of that general idea , to give the green light to the Community budget , the research programme , the structural funds , export policy , and the review of the Treaty itself .
I think this is a dangerous step , which only generates surprise , puzzlement and sadness , and which I think has made the European Parliament look like a room in the Pentagon today , or a chamber of multi-national military industry .
This must stop .
It is sad that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has pursued this path , and I would like to tell Mr Titley that the Labour Party , with its tradition and values , brings some hopes .
Let us not extinguish them so soon .
You told us that your area is one with a defence industry .
We understand that , but just think about an Italian colleague from the South of Italy , in an area where the Mafia has businesses : what should he do ?
I think that at the Conference of Mr Coates next week , you will find proposals concerning employment for your area too , much more interesting than those contained in your report .
Mr President , the two reports which have been discussed here this morning should set alarm bells ringing for most European citizens .
It is quite clear that we are setting up a military superstate within the EU with its own arms industry .
I know that Mr Titley is a lobbyist for what I would call ' the merchants of death ' .
There is no mention of the fact that British Aerospace , for example , is responsible for arming Indonesia with Hawk jets so it can terrorise the people of East Timor .
Now he wants the European taxpayer to contribute to the arms industry .
If this is our only answer to the EU 's unemployment problem , we have a long way to go before launching any kind of humane policy .
There is no word here that EU arms supplied around the world are the cause of many of the disputes which we talk about settling .
There is total hypocrisy as regards this Parliament and what we discuss .
Mr Titley is out of step with his own Foreign Minister who said that he wanted to clean up the UK 's international arms export reputation .
It is quite clear that by the discussions here today we are setting up a European military state with its own arms industry , and neutral countries such as Ireland should be well aware of this .
I am most disappointed with the briefing from Ireland 's Permanent Representative .
It glosses over what is actually being discussed and what is happening .
Do you want your children to be involved in industries that are responsible for the persecution and death of so many people around the world ?
Mr President , I congratulate my colleague , Mr Titley , on a concise and well written report .
There are two things in the last ten years that have put immense pressure on defence-related industries .
The first one is the demise of the Cold War and the second is the advent of the CFSP .
Clearly the demise of the Cold War has created tremendous pressure because of reductions in demand from EU countries for weapons in particular .
There has been a phenomenal reduction in jobs in the defence industries as well as in research and development .
In addition , companies face fierce US competition which threatens their survival .
This means that there has to be some restructuring of these industries across Europe .
With regard to the CFSP , if we want a Common Foreign and Security Policy in Europe and we want that genuine choice , then we have to maintain a European defence infrastructure .
I take exception to some of the comments both on my own side and from the Greens with regard to this issue .
We do not need any lectures about this , because it is quite clear that unless we maintain our own defence industries and defence infrastructure then all we will end up doing is buying American weapons and being totally dependent on the Americans for our defence .
Secondly , it is important that we maintain this industry as well because it is an important technology driver which feeds into the civil markets and produces many valuable products , enabling us to enjoy a high standard of living in our Western European Union countries at the moment .
What we need is a genuine single market in defence .
We have to improve intra-Community trade in this area so that we do not become more and more dependent on the United States .
That means a common approach .
It means a common armaments policy .
This is not necessarily synonymous with the Western European Union coming into the European Community 's institutions , but it is synonymous with an approach of greater cooperation .
We need a legally binding code of conduct so that we can move forward in this very important area .
Mr President , the excellent report that is before us reminds us that European arms policy is based on two principles : one good and one bad .
The good principle is that this is an activity unlike any other and it requires a particular regime .
The bad principle is that its particular nature has sidelined the European dimension and confined the activity to a national context .
It is in fact a very special activity .
Arms are not products like any other products : they are products which cause death and bring independence at the same time .
The buyers are not like other buyers : they are rather few and they are nation states .
And then there is the political dimension .
Finally , because this is a sector , as we have said , experiencing profound crisis .
But , on the other hand , the fact that arms production requires a particular regime does not mean the dimension of Community cooperation must be rejected , quite the contrary .
There will be no protection for national industries unless there is more cooperation at the European level .
There will not be more cooperation at the European level unless there is a common definition of military needs .
There will be no common definition of needs if there is no common defence policy and no common foreign policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are faced with a very serious problem .
We must guard against two temptations .
The first is market place trivialization which would eliminate the political dimension of the business and would subordinate us to our great ally , the United States .
The second is nationalist withdrawal which would deliver the Europeans one by one to the voracity of the American giant .
Mr President , a lot was said just now about the technological problems linked to the defence industry .
I would like to speak very quickly on this point for the minute I am allowed .
First of all , I would point out that the technologies are essentially linked to the capacity for deterrence , they are also linked to the capacity for disarmament , and hence the best contribution that the framework research and development programme can make to these two problems obviously depends on the development of generic technologies which are essentially dual technologies . However , that should not suggest that the framework programme for research constitutes a sufficient instrument .
It represents very little in the research and development effort of the Community as a whole , so the intergovernmental programmes must take up the slack .
I would also like to remind the rapporteur and the Commission that it will not suffice to open up the arms industry to competition , because competition is the short term .
And where arms and disarmament are concerned , investment necessarily represents the long term .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur most sincerely on his report . I appreciate that he has tried to present a sober and objective report , since this is unfortunately a subject which sometimes gives rise to heated debate .
I should like to make four comments . Firstly , I agree with the rapporteur that Europe has been lagging behind developments in a number of areas , with the effect that it can no longer keep up with its competitors in this hightech sector .
The gap between European and US defence technology has been steadily widening , and even Europe 's leading defence companies are scarcely half or a third of the size of their American counterparts .
Secondly , with regard to NATO enlargement towards the east , it would appear that in several cases , Europe has already missed the boat .
Some of our future partners in the alliance are already upgrading their military technology with non-European help .
Thirdly , I wish to stress that the question of export controls remains extremely important , but that controls alone are not enough .
We need to combat the illegal trade in arms effectively , because we are implicated in that trade .
Let us just consider the conflict regions and crisis areas in the developing world , or in the former Yugoslavia , where illegally acquired anti-personnel mines made in Italy have been found , for example .
Fourthly , the European Union accepts its role in conflict settlement and crisis prevention , but this also means ensuring the personal protection of the troops in question with coordinated and high-quality weaponry , so that they can carry out their tasks effectively .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Titley for the excellent work he has done over the past year on this report .
I am grateful to him for supporting the approach set out in the Commission communication and our efforts to establish an EU arms policy .
I would stress once again , as Mr Tindemans also indicated , that the whole point of this discussion is not whether we need armaments , but how to obtain the armaments we need .
It is also clear that the Maastricht Treaty requires us to work towards a common foreign and security policy and , in time , a defence policy , and I would point out that for the Commission , this also includes an armaments industry policy and a policy to harmonize exports and imports .
I would add straight away that the reductions in the defence budget are a welcome development made possible by the ending of the Cold War .
Who could possibly object to that ?
But at the same time , these cutbacks mean that we are increasingly having to join forces at European level in order to maintain and afford the expensive technological innovations needed , which we have to do if we are to remain competitive on the international market .
However difficult it may be to think of the armaments industry in purely economic terms , we cannot accept that the Union should make itself too dependent on what other countries produce for this vital area of its activities , and in this context it has to be said that there is a severe imbalance in the transatlantic arms trade .
Establishing a European market in defence-related products will help to improve efficiency in the sector and thus bring costs down , which in turn will benefit the defence budget .
Europe needs to develop its operational capacity in the field of conflict prevention and management , unless we prefer to leave the whole issue of conflict management to non-Union countries .
Supply and demand on the arms market are rightly governed by special rules which give governments an exclusive role , and those governments are principally guided by stringent requirements in terms of security and foreign policy .
But the economic dimension , as I have already said , makes the provisions of the EC Treaty relevant here too .
The internal market rules already in force could therefore be used as a basis for devising rules for the armaments sector , or another possibility would be to apply the existing rules as they stand , but making allowance for the special nature of the sector .
The Commission communication describes the measures which the European Union can take in the short term .
It is vital that it should be possible to adapt these to take account of the special nature of the armaments sector by using procedures and instruments combining the first pillar on Community policy with the second on the CFSP .
There are already precedents here , such as the EU export rules on goods for dual use , which include a regulation based on the Treaty of Rome but also providing for Community action on the basis of the CFSP .
We support the Dutch presidency 's proposal to the IGC specifically requiring the CFSP to be underpinned by an armaments policy .
This should form the basis for the Union 's work on the various instruments based on the EC Treaty .
As we know , the WEU 's Western European armaments group , to which 13 NATO members belong , is responsible for cooperation on armaments , and this cooperation needs to be further encouraged .
The Commission 's communication also discusses this .
Finally , just a brief word about exports .
The rapporteur quite rightly stresses the complexity and importance of the arms exports issue .
The Member States have widely diverging interests and sensitivities in this field , and the national governments guard their sovereignty very jealously .
Community criteria have been laid down for arms exports , but responsibility for their implementation remains exclusively with the Member States .
No progress has been made on the alignment of policy and prices .
The motion for a resolution calls on the Commission to produce a white paper on this subject as the first step towards a legally binding code of conduct for arms exports , and we welcome this as a very constructive proposal .
I should like to thank the rapporteur and all the other speakers for giving me the chance to take part in this debate , and I hope that the IGC will produce a new constitutional basis for dealing with this issue on a more practical level .
It is time to take action , and up to now , as far as the Commission and the Council are concerned , very little progress has been made .
Let us hope that this can be rectified .
Mr President , I really think something needs to be done here . If we are debating a report and the Commissioner is speaking when people start to come into the Chamber for the next debate , you cannot even hear what he is saying .
Could we not show a little more respect for each other in the House , please ?
Thank you very much , Mrs van Putten .
You were more successful than the President in doing that job because everyone has heard you now .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Votes
Mr Chairman , yet another translation error has appeared in the Finnish translation .
It uses the terms ' waste ' and ' waste water ' when referring to cattle dung and urine .
I should like the correction of the mistake in the Finnish language version to be noted in the minutes .
This error occurs in at least three different proposals .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Before we continue with the voting , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo wishes to speak .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
I would like to alert Parliament to the presence in the gallery of a group of Algerian women candidates in the forthcoming Algerian general election .
They represent two causes strongly espoused by the European Parliament : participation by women and democracy in Algeria .
( Prolonged applause )
Mr President , I should like to ask that when this text is translated into all the official languages , particular care should be taken to make it clear in each language that the term ' practitioner ' covers a range of people who are entitled to act in this capacity , and not just doctors .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I should just like to say a few words before we vote on Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 .
Mr Väyrynen tabled these in order to have the Barents Sea included in the Baltic Sea region , and I have found that a number of Members do not agree with this .
They say that there is not a common border , while others reply that there is cooperation .
The issue has never been properly discussed .


On the basis of the contacts I have had , I should therefore like to propose that we adopt the new Amendment No 3 , which puts the Baltic Sea region and the Barents Sea together , and that we reject Amendments Nos 2 and 4 in order to avoid putting too much emphasis on this .

So we adopt No 3 , but not Nos 2 and 4 by the same author .



I should like to propose this , and I think we should have a good majority in favour .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
It is extremely welcome that the Conciliation Committee has now succeeded in reaching an agreement on the guidelines for telecommunications networks .
The disagreements between the institutions on procedure and the method of approach have been settled in a satisfactory way .
I particularly wish to emphasize how important it is that the area of satellite communications has been included in the guidelines , not least thanks to the efforts of Commissioner Bangemann .
I am quite sure that the new guidelines will provide a sound basis for the subsequent negotiations in this sector .
On 7 June 1995 , on the basis of Article 129d of the Treaty , the Commission submitted the basic proposal for a series of guidelines for trans-European telecommunications networks .
The aim is to establish the broad lines of the measures envisaged and to identify projects of common interest which will be eligible for financial assistance .
On 1 February 1996 the European Parliament adopted its opinion containing 35 amendments stressing the use of applications by the general public , social consequences of , for example , teleworking and the procedure to identify projects of common interest .
Neither the Commission nor the Council were ready to adopt the European Parliament 's view .
The same happened in the second reading and the conciliation procedure was opened with the result laid down in the above-mentioned report .
The agreement reached concerns by example : 18 EP amendments accepted by the Council ( wide use of applications , taking into account social consequences of new ( tele ) working conditions , language needs of regions ) ; identification of projects of ' common interests ' , which is now dealt with by Annex 1 to the guidelines ( and no more exclusively by the committee which is to be installed to advise the Commission and is recruited by Member State representatives ) ; certain projects of particular importance ( distance training , telematics for transport , environment and health ) .
As Greens we had proposed to incorporate strong provisions regarding the conditionality for employment-creating and social-targeted projects .
Likewise we had argued for a strong role for the European Parliament , identifying projects of common interest , which is quite weak .
We are , however , prepared to accept the conciliation text , because it contains at least some references to these subjects ( including provisions to peripheral regions and employment creation ; see Article 3 ) and stipulates that the Commission has to present an evaluation report to the European Parliament every three years containing the social and societal consequences of the projects launched ( Article 14 ) .
I should like to stress again that the European Parliament will be unable to fulfil its role in the democratic control of the transition to the information society , if this continues to be unduly sectoralized .
What is necessary for this overdue democratic control will be a general transsectoral framework directive for the guiding regulating principles of this transition .
Barthet-Mayer Report ( A4-0156 / 97 )
We would like to emphasise that we have voted for the proposal that road transport of animals should not exceed eight hours under any circumstances .
The loading and unloading of animals should be carried out with care , and the use of allopathic tranquillising methods during the journey must be banned .
We consider this to be a very important issue which must be taken further when the matter is discussed in the European Union .
Any other way of managing the transport of animals , other than what has been proposed above , is unacceptable .
We are dealing with the report by our colleague Mrs Barthet-Mayer on a proposal for a Council Regulation supplementing Regulation No 2092 / 91 .
At last , we might well say !
The Commission has not kept to the timetable , but it looks as if the BSE crisis has accelerated the process .
We can appreciate organic farming from a new angle , in the context of sustainable agriculture guaranteeing quality and safety for consumers .
So I support the rapporteur on the many positive points she has added to the Commission proposal .
Organic farming can take on the shape of innovative agriculture using renewable energy and materials , but all the same it must be surrounded by guarantees to assure its quality .
So a number of imperative rules must be established , in terms of both controls and methods of production .
Genetic manipulation must be entirely banned and healthy animal feed guaranteed , thus avoiding the notorious consequences of industrial scientists , closer to mad scientists than Nobel prizewinners .
Organic farming can represent a real alternative to intensive and industrial agriculture , which has sinned by excess .
It should be given support and a framework for development at European Union level .
The principal concern of agriculture as a whole today must be not the quantity but the quality of its products .
Organic farming should be upgraded to a significant production method within the EU 's agricultural policy as a whole .
A growing number of people want better quality food produced in a more ethically sustainable way than is the case with present-day high- efficiency farming .
In Finland , organic farming has been enabled , thanks to EU environmental support , to grow rapidly to the point where it now represents 5 % of arable area .
Our next objective should be the 10 % achieved by Austria , which is the result of a specially determined effort .
Unfortunately , the regulation on organic farming is too detailed for the widely differing conditions which occur in the Union .
The Greens tried to make it more flexible in many respects , but the enthusiasm for hair-splitting detail won .
In Finland , the transition period for the changeover from mainstream to organic farming is three years .
In the EU a much shorter transition period is going to be adopted , two years under the Commission proposal , which Parliament would like to shorten still further to one year .
The Greens consider that two years is the absolute minimum .
The most important achievement in Parliament 's debate on the organic farming regulation was undoubtedly Commissioner Fischler 's statement that he is prepared to approve Parliament 's demand for the banning of the use of genetically altered organisms in organic production .
Member States , including Finland , as well as the organic farmers ' organizations , have been very worried about the Commission 's unclear position on this point until now .
The Greens are in favour of increasing the Parliament 's decision-making powers in the Common Agricultural Policy .
The Group proposed that the organic farming regulation should be adopted on the basis of Article 100a ( internal market ) but a majority in Parliament rejected this proposal .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's proposal has far too many shortcomings .
The work by the European Parliament 's rapporteur and the committee responsible is , therefore , worthy of merit and I support it .
In view of all the media reports on how animals are transported and fattened up I welcome this proposal .
We must put a stop to the type of industrial handling of animals which currently prevails and which is totally unjustifiable .
This is one of the reasons why it is important to encourage farmers to change to more environmentally friendly animal husbandry methods .
But we must also be aware that the situation in the EU Member States in this respect varies enormously .
While Austria , for example , has made a lot of progress , other countries have not done so well .
I hope that this proposal will encourage these countries to finally take these issues seriously and to act accordingly .
This report is also important as a precedent .
It is the first time since I became a member of the European Parliament that I have seen such a concrete and ambitious programme to change this part of the EU 's agricultural policy for the better .
It is inadequate but it is an important step in the right direction .
Finally , I hope that the majority in the European Parliament will approve the amendment proposal which involves a ban on the use of genetic modified organisms in organic farming .
It is up to us , in the wake of the extremely serious mad cow crisis and the absolutely scandalous failure to sanction the European officials responsible for it , to restore consumer confidence about food of animal origin .
The development of organic farming can contribute to that , provided the rigorous efforts made for many years by certain countries like France are not undermined by the adoption of lax standards at European level .
In fact , up to now organic farming has only been regulated for vegetable products at European level .
This text extends the provisions of the 1991 regulation to animal products .
In the absence of a Community regulation some Member States have brought in legislation and others have not .
A certain number of countries , including France , are ahead of the rest : it is essential that they do not have lower standards imposed on them now than those they have already established , which have succeeded in gaining consumer confidence .
France has been working for over five years on very strict specifications to guarantee the reliability of organic farming products to consumers .
But this confidence would evaporate rapidly if the very demanding French market were to become awash , because of European policy , with organic products which were not really organic and which would not really differ in practice from traditional products because of very lax rearing standards .
Certain countries with highly intensive agriculture are putting on pressure in favour of lax standards .
We refused to vote for the amendments they have inspired because if they had been adopted they would have prevented farmers who respect strict standards remaining competitive .
We kept to Mrs Barthet-Mayer 's text and the Agricultural Committee 's amendments , which in our view constitute a minimum basis for guaranteeing that the efforts made so far by rigorous national producers should not be undermined .
It is also up to us to combat rural depopulation tirelessly and encourage any working methods likely to maintain a dense socio-economic fabric .
Organic farming can play a positive role in land management : it offers farmers , especially young farmers , an alternative which can maintain agricultural employment given the outlets demand for organic products could generate .
Organic products can be a significant development factor , notably in ecologically fragile zones , where the role of farmers in preserving ecosystems and biodiversity is particularly important .
They respond to a demand from consumers , and especially tourists , who are hostile to genetically modified organisms , eager for healthy , diversified , quality food products , and concerned about respect for the environment .
But it is essential for products originating from these sensitive regions to be backed by certification systems which are highly reliable in terms of quality and traceability , and which will facilitate the implementation of Community preference and constitute so many poles of resistance against the clean slate process represented by the GATT negotiations .
That is the path chosen by the Barthet-Mayer report and that is why our group supports it .
Amadeo Report ( A4-0146 / 97 )
Given the major advances in the scientific and technical fields which have led to the appearance of new methods of diagnosis and treatment , and given that we know the benefits and dangers of the use of ionizing radiation , it has become imperative that the European Community , within the scope of the powers attributed to it by the Treaty on European Union , namely Article 129 , should legislate in order to update Directive 84 / 466 / Euratom .
The changes must reflect the need :
to limit the use of ionizing radiation to where it is strictly necessary , in other words when there is no other alternative means of diagnosis of treatment either more innocuous or offering the same guarantees in terms of benefit for the patient ; -to demand that the Member States carry out the necessary controls and take responsibility for them , not only of the quality of public or private installations but also the establishment of quality guarantee programmes , aimed at assessing doses received by patients ; -to assume ' overall clinical responsibility ' for individual radiological exposure ( the number of and absolute need for examinations ) by health professionals qualified to carry out these examinations or treatment in accordance with national legislation.These are the reasons why I voted for this proposal .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to seek the support of the European Parliament for European funding to carry out radon surveys and in particular to seek financial assistance for national authorities to carry out radon tests .
It is vital that the European Parliament and the Commission recognize that radon exposure is a European-wide problem that merits the provision of EU funding .
A recent national radon survey by the Radiological Protection Centre of Ireland revealed that parts of the country , including large areas of Wicklow and the Cooley Peninsula in Louth , have a greater than 10 % change of being exposed to an unacceptable level of radon gas .
This is a major source of concern to the householders affected .
However , the cost of remedying this problem is a major stumbling block for householders .
It is my view that free radon measurements should be made available to householders living in high radon areas .
It is my hope that the Commission , perhaps through some of its research programmes , can make funding available to make this objective a reality .
There are many schools located in the areas with elevated levels of radon .
However , there is no national programme of radon monitoring for our schools .
Since children are generally considered to be at greater risk , I believe a national survey of radon in our schools should be initiated .
Additionally , there is as yet no monitoring of radon levels in workplaces in the worst affected areas .
Here again EU funding would be extremely beneficial .
The Irish Government too has a crucial role to play and should carefully examine the localised grant scheme that exists in Britain to help people measure their households for radon .
K. Collins Report ( A4-0109 / 97 )
Although we are voting in favour of this report we do not share the views put forward in points 12 and 13 of the proposal for the report .
We do not consider that issues concerning environmental legislation should be placed under the co-decision procedure .
This would involve increased supranationality in the European Union which we are against in principle .
We do not think that the European Parliament should be given more power .
The work on progressive environmental legislation will almost certainly be improved if we give Member States better guarantees than is currently the case that they may forge ahead with environmental reforms .
The issue Mr Collins deals with in his report is of the first importance , because without verifiable monitoring of correct transposition and application of environmental legislation , and compliance with it , part of this Parliament 's work would be sterile given the flood of complaints received every year about unsatisfactory application of , or non-compliance with , environmental law .
That is why this Parliament , and I personally , have repeatedly and for many years pressed the need to create a system of inspection at European level , precisely to ensure the application and implementation of that same environmental legislation , because there is massive incongruity and indeed frustration of democracy in legislating only for that legislation to be afterwards ignored or not complied with on so many occasions ?
As the rapporteur makes very clear , in many respects the development of Community environmental policy has lent significant impetus to the democratization of the Community , as one of the Union 's most popular policies .
This means our citizens participate actively in monitoring and shaping it .
So in drafting such legislation it is essential for the Commission to open a wide range of consultations to guarantee that it is fulfilled , and such legislation should always be the subject of co-decision procedure as called for in this important report .
I end by congratulating Mr Collins and trusting that the Intergovernmental Conference will shoulder its responsibilities in this area .
It is encouraging that the cause of the environment is gaining ground in all the EU institutions , but we must take care not to misuse this good cause by introducing unnecessary or bureaucratic rules without appreciating the possible consequences .
The proposal that each Member State should set up an environmental inspectorate , to be subject to monitoring and oversight by the Commission , would not appear to have been thought out properly .
Most EU countries already have similar inspectorates at national level which work in harmony with the Commission and other bodies .
I would warn against such ineffectual gestures .
The European Environment Agency in Denmark already cooperates extensively with the national authorities in the Member States .
I see no evidence of the need for us to set up 15 new national environmental inspectorates alongside this , subject to monitoring and oversight by the Commission .
It is crucial for the environment that environmental legislation works , and that the environment is given priority .
Today , the environment generally loses out in competition with commercial interests , and the actual implementation of environmental law in the Member States is very unimpressive .
In the area of environmental legislation , as Mr Collins indicates , there is a need for codification of the law , openness and further checks on implementation , and both individuals and organizations should be able to bring legal actions in the national courts .
The report seeks above all to raise the profile of the environment .
I am therefore voting in favour of this extremely important report .
Todini Report ( A4-0148 / 97 )
The EU education programmes are amongst the best of the good news stories from Brussels .
When they started in 1984 six thousand students participated in ERASMUS and in 1996 this had increased to a massive one hundred and seventy thousand young people .
I welcome this healthy trend and hope the numbers participating continue to increase .
The biggest problems which have existed from the beginning , and still persist , are the additional costs of travel and subsistence which must be met from family budgets , as well as the differences between Member States on the level of amounts paid .
This means that the students whose families cannot afford to subsidise them continue to be excluded .
This is unacceptable and impedes their mobility and the fairness of the whole programme .
The Commission and national education authorities must assess this discrepancy and provide us with comparative information from the Member States so that we may be able to respond to the real needs of the students concerned and increase the uptake of ERASMUS grants amongst poorer students .
The rapporteur has made an excellent list of the real problems faced by students , researchers , academics and others when they wish to realise their dreams in other EU countries .
The Commission has drawn a comparison saying that it is easier to move to the USA than within the EU which is why action is needed .
But we do not think that this comparison is valid .
There are many other reasons why so many Swedes , for example , move to the USA .
The comparison also shows that the USA and some EU countries have resolved the administrative problems involved through straightforward inter state cooperation which is why we think that these problems can be also resolved between EU countries through inter state co-operation alone and not by moving the issue up to the level of some supranational administration office in Brussels .
We do share the view that there are problems which must somehow be resolved .
But we think it unnecessary for the solution to have to involve a list of legal guidelines , positions and so forth .
We consider some of the points in the report to be unjustifiable .
This includes point 23 where the requirement ' ..... to facilitate repatriation of students and academics to their original countries following their stay abroad ' appears to be unfounded and totally unnecessary .
We also feel that there should be a section covering other countries in Europe which do not belong to the EU region .
We think it is extremely important to include these countries as well to make it easier for students and researchers from all countries in Europe to live in other European countries .
The Danish social democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the report by Mrs Todini on the Commission 's Green Paper analysing the main obstacles to mobility within the EU in the field of education , training and research .
We attach great importance to freedom of movement for both students and teachers in the education sector .
We must emphasize , however , that we have some reservations concerning the report when it comes to harmonizing social security benefits , providing tax exemption for research grants and introducing a European status for trainees .
We believe that it is important to dismantle the obstacles to mobility within the EU , but that this should only take place on a voluntary basis between the Member States , and not through harmonization of the rules at EU level .
The Commission should be commended on an excellent piece of work in drawing up this Green Paper .
Employment market mobility depends on many things , but I am quite sure that the new lines of action which the Commission is proposing will be a positive move in the right direction .
It is good to see that several of the existing programmes have already been a great success .
For example , the number of students able to supplement their studies in another EU country through ERASMUS has increased many times over .
I therefore believe it is very important for the Commission to use the proposals contained in the Green Paper without delay to create a European area of qualifications , so that we can develop the mutual recognition of academic courses by such means as greater use of credit transfer systems .
Tindemans Report ( A4-0162 / 97 )
The Treaty on European Union has made some advances in common foreign and security policy possible , but they have tended to be theoretical and insufficiently practical .
The European Union should get past the stage of incantations and clearly define its foreign policy and its ideas on security and thus implement a real policy of prevention , or indeed intervention .
This perspective is indispensable to the ultimate establishment of a European diplomacy . The Union must speak with one voice on the big issues and be capable of overcoming the traditions of the national diplomacies , with a view to guaranteeing and expressing the higher interest of Europeans as a whole .
So it is right to specify our imperatives for external security .
The obligatory counterpart of this external security policy is the strengthening of the third pillar , justice and home affairs , and it would be wrong to confuse the threats of various kinds with the interests of the Union in acting in all these fields .
It is also necessary to be able to anticipate crises outside the Union which might have consequences for the Union , and act accordingly with one voice , involving the Member States as appropriate .
This ambition is hard to achieve , but the Intergovernmental Conference must seize the opportunity it has available to provide the Union with a real common foreign and security policy .
The international credibility of the Union is at stake .
It is the only way the Union can present the world with an image of more than a single market without any other cement .
Eriksson , Seppänen , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Holm , Lindholm and Schörling ( V ) , Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen and Sandbæk ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) The undersigned have voted against the report for the following principal reasons :
1.The report represents a narrow ' Eurocentrist ' point of view and lacks a view of current global reality .
It is strongly marked by old fashioned power politics.2.Realisation of the report 's concepts of security policy would promote the division of the world into blocs and would develop a regional organisation in competition with the United Nations.3.The report 's proposal on the Union 's right to intervene in situations in other countries violates UN regulations and constitutes a danger to peace , stability and national independence.4.The report 's statement on protecting the Union 's ' interests and values ' stands out as highly questionable .
This represents an almost colonial attitude which places the Union 's values above those of others and means that other countries are at risk of pressure from the Union if they hold different values .
The word value is not even defined.5.The report demonstrates a serious lack of respect for the role and interests of the non aligned Member States .
The report 's security model is an undisguised attempt to make the smaller countries subordinate to the larger ones.6.It is unrealistic for the Union to speak with one voice in an international context , for this would involve suppressing free debate on foreign and security policy issues.7.There are no grounds for unified security and foreign policy in the Union .
Each country has vastly different interests .
This is demonstrated by the differing views which emerged over the years on the Vietnam War , South Africa , Cyprus , Turkey , the bombing of Libya , Croatia and Iran for example , and by the different stances on nuclear weapons and nuclear free zones.8.There is no European ' identity ' as such nor any European ' common destiny ' .
These are obscure , metaphysical terms.The countries of Europe should work to strengthen the UN and to promote a global perspective on security and stability .
There are powerful forces at work which wish to turn the European Union into a major power which would protect its interests in the world by force of arms .
This would be done by amalgamating the Western European Union ( WEU ) with the Union to secure a common defence .
Now there is also a desire to add to this structure a common policy on the arms industry .
The Union , as an association , is unique in that it is not a state .
Its strength , vis-à-vis the outside world too , lies in peaceful , non-military cooperation .
It would be a mistake to change the Union into a military alliance .
It has also become increasingly clear that changing the WEU into the Union 's crisis management organization , as proposed by Finland and Sweden , would merely be a step towards a common defence .
Either its proponents were being naive or else they do not wish to tell the people about the underlying aspirations .
A common policy on the arms industry would be liable to increase pressures to export arms even to countries which use them against their own people .
In such circumstances even the smallest step towards a closer association of arms industries must be avoided .
The Greens consider it extremely regrettable that an attempt is being made to destroy the special character of the Union through militarization .
I have today also signed a statement by some of my Nordic colleagues condemning the conversion of the Union into a military alliance .
The Danish social democrats in the European Parliament have voted against Parliament 's report on security and defence policy in the European Union .
We voted against the report because it contains a number of paragraphs concerning the extension of defence cooperation within the EU .
This is not in keeping with the Edinburgh agreement , whereby Denmark does not participate in the elaboration and implementation of actions of the Union which have defence implications .
Moreover , we take the view that there is no need for a strengthening of the defence policy dimension of the EU .
On the contrary , we believe that the EU Member States should continue to coordinate their defence cooperation through NATO .
It should be emphasized that while we are unable to support the report as a whole , we believe that it contains a number of positive features .
These are in particular the references to the advantages of establishing a European stability pact , and to the work of the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
I think it was a good solution to divide the Tindeman report into two sections .
The section that I voted in favour of today was concerned only with foreign and security policy .
I could support the bulk of the report but there were certain details which I , as a representative of a neutral Scandinavian country , could not approve .
For this reason I could not support the approval of the report as a whole either .
We consider that the division of the Tindemans report into two parts was a good solution .
The part on which we are voting today thus relates solely to foreign and security policy .
We may have supported the majority of the report , but there are individual points in it with which we as representatives of neutral Nordic countries cannot approve .
For this reason we were also unable to give our support to the report as a whole .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Regional cooperation with former Yugoslavia and contractual relations with south-east Europe
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Cohn-Bendit ( A4-0127 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the report from the Commission to the Council ' Prospects for the development of regional cooperation for the countries of the former Yugoslavia and what the Community could do to foster such cooperation ' ( SEC ( 96 ) 252 - C4-0274 / 96 ) , and on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ' Joint principles to govern contractual relations with certain countries in south-east Europe ' ( SEC ( 96 ) 0252 - C4-0644 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I could actually greet you all by name , such is the impressive level of attendance .
But I am even more dismayed by the absence of the Commission .
The Commission is supposed to be represented at this kind of debate , although I realize that with the arrival of spring and some warm weather at last , politics inevitably takes a back seat .
Twelve years after the Second World War , the former warring parties put their signatures to the Treaties of Rome .
Those treaties were the first examples of regional cooperation in Europe , and they led on to the creation of the European Union as we know it today .
Of course , the United States had a role as guarantor of the process of peace and democratic reconstruction in post-war Europe .
But had it not been for that decisive step - had the politicians of the day not had the courage to develop regional cooperation in Europe - we would not be where we are today .
Therefore , in our present discussions on the need for regional cooperation following the bloody wars which have taken place in SouthEastern Europe , our conceptual model is that of the European Union .
Regional cooperation is needed in southern Europe , precisely because the conflicts there were so damaging .
But regional cooperation will only work when there is a functioning Bosnian state in Bosnia .
Only when the states and forces which were parties to the conflict are prepared to regard Bosnia as a state and to promote its statehood can regional cooperation begin the process of rapprochement among them .
I believe that there is still a great deal to be done in this context , and the Dayton peace agreement is not enough .
However , if we take the view that we need to reconstruct Bosnia , we cannot burden it with bureaucratic structures which basically fail to facilitate the process of reconstruction by the people who live there and those who are working on the ground .
That is why I propose the creation of an institution - a foundation for democracy .
Neither the criteria of the European Union nor its bureaucratic methods are applicable in a society like Bosnia .
Attempting to apply them is ultimately futile , and in 1996 only ECU 3 million , out of a total of ECU 35 m available for investment in Bosnia , was paid out .
That is simply disgraceful .
At the same time , this type of regional cooperation must not be regarded as reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia .
On the contrary , it is all about conceiving of South-Eastern Europe as South-Eastern Europe .
In other words , the process of regional cooperation clearly includes not only the countries of the former Yugoslavia , but also Greece , Bulgaria , Hungary and Turkey .
That is the thinking behind the proposal for a southern European conference to consider ways of achieving economic , political and environmental stability , as a means of giving the countries involved a sense of mutual responsibility for peacekeeping and developing the scope for peace .
If the region is to be seen as having any kind of political future , then - according to the Barcelona model - the process has to develop independently from within South-Eastern Europe . Let me welcome Mr van den Broek , from the Commission .
I am glad that he managed to find his way here on such a sunny afternoon . Better late than never !
In conclusion , I would say this : the people of southern Europe will not understand , and cannot be expected to understand , if we play politics here on behalf of one government or another .
Our task as elected representatives is not to act as ambassadors for Slovenia , Croatia , Serbia or Bosnia .
We are independent politicians whose job is to work to our own agenda .
That is why we must promote the European concept of cooperation .
Finally , I have a request concerning our amendment .
In the committee , we included military as well as civilian personnel in paragraph 24 of the motion for a resolution .
This does not make sense .
I have no objection to a military force , even in Europe .
But in this context , where we are referring to the ECMM , it is a nonsense .
I would therefore ask you to vote in favour of our amendment , not on ideological grounds , but simply because it would be counterproductive not to do so , since the text as it stands is basically contradictory .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the idea of convening a conference on peace , democracy , sustainable development and stability in south-eastern Europe under the aegis of the European Union is certainly one that should be supported and pursued .
The European Union , which - unfortunately , but it must be said - has been a most notable absentee from the events that have convulsed the former Yugoslavia , must now adopt an active policy directed towards the reconstruction of that region , to encourage the return of stability , peace and development to a region so close to our own .
Quite apart from our ideals , our self-interest demands it .
Our view of Mr Cohn-Bendit 's report is generally favourable , though we cannot agree with everything in it .
For example , the suggestion that a pop music festival should be organized in Bosnia , while certainly intriguing and charming , comes more under the heading of folklore than that of politics .
There is one aspect , though , to which we feel we must call Parliament 's attention : not one of the various initiatives contained in the Commission 's report is currently accompanied by any plan for financing it , nor can any of them be financed between now and 1999 except at the expense of other projects .
I should say at this point that the Committee on Budgets has asked the Commission to put forward proposals , but no reply has ever been received .
This seems to us to be the most serious aspect of the whole issue .
The European Union seems all too likely to continue to be the major absentee from the former Yugoslavia : because all these proposals we are talking about are doomed to lack the funds to translate them into reality .
But if that is how things are , it would surely be better to say so bluntly !
Mr President , I should like to tell Mr Cohn-Bendit that I agree with him , and that my group will be voting in favour of his report , which we regard as positive and , unlike on other occasions , full of ideas for positive action .
It is true that these ideas have yet to prove themselves , in terms of feasibility among other things , but it is very instructive for us to find that sometimes , debating things in committee and comparing opinions , we do have the possibility of putting forward practical proposals .
This happens when we have a clear idea in mind , and I maintain that at the heart of this report there is the idea , the very clear idea , that we need to look at SouthEastern Europe with a strategy slightly different from that we have pursued hitherto . When I say ' slightly ' I am , of course , indulging in a little irony , in that the one thing that emerges from this report is the need for a European Union policy as such rather than the sum of the policies of the individual Member States .
I should like to emphasize the link that exists between the two proposals that Mr Cohn-Bendit puts forward in paragraph 5 of his report , where he rightly talks about this idea of a conference and says that ' at the same time , the European Union would commit itself to an ambitious long-term programme of enhanced , concerted and multilateral economic assistance to the reconstruction of the region ' .
I maintain that these two things are closely interrelated .
Nothing is said here about who is immediately to start working on the preparation of this ambitious long-term programme .
I think the invitation is indirectly addressed to the Commission , or at any rate that it should be understood as being so , so that the conference on peace , democracy and sustainable development in two years ' time will become a convincing objective if work goes ahead in the meantime on this ambitious long-term programme of reconstruction , which needs to have this regional slant as a political concept .
One reason why this is urgently necessary is that , as we all know , the Union 's humanitarian presence is enormous - indeed , we are the major contributor - but at the same time there is a confused presence of international bodies in Bosnia , as in other countries as well , and this is certainly no help to us .
I am also in agreement with the proposed Foundation for Democracy .
The idea is a good one , as indeed are the other two ideas contained in paragraphs 25 and 26 , which we will be supporting .
In conclusion , Mr President , let me say that we will also be supporting Amendment No 4 , because it seems to me consistent with the whole approach of this report to delete this word , as Mr Cohn-Bendit proposes in his amendment .
Mr President , there are numerous aspects of both the Commission report and , unfortunately , Mr Cohn-Bendit 's report that cause me some difficulty , because it seems to me that they have both taken the wrong approach , at least as regards timing and also in terms of geography .
However , I shall leave the geography to Mr Oostlander .
It is clear that despite the bloody collapse of one-party rule in Yugoslavia , too many Europeans still fail to realize that any pressure in the direction of cooperation at the present time will simply be rejected because people will fear that it is a dressed-up attempt to create a new Yugoslavia .
How is it that we have ended up applying double standards ?
Slovenia , which is also a successor state of the former Yugoslavia , has enjoyed and continues to enjoy all kinds of preference and assistance , without being subject to the conditions set out in the report .
I am sure that following the lifting of the Greek boycott and the sanctions against Serbia , Macedonia will now at last be able to develop freely and resolve its Albanian problem ; and that Croatia too , after the end of the illegal occupation of a third of its territory , will now be able to attend more effectively to developing its democratic structures and economy and , of course , repatriating refugees .
However , just like Slovenia , it must receive the necessary help from the European Union to enable it to do this .
It is obvious that some form of regional economic cooperation will then emerge .
To that extent , I would endorse what Mr Cohn-Bendit has said in recital E : that a regionally based approach must be more broadly based and does not imply the re-creation of the former Yugoslavia , but should take into account the individual special features of each country , and the fact that one country might decline to cooperate must not be allowed to prevent any other country from effecting a rapprochement with the EU .
All very impressive !
Unfortunately , Mr Cohn-Bendit , your report fails to reflect that principle .
And if the European Union intends to reward what you yourself refer to as cumulation of product origin , then that will effectively mean a return to the former Yugoslavia under the cover of trade .
Such a proposal is totally insensitive !
We cannot put the cart before the horse .
Nor , by the same token , is it possible to compare what now needs to be done in this area with what we were able to do in Europe long after the Second World War .
My point is that we must begin by ensuring that order is established in each country .
We must ensure that refugees are able to return to their homelands , so that the experience of coexistence once again becomes part of national life in these countries . Only then will it be time for cross-border cooperation .
On the question of Bosnia-Herzegovina , I entirely agree on the need for consolidation , but ultimately that also needs to be worked for !
And it is time for everyone who signed the Dayton peace agreement to start putting it into action .
I very much hope that we shall have the backing of the House for the inclusion of one minor point , namely support for the European schools .
I believe that these schools , through their multi-ethnicity , have a long-term impact which an event like the pop festival - which I also support - cannot hope to have .
The festival will encapsulate a moment in time , and that is worthwhile , but it will not lead young people in the direction that we have to lead them - along the road to multi-ethnic coexistence .
To do that , we need curricula in the schools and teachers to do the work , and this is where we should deploy our manpower and our expertise .
We should also learn the lesson of Albania : that money alone is ineffective , the only effective way is to put people on the ground in the country .
I share the belief that an institution such as the proposed foundation can achieve something positive .
But I do not believe that it can be effective in isolation .
We must also involve the ECMM and all the people on the ground , and work with them to rebuild the state .
The fact is that there is precious little will to live together in BosniaHerzegovina .
Very few people there genuinely wish to make coexistence a reality .
The bodies that were elected last September lack a common civic identity .
I very much regret that this should be so , and we must begin by helping them to develop such an identity before there can be any question of achieving cross-border cooperation .
Mr President , I must begin by thanking Mr Cohn-Bendit for the excellent work he has put into this report .
I too would like to place it on record that our starting point must be Europe 's political and moral responsibility for what it has failed to do for Bosnia and for what has happened in Bosnia as a result : slaughter and savagery , and the complete lack of any European presence .
Clearly , we now have an even greater responsibility to act so that , during this period of reconstruction in the former Yugoslavia , we are able effectively to export the benefits of peace , democracy and stability - and , above all , liberty .
I believe that the machinery for credible joint action is important , and this brings us back to the problem of the CFSP . On this point , clearly , there is a need for a general commitment , a need to reinforce and broaden the SFOR mandate .
For this reason , I believe it is essential that this Parliament should bring pressure to bear on the Commission and the Council .
Our central aim must be to make Bosnia independent of international aid , so that it can move ahead with its economic development by its own efforts .
That is why I greatly appreciated certain passages in Mr Cohn-Bendit 's report : we very much appreciated the report not only for its remarks on the regional approach but also with regard to the overall political initiative , meaning the re-establishment of the rule of law , and a more generalized pact of stability for peace and development , which implies strict compliance with the peace commitments entered into with the Dayton accords but also implies a free trade area , common airspace and favourable conditions for investment .
Peace and stability in Bosnia will come not from piecemeal interventions in the form of aid , which will merely result in corruption , but from creating conditions that favour the independent development of that region .
Mr President , Commissioner , I recently received a copy of the Commission 's first end-of-year report - for 1996 - on how the resources made available by Parliament and the budgetary authority are being spent in the former Yugoslavia .
Of the ECU 125 million in the essential aid programme , the proportion committed in 1996 was 66 % , and this gives no indication of what was actually paid out .
Precisely ECU 2.1 m was committed from the ECU 27.6 m available in reconstruction aid .
In the area of aid for repatriation , which is so urgently needed to allow refugees to return home , ECU 8 m out of a total of ECU 25.7 m was committed , and of the ECU 35 m earmarked for ' Europe for Sarajevo ' - to which the House attaches such importance - exactly ECU 3.2 m was committed in 1996 : only committed , mind you , not paid out .
Is it any wonder that if you go to Sarajevo - as I did two and a half weeks ago - you meet people who ask what the Commission and the European Union have actually done .
What visible proof is there that the reconstruction aid is in fact getting through ?
In effect , the Commission report for 1996 exposes the bureaucratic and inefficient approach which has been adopted here .
I should like to ask the Commission a question : why is it not possible to adopt a less bureaucratic approach ?
We managed it in Mostar , so why not in other cities ?
And why is the IMG unable to act on our behalf on the ground ?
Why , instead of continuing to administer the resources centrally from Brussels , do we not cooperate with organizations such as the Bärbel Bohley programme for 1000 homes in Bosnia - a project with a minimum of red tape which has been able to put 3 million to good use ?
All these questions are of critical importance for the Commission , and I hope that we shall manage to do rather better in 1997 .
Thank you , Mr President , but I thought I had two minutes , and that was the very least I needed to say that Mr Cohn-Bendit 's report seems to me full of good intentions .

Personally I am all in favour of considering regional cooperation with the countries of former Yugoslavia and indeed beyond .
In fact I think we should have noticed sooner , instead of encouraging each European country to choose a protege in the Balkans , as Europe did , that independence was as premature as it was illusory . We promised countries that we would guarantee their frontiers , which we did not do , and that we would allow them to join Europe right away , which they are still waiting for , and instead of doing that there was another way to achieve solidarity and balance in Yugoslav , through groupings which would no doubt have been reviewed : by explaining to the countries concerned that they would only come closer to Europe by finding new ways of living together .
We have seen the result : ethnic hatred , nationalism , religious tension , have all triumphed over the inclusive values the European Union should have promoted .
But we should not always expect the worst and cooperation is extremely necessary today .
We must promote it and in particular speed up the financing , as has been mentioned .
I just want to draw Parliament 's attention to one point , Mr President .
The European Union has shown serious weakness , and I think it could make up for that if it decided to establish wholly European intervention forces in Bosnia for the period after the council elections , which would be responsible in particular for preventing war breaking out again in Brcko or Mostar , as it unfortunately ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the independent Members of the House welcome Mr Cohn-Bendit 's perceptive and courageous report which , by involving all the Balkan countries , lends a new dimension to the difficult task of securing peace in the former Yugoslavia .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , I agree with you that politicians certainly need vision in order to achieve ambitious goals .
But there have been repeated instances in the past of major long-term projects , with a high degree of commitment , which have failed because - in the absence of short-term successes of the kind that people in the former Yugoslavia would undoubtedly wish to see today - some of those involved lost faith in the project as a whole and did not see it through to its completion .
Therefore , we have to keep a sense of pragmatism alongside the vision , and be aware that what we are doing is like the work of a good football coach : it will not be judged on the basis of carefully thought-out and theoretically irreproachable game plans , but purely and simply on results .
Mr President , I am also very pleased with the Cohn-Bendit report , which strongly emphasizes the need to restore the rule of law in the area in question .
This is a particularly important issue to which I shall return shortly .
I am actually rather surprised that the Commission should focus on such a limited area when it talks about regional cooperation in the former Yugoslavia . There are several countries here which have just emerged from a terrible war with each other and still harbour various grievances .
We have a situation where Bosnia-Herzegovina , for example , includes a number of groups which are more than happy to cooperate with the neighbouring states of Croatia and Serbia , and this is threatening unity in Bosnia and peace in the entire region .
So when we talk about regional cooperation , we must be very , very careful that this is not interpreted as giving encouragement to those who would like nothing better than to destroy Bosnia-Herzegovina altogether .
I think it is absolutely vital that we should make it clear that this is not our intention .
I also wonder why the Commission is focusing on this small area , so that Serbia-Montenegro is the centre of attention once again .
Is that what we really want ?
I hardly think so .
I would prefer to see the regional cooperation extended to include the rest of the Balkans and some neighbouring countries , which may even include EU applicant countries or Member States .
We have the Barcelona process , and I would be much more in favour of allowing something similar in the Balkans , so that we can have a broader regional overview , rather than thinking that the emphasis is on the ' bad boys ' once again .
I would prefer to give Romania a more prominent role , especially now that it has a more constructive government .
It would also help to give countries in the Balkans which have already taken various measures such as the Black Sea initiative greater self-respect and a better understanding of international responsibility .
I think it is very important for them to realize that their contribution to international security and the rule of law is extremely important to us , and we should continue to develop this idea .
I do not think we should bring pressure to bear by threatening to withhold financial aid if they do not cooperate in the way we want .
We should leave things up to them .
There should be more consultation between officials from the countries around Yugoslavia and yourself , Commissioner , and perhaps also members of the Council .
I also feel it is rather difficult to be calling for economic cooperation at a time when racist tendencies in Bosnia-Herzegovina are completely frustrating further economic development .
I am thinking here of the east-west and north-south railways through Bosnia-Herzegovina which both head towards Tuzla , but which the racist attitudes of the Republika Srpska are preventing from being extended .
What sort of economic aid and development are we trying to promote with our cooperation models ?
I would therefore urge that we should vote for the section on this subject in the Cohn-Bendit report , as amended , since this is how we can genuinely promote the international rule of law .
Mr President , Parliament 's attention needs to be drawn to a particularly positive aspect of the Cohn-Bendit report : the regional approach and the quality of the bilateral relations between the countries which made up former Yugoslavia .
In fact there is no suggestion that countries wishing to associate with or join the Union are all obsessed with Europe and refusing to work together or show each other a minimum of solidarity .
This necessary solidarity should be expressed economically and politically in a declaration containing specific commitments leading to a regional stability pact .
But reassuring words are not enough ; there must be practical consequences , with membership of the Union subject to clear demands and penalty clauses suspending our commitments .
Mr President , reading the title here - which of course everybody has read , but I am simply repeating it - I see that the European Parliament is considering a single resolution on two Commission reports , one on ' Prospects for the development of regional cooperation for the countries of the former Yugoslavia ' , and the other on ' Joint principles for future contractual relations with certain countries in south-east Europe ' .
I think this way of dealing with two reports on different issues led to the confusion created with the reading of the report by Mr Cohn-Bendit , because the countries of former Yugoslavia are covered by a special situation , the Dayton agreement , they are involved in war , they have victims , they have the dead , and they have refugees , while the other countries of south-east Europe are ones with enormous economic problems , I would say with huge internal problems and problems of democracy , but they continue struggling and fighting by peaceful means to overcome those problems .
I say this because the report , as drawn up at present , does not make it possible to draw useful conclusions and can be no help either for the Commission , or for the Council .
I accept , of course , the proposal made by Mr CohnBendit in paragraph 5 , where with reference to the well-known Royaumont initiative , he speaks of a Conference supported by the European Union .
This is an idea correct in principle . We must support it , but as for the remainder of the contents , I think it is a text which does no harm , but offers nothing .
First of all , I should like to apologize to you and in particular to Mr Cohn-Bendit for my late arrival , which was not out of any disrespect to the House , but was the result of a misunderstanding .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying how pleased I am that this subject has been put on the agenda and examined in this report by Mr Cohn-Bendit , even if there is limited time for dealing with such a complicated issue .
The Commission broadly agrees with the motion for a resolution , which clearly supports the European Union 's strategy on the countries of South-Eastern Europe .
This strategy was developed by the Council on the basis of recommendations from the Commission , which had itself produced a report on conditionality and a regional approach .
Both concepts will enable us to make full use of the special relations which the European Union has with the countries of South-Eastern Europe , including in particular those with which we do not yet have association agreements .
On 29 April , the General Affairs Council also formulated conclusions on this subject which we believe mark an important step towards a coherent and transparent policy for the Union in its future bilateral relations with these non-associated countries in the areas of economic and financial aid and contractual relations .
I should like to put my written notes to one side for a moment , because I realized when I heard what Mr Sarlis said that the approach we have chosen is still apparently causing some misunderstanding .
There were also comments from Mr Oostlander and Mrs Pack about the geographical area and in particular the conditions for entering into contractual relations with the Union , such as those of good-neighbourliness or cross-border cooperation .
What it really comes down to is ' do unto your neighbours as you would have the European Union do unto you ' .
After everything people have been through in the Balkans in recent years and all the European Union has invested , however inadequately , in peace and reconstruction in the former Yugoslavia - and here I entirely disagree with the very negative picture painted by Mrs Müller , but I will not go into that just for the moment - is it really so surprising that the time should come when we ask Croatia , Serbia and Bosnia to normalize their own relations before they can hope to enter into contractual relations with the European Union ?
Or that when it comes to asking for certain trade concessions or preferences from the Union , they should first be asked to agree to similar concessions for each other ?
I can assure Mr Oostlander that time and time again in talks with these countries - and I know how we have been criticized for this approach , not least from the capitals of the countries themselves - the European Union has assured them that our policy must not be seen as an attempt to restore the old federal structure to Yugoslavia .
As well as the Balkans , Romania is included , which could well form the nucleus of regional cooperation in the Black Sea area .
Indeed , this is already the case , since Romania is already involved in the Black Sea cooperation project .
The Commission is currently preparing a document on cooperation between the countries around the Black Sea , just as we did for the Barents Sea , the Baltic States , the Central Europe initiative , the Royaumont initiative and the Balkans initiative , which is supported by Greece .
So let there be no misunderstanding : the regional approach is by no means a new concept for the European Union , and demanding good-neighbourliness and promoting regional cross-border cooperation using political and financial means are in fact part of the European Union 's standard approach .
Let me move on now to the other conditions which apply as regards the former Yugoslavia .
The Serbs have been told not to count on contractual cooperation with the European Union if no solution is found to the Kosovo problem .
The Croats have been told that there are various problems with their internal human rights , and improvements must be made before they can count on PHARE aid , apart from PHARE-Democracy .
I have just come back from Bosnia with Klaus Kinkel .
What did we find ?
As we have heard , groups like the Croats who would like nothing better than to rejoin Croatia , and the Republika Srpska which is contravening the Dayton Agreements by concluding new agreements with Serbia .
What should we do ?
Should we now stand back and do nothing while a number of our Member States - you will know who I mean - are bringing enormous pressure to bear to make it easier for refugees to return to the former Bosnia ?
What we have said is that as things stand at present , there is simply no point in having contractual cooperation or proper trade and cooperation agreements with Bosnia .
Bosnia first has to show greater cohesion , it must have a collective presidency which agrees on what it wants from the European Union and agrees to abide by the Dayton Agreements , and we might also require it to cooperate with the war tribunal in The Hague , since it would be madness to send Bosnian refugees from Germany back to the Republika Srpska , where Mr Karadzic is still active behind the scenes .
Mr President , I have gone well over my time , but it is such an exceptionally complicated situation in the Balkans .
I can only say that there are two quite different strands here .
The first is our attempt to pursue a policy to bring stability to the Balkans , which calls for a special approach after all the years of violent and bloody warfare that the region has gone through .
But in addition , regional cooperation is a concept which also applies to regions that are fortunately not in such a complicated situation , but also wish to have a special relationship with the Union .
Here too , the message is the same : that we would like them to play a constructive and positive role in their relations with their neighbours .
These are the broad outlines of our approach which we now have to translate into a detailed policy for Serbia , Croatia and Bosnia , and this is what we are working on at the moment .
On Mr Cohn-Bendit 's proposal in his report to set up a foundation for democracy , I would say this .
As you are certainly aware , the Commission is already funding a large number of projects in this field in South-Eastern Europe , and particularly in the former Yugoslavia , with the aim of establishing and strengthening democratic structures by providing aid for the development of a civil society , a culture of openness towards and freedom for the media , and a more robust judicial system .
We would have to consider very carefully whether the proposed foundation would be a useful addition to the measures already being carried out by the Community .
I have no problem at all with the objectives that are set out .
The only question is whether there is really any added value , or whether we are already doing enough in this field , so that if anything extra is to be done it should focus on a different area .
This brings me to the end of what has been a rather fragmented speech , and I should simply like to congratulate Mr Cohn-Bendit once again for showing such commitment in working through this very complicated issue .
I agree with you entirely , Commissioner , because you have made it clear that the first step has not yet been taken .
We cannot demand regional cooperation if the people in these countries are still incapable of living together .
Nonetheless , we do have a duty and a responsibility to help them establish coexistence at national level : the next step will then follow by itself .
I think I have already made that point quite clearly .
Mrs Pack , surely you must see that regional cooperation is not an obligation in the sense that we have to take up arms to enforce it ... for goodness sake , you have no trouble understanding plain German when it emanates from Zagreb !
Now try reading some plain German which does not come from Zagreb !
Cooperation is simply a political necessity , so that people learn to live together .
And if we in Europe do not treat that as a moral requirement , then we in Europe will have failed .
Surely , for once , the PPE Members of the House can grasp that !
Mr President , I do not wish to be the referee here , but I would simply repeat that it is still not our view that these people do not want to live together .
It is the politicians who are trying to impose and assert their own nationalistic beliefs , and this is why I am by no means reluctant to impose conditions , and why I am also not particularly troubled by comments that our conditions are simply designed to restore Yugoslavia to how it used to be .
Not at all .
Our goals are quite different and are designed to bring peace and stability , which is more than I can say for some of the leaders in the region .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
Improving the impact of joint actions
The next item is the debate on the report by Barón Crespo ( A4-0133 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on improving the impact of joint actions .
Mr President , I particularly want to express my satisfaction that this report has been able to reach the House barely a year and three-quarters after it was written .
If you look carefully at the date you will see that this recommendation was made on 20 September 1995 in application of article J.11 of the treaty and rule 46.3 of our Rules of Procedure .
And the recommendation has the added advantage of scarcely filling a page and a half , unlike most of the interminable litanies which constitute parliamentary reports .
Two battles have been joined here .
One is the external battle .
And I have to say that where we do not have problems with the Council , which is currently practising the empty chair policy , or the Commission , we put shackles on ourselves , we put spokes in the wheels , to the point that this recommendation has had to go to the Committee on the Rules and the Conference of Presidents before coming here today .
So as regards the external side , the law , what is basically being said is that the intelligent use of a weapon like the recommendation allows us , with the immediateness international political problems require , to formulate how foreign policy is debated , and whether there are criteria , opinions , judgements , or guidelines to the Commission .
This is something that we are very much lacking in and we will shortly have the opportunity to see an analysis of it in the report Mr Spencer is preparing on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , drawing up the full balance sheet of the unsatisfactory development of the common positions and joint actions which are the instruments of foreign policy we have available under the Treaty on European Union .
To come to the nub of the matter , the content of the recommendation , the position over eighteen months ago still has a terrible topicality , especially at a time when - hopefully - the Intergovernmental Conference is reaching a conclusion , because this is one of the most delicate issues as regards reform and improvement of the treaties .
And the substance of the proposal is four fundamental points based on our experience over the past few years .
It is not enough to complain about how incapable we are in Europe of developing foreign policy , we also have to do something to improve it and find the way forward .
So to put it very briefly , the proposal is that the necessary measures be adopted to formulate and develop joint action based on the qualified majority principle , which this Parliament has approved , moreover , and which should be the general principle which inspires our actions .
Secondly , another very important point for a Parliament which shares budgetary power with the Council is to state that costs generated by common actions under the treaty must be included in the non-compulsory section of the Community budget involving democratic control by Parliament and that specifically administrative expenditure should come under heading V and operational expenditure under heading IV .
The principle of budgetary clarity is a basic principle of parliamentary and democratic responsibility .
Thirdly , we need to consider how to implement joint actions effectively and rapidly , and here I would recall a proposal made by Parliament five years ago for a code of conduct and an interinstitutional framework agreement allowing us to develop and control our relations with the Commission and the Council correctly .
Finally , Mr President , we must insist , as of right , that the treaty is applied , and Parliament is consulted when decisions are taken and joint actions are planned .
To illustrate our situation , I need only mention what has happened in the case of Albania , where a problem arose with a neighbouring country in the Union and it was decided , quite disgracefully in my opinion , that this was not a priority issue for the Union . It was then left to Parliament , after a series of countries decided to act , to ask the Council for joint common action .
Therefore , Mr President , and with this I conclude , I think this recommendation - albeit late , but better late than never - has arrived at the right moment and I hope ministers will read it before the Amsterdam Summit .
Mr President , I should like to express our opinion on a number of points .
Firstly , let me thank the rapporteur for including the key demand of the Committee on Budgets : that expenditure in this area should be non-compulsory .
The current difficulty in getting this point across at the Intergovernmental Conference demonstrates how far-sighted we were when we drafted our opinion in January .
I very much hope that an agreement is reached - and one to which the Council representatives are also party - so that we do not experience a backlash which would be detrimental to this democratic institution .
Secondly , through the Committee on Budgetary Control , I requested an opinion from the Court of Auditors on the functioning of the foreign and security policy to date .
That opinion is now available .
It is probably too late for this to be included in the preparatory discussions for the Intergovernmental Conference , and it contains a great many technical comments .
However , I would ask for us to cooperate with the Committee on Foreign Affairs in considering this opinion and looking at how the Council , the Commission and Parliament can improve their performance in relation to joint actions in the future , for example in terms of rapidity , transparency and administrative obstacles .
Finally , I wish to issue a warning to the Council .
I believe that any temptation to misuse joint actions must be firmly resisted . An example of such misuse occurred when the Committee on Budgets received notice of a transfer of appropriations of ECU 5.5 million for participation in election preparations in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
We had literally no time to consider whether Parliament wished to lend its support or not .
This was a decision of the Council , a joint action at intergovernmental level .
The Member States dispatched their staff , then found that they could no longer manage to pay for them , so they came to the Committee on Budgets seeking finance from European coffers through the back door .
If that is the way that joint actions are going to work in future in terms of relations between the Council and Parliament , then I can assure the Council that the next time the going gets rough , there will be no more transfers of appropriations from the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , my Group supports the Baron Crespo report , shares his delight that it has finally made it to plenary and I echo all his comments in detail .
The truth is that our joint actions are unimpressive .
They are too few and where they have been crafted , they do not deal with fundamental issues .
I find it literally amazing that the diplomats of our sophisticated , experienced and powerful nations , whose fathers and grandfathers ran the world , seem to have such trouble having any measurable impact on the rest of humanity .
We have seen in recent weeks that there is little mutual solidarity amongst the foreign ministers of the European Union and almost no principle that cannot be traded for commercial advantage at any particular moment .
The problem may lie in the details of decision-making and implementation of joint actions , but I rather doubt that is the complete answer .
I fear that the problem is more fundamental and it lies in the self-censoring reluctance to tackle big issues from a European perspective .
It is the problem of diplomats who perhaps spend too much time in beautiful chancellories contemplating great national traditions .
Too much concentration on Agincourt and not enough on Asia and , if Mr Baron Crespo will forgive me , too much concentration on Trafalgar rather than trade .
We should listen to the good sense of Dr Johnson , who said in relation to Scotsmen that much could be done if you caught them young .
The same applies to diplomats .
I believe that until we have a European Institute for foreign policy and defence studies modelled on the excellent European Institute for Public Administration in Maastricht , we will never have the critical mass of national diplomats trained to take a European as well as a national view .
There are European interests in the world but as yet there are few advocates for those interests active in the diplomacy of the Council .
It seems to me that success in the joint actions of the CFSP , as in the other aspects of the CFSP , depends first and foremost on an extended intellectual effort to understand those ' important interests in common ' that are referred to in the Treaty .
My Group will support the Baron Crespo report .
We have no difficulty whatsoever with the recommendations of the report by Mr Barón Crespo .
He knows that , because in the many exchanges we have had , either in former days in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , or on a more individual basis , we have agreed with him and many Members of this Parliament about the necessity of improving the instruments of our Common Foreign and Security Policy .
We agree that it is not only a matter of continuing to dwell on substance and on whether policies can be aligned , however important that is , but that if the European Union does not provide itself with the necessary procedures and instruments , then the implementation of that policy will fail and we will not stimulate the necessary convergence of policy .
It is against this background that the Commission , even at this early stage of the Intergovernmental Conference , has made its contribution to that conference , making points that are very much in line with the recommendations of this report and of other resolutions adopted by the European Parliament : the preparation of our common action through this joint planning analysis capacity ; the question of the representation of the Union in foreign policy by the new model of troika , which is still under discussion ; the question of how we can change the decision-making procedures and whether some qualified majority could be introduced into the foreign policies , which is also still under discussion in the IGC ; the question of the defence component we discussed this morning in relation to the Tindemans report on the Common Security Policy ; last , but not least , a matter which is attracting some attention today , and rightfully so , the whole question of how we finance of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
There again , you will find that the Commission supports Parliament in defending the thesis that expenses on these kinds of joint actions should be considered as non-obligatory expenditure .
Having said that - and I think the term ' interinstitutional agreement ' came up - we do need something like an interinstitutional agreement .
For on the one hand , given its budgetary responsibilities , Parliament has certain prerogatives here which should be respected .
But on the other hand , the European Parliament must respect the fact that foreign policy is something that often requires swift action and cannot await very complex and lengthy procedures to ensure that the financing will be available .
Perhaps the solution would be to find a kind of interinstitutional agreement that would allow for swift procedures where required .
These are my brief remarks today .
They certainly will not be the last contribution that we make in the continuing debate about giving more substance to our Common Foreign and Security Policy .
I would like to conclude by availing myself of this opportunity to express great admiration for the book that Mr Barón Crespo has recently written , entitled ' Europe at the Dawn of the Millennium ' , or something similar .
I find all that he says in that book about European aspirations , as he sees them , very worthwhile and inspiring .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
Common organization of the market in bananas
The next item is the debate on the statements by the Council and Commission on the position of the WTO panel concerning the COM in bananas .
Mr President , I should like to make a brief statement on the market in bananas , in the light of recent events .
The Council has not yet determined its position on this issue , and will first have to hear the views of the Commissioners responsible for the common commercial and agricultural policies .
As the House will be aware , the WTO panel on bananas concluded in its report that the European Community 's import regulations do not comply with its WTO obligations .
The panel recommended that the WTO body responsible for the settlement of disputes should request the European Community to bring its import regulations for bananas into line with its obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , and in particular the agreement on administrative procedures during import and export .
As the European Parliament can imagine , this report by the panel could have far-reaching political and economic implications for the import regime for bananas , which we are currently examining .
It is still too early to say what further action the Union will take , since the WTO procedure for approving the panel 's report is still in progress , and we are not yet in a position to be able to give a formal response .
That is my official statement , Mr President .
Mr President , having heard the stance which the Council is adopting - and , viewed objectively , it is the only one it could have been expected to take - namely that the first priority in this difficult issue is to examine the WTO ruling , I have to say that I believe this ruling comes as a severe disappointment to the majority of Members of this House .
The panel is calling for the banana regime to be brought into line with obligations under the WTO licensing agreement and GATT .
To justify this requirement , the panel refers to Article 16 ( 4 ) of the Marrakesh agreement under which the WTO was set up .
We are all quite clear that if the European Union and its Member States refuse to toe the line , this could constitute a breach of that agreement and possibly call into question important aspects of the WTO - an organization which we promoted and helped to create .
That is why it is very important for the European Union that a solution should be found in the context of the WTO .
I would urge the Commission to consider the possibility of reaching an agreement with the USA - as was done in relation to the Helms-Burton Act - before we find ourselves on the losing side for a second time in a dispute settlement case .
The European Commission would be ill-advised to make its relationship - and Parliament 's relationship - with the WTO dependent on the success or failure of any particular dispute proceedings : the party with the weaker case must be prepared to be a good loser .
But whether our case is the weaker is still an open question .
The possibility must also be considered that the WTO ruling was one-sided , and legal steps should be taken to examine this .
I am afraid , Commissioner , that we may soon be discussing another similar ruling in the dispute over hormones in meat .
In the present case , the WTO panel maintains that regardless of whether they come from EU countries , ACP countries , framework agreement countries or other third countries , bananas are products of the same description under GATT and must therefore be treated in the same way .
We have to consider whether that view is correct .
As regards the preferential tariff for ACP bananas , this may well breach the basic principle of most-favoured nation status .
However , this breach should be covered by the derogation allowing the EU to grant special treatment to ACP countries until the year 2000 .
This means that the EU is also entitled in principle to grant a preferential tariff for non-traditional ACP bananas .
There has already been public speculation that the Commission is considering seeking an alternative solution .
Our view is that the EU should not act in breach of the agreement .
But we shall support any move that is necessary to establish whether this WTO ruling has a clear legal basis , and we hope that it may yet prove possible to resolve these matters in a way that does not undermine all our expectations of the panel .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have a number of comments concerning the banana panel report which we have been discussing . Firstly , the final report of the WTO special working group was forwarded to the parties involved on 29 April this year .
It was an extremely long report , and we immediately set about analysing it in detail , not only in terms of its impact on the banana regime and the banana trade in the European Union , but especially with regard to the various aspects of the report which have implications above and beyond the specific issue of bananas , requiring a study of possible consequences for trade within the European Union in general .
Because this is a very complex subject , you will appreciate that it has not yet been possible to complete this analysis .
However , I can tell you now that the panel took exception to a great many aspects of the EU banana regime .
Secondly , the licensing arrangements in particular - including the allocation of licences to market operators - were deemed incompatible with the provisions of the GATT and WTO agreements on non-discrimination and national treatment .
Certain aspects of the preferential treatment that we accord to ACP bananas , and of our framework agreement with four Latin American countries , were also deemed to be incompatible with WTO rules .
Thirdly , as I have already indicated , quite apart from its impact on the banana regime , the report has wider implications for the interpretation of a number of important WTO provisions .
We are now studying those implications carefully , so as to assess the possible effects on other Community policies .
Fourthly , I would remind you that the report is to be forwarded to all the members of the WTO in a few weeks ' time .
Then in June , it is likely to be presented for approval to the WTO 's dispute settlement body .
At this stage , the European Community will have the opportunity of submitting an appeal to the WTO appeals committee .
On the basis of our analysis of the panel 's arguments and conclusions , and in the light of what I said earlier , there would indeed appear to be good grounds for appealing against the report .
The Commission is particular concerned to see that the interests of the banana-producing regions of the European Union and the ACP group continue to be taken into account .
Mr President , several points come to mind following the Commission statement .
I know other members of the Socialist Group will raise aspects concerning production in the Caribbean , perhaps my friend Mr Wynn , and Mr Medina on production within the Community .
So I will leave those points to be made better by other people .
I will concentrate on what the Commissioner said .
Concerning an appeal , I understand his caution , but he said that we can make an appeal .
I would like to make it quite clear that the Socialist Group would like to insist that an appeal is made if the eventual judgment is adverse .
We want to turn ' can make an appeal ' into ' insist that an appeal is made ' .
Secondly , we have some disagreement with the line taken by Mr Kittelmann .
I do not think it would be helpful to link the question of concessions on bananas at the WTO with other disputes which the European Union has with the USA at the WTO .
We need to de-link issues .
It is important that this House supports the principle that each case should be discussed and judged on its merits alone .
We do not want to undermine the WTO by having out-of-court settlements between the great and the good .
It is important that transparent judgments are made which will then be universally applied .
Thirdly , the whole procedure of taking this case raises very important questions , not least the inability of small producer countries fully to present their case equitably and openly at the WTO itself .
The Socialist Group appreciates that eventually the Commission will use its good offices to ensure that representatives from the small islands are admitted to that appeals panel .
We would like , however , to insist that in future the small islands are allowed as of right to attend those appeals panels , represented by whosoever they wish , as is the norm in all other international arenas .
Mr President , as this Parliament 's rapporteur on the reform of the common organization of the market in bananas , I must first express my total dissatisfaction with the way in which the Council has presented this serious problem before Parliament - simply informing us that the panel does not agree with our common organization of the market and that the terms of the GATT have been violated .
To be frank , I was hoping for some kind of explanation , some kind of justification , perhaps even some kind of argument that would help us to find the right way round this impasse .
On the other hand , I note with satisfaction the remarks made by Commissioner Fischler , who has expressed a desire , not to say a commitment , to strive to overcome this obstacle to the advantage of Community producers .
Because , basically , this is where the entire problem lies !
I ask this House if we are in favour of the Community 's safeguarding and protecting those who work in the fields , sometimes on remote islands - I am thinking of Guadeloupe , in particular - in pursuit of an activity which is not simply economic , commercial or agricultural but is , first and foremost , a social one : in those remote areas , bananas are often the only crop - the only form of employment to guarantee the survival of these people . Bananas are not a source of wealth , not a surplus .
I question whether we should still hesitate or blush when we say to any panel that we will defend this situation , this form of economic activity behind which so many other issues are at stake .
In point of fact , the battle is always the same : a clash between Community production and the big global business organizations .
The three American giants that control 75-80 % of the world banana market , and 70 % even in Europe , despite Community production , are trying to get their hands on the rest .
They are trying to deprive Community producers of any possibility of staying in the game , least of all on equal terms .
We - Parliament and the European Union - have a duty to say that any commercial argument must take second place to a specific and irrevocable commitment to the producers , especially producers in a minority situation , as I have pointed out . First and foremost , we must stand by the Lomé Treaty , which lays down that no bananaproducing ACP country may be put in a less favourable situation than it was before the common organization of the market was created .
So we are not asking for anything more , or anything better .
We are asking for the maintenance of the status quo - a situation that already existed .
So I believe that when we talk about Community preference not only have we no reason to blush - more than that , we must demand that the Commission , Council and Parliament speak with a single voice and , especially , adopt common solutions that can be carried forward with conviction .
Mr President , as has already been said , the WTO panel 's ruling is still provisional , and my group too feels that the European Union would be perfectly entitled to appeal against it .
However , we also feel that it is entirely in the Union 's interests to have a trade system which operates smoothly , and we think that the existence of the panel as such should not be called into question .
It was set up specifically to resolve trade problems , and we must give it a chance to do so .
As far as we are concerned , the WTO 's provisional ruling does not say that we cannot meet our obligations under the Lomé Convention , and we can also meet our obligations to banana producers in the European Union itself .
And that is how things should remain .
We must insist on fulfilling our obligations .
However , the main problem here is that the ACP countries cannot meet their obligation to fulfil the quota and redistribute any surplus .
That is where the real problem lies , and I would urge the Commission to consider possible ways to get round this in the meantime , since we feel that the current system works to the disadvantage of European importers .
My group believes that we need to give serious consideration to ' fair trade ' bananas , produced using sustainable methods in countries which respect human rights and so on .
And customers must be able to identify which these are .
Mr President , what is involved in this debate , and in the procedures that we are discussing here concerning bananas , is a battle between multinationals for market share .
Through the organization of the market in bananas , we strengthened the hand of European multinationals against their US counterparts , who then retaliated by resorting to the law .
But as we have just heard , it is the ACP countries , the small producers and countries , who are being left out of the picture , unable to intervene .
As a general rule , where we have an organization of the market that falls within the scope of the WTO , they too must be given access to the latter .
For the ACP countries , this means that the Caribbean islands , the Windward Islands and others must have an opportunity of stating their position .
We must support them in this respect .
It is our duty under the Lomé Convention to do so , and that is why it is right - as previous speakers have pointed out - that we should reach an agreement which gives these small islands access to appeal .
I believe this is essential if we are to complete Lomé IV and have a post-Lomé period .
We must ensure that social conditions continue to apply , because in many cases people are totally dependent on this crop , and we must also safeguard organic production and ensure that these producers can lodge an appeal .
Mr President , the WTO panel 's conclusions on the COM for bananas certainly present formidable trading problems for European producers and traditional ACP producers .
With the banana market already in very serious disequilibrium through the extravagant quota favours granted to the multinationals in the ' dollar ' area , the system for marketing the various quotas would be modified to the detriment of those who market barely a quarter of the bananas consumed in Europe .
This does not seem acceptable to me .
But this new episode in an already lengthy trade war also bears witness to the existence of a conflict between two development concepts , one in the WTO and one in the European Union .
There are those who want to protect producers , farmers , those who live by working the land , in the name of a balanced development .
Then there are those who want to favour international business , trade and speculation , in the name of liberalism and the great integrated world market ,
The Group of the European Radical Alliance is firmly in the first camp .
Mr President , this afternoon I think Commissioner Fischler has caught Parliament 's frequently expressed spirit in defence of the common organization of the market for bananas .
We are talking about reasonable organization , giving imports from the large banana producers a 70 % share of the Community market , and keeping a small amount , 30 % , for Community producers and traditional ACP producers .
I think the Commissioner is right : the European Community must appeal this World Trade Organization decision and , of course , we hope the Council will uphold the guidelines the Commission and the majority of the political groups of this Parliament are currently establishing .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that this banana panel throws doubt on the possibility of maintaining an international economic order because , if this international economic order is going to consist in a whole sector as important as bananas being virtually in the hands of just one multinational - which is what will happen if things go on like this - we will find ourselves unable to control our own consumer market .
Moreover , account must be taken of the vast damage flagged up both by the small ACP countries which have no other means of survival apart from banana production , and by certain Community regions where the destruction of this common organization of the market will have a massive impact .
What we are trying to create , after all , Mr Commissioner and Mr President of the Council , is an international economic order , not an international economic disorder .
If social clauses in trade agreements are ignored and everything is left to the free market - with its exclusive principles of profit , of economic benefit , of gain - we will end up with very serious problems , both within the Community and in the world economic order .
So I hope this debate in Parliament will strengthen the Commissioner 's hand .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from time to time European countries and regions as well as banana-producing ACP countries experience particular difficulties in marketing this farm product as a result of interference from third countries defending interests differing from the European Union 's .
Despite the fact that the European Community 's Court of Justice recognized , recently even , the legal validity of the Community banana scheme , the Arbitration Committee of the World Trade Organisation , taking an extremely discretionary and , in our view , intolerable position declared , at the end of April , that this regime was contrary to the rules of international trade .
Given that we are fighting and investing so that economic and social cohesion in the European Union can be fully applied , this declaration by the World Trade Organisation - if it is maintained - could easily destroy once and for all the main farming production in economic terms of certain European Union regions , in particular its islands and ultra-peripheral regions , which are already highly penalized by their very status .
Nor can we forget that the aims of the Lomé Convention , in particular an explicit undertaking in Protocol 5 , on bananas , aimed to guarantee ACP producers access to the European market and improve both the production and marketing conditions of bananas in ACP countries .
The Community banana import regime defined by Regulation 404 / 93 stipulates that the European Union must respect its undertakings to banana-producing ACP states .
The recent decisions taken by the WTO panel are unacceptable since they concentrate exclusively on free trade rules and ignore or dismiss the vital considerations of social , cultural , health and environmental orders .
Therefore , not only should we consider but in our opinion we absolutely must , Commissioner , ensure that the Commission appeals against these unfair conclusions of the Arbitration Committee of the World Trade Organisation .
We fail to understand the position of certain Member States which apparently have already declared their opposition to such an attitude by the Commission which would fundamentally try to restore justice and keep alive the due solidarity between the European Member States and various regions of those States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the banana market was in deep crisis even before the panel decision .
Over-supply of the Community banana market from the dollar area has caused the price to collapse and ACP bananas are bearing the brunt , under pressure from two main factors : higher production costs and weaker marketing .
Need I recall the many occasions we have spoken out in this hemicycle to express our disagreement with the Commission on a number of points which we considered contrary to European interests and those of our allies ?
I myself pointed out to the Commission that figures since the second half of 1995 showed that the proposed increase in volume reserved for third countries was unrelated to the consumption needs of the European Union and therefore we were being asked to ratify the marketing of some 265 , 000 tons of bananas surplus to the European Union 's capacity to absorb them .
We also expressed concern about the new distribution of licences proposed to us a little while ago by the Commission , because in our view , if it were to be applied , it would contribute to an imbalance in trade in bananas , leading to massive unemployment , a fall in export receipts and the collapse of certain economies with unprecedented social and political consequences in European regions and ACP banana producing countries .
Some European Union bodies have been nurturing this ambiguity in analysis and action for too long , determined to impose controversial attitudes which do not respect two fundamental principles , Community preference and preferential access for our historical allies . This , with the blatant division established within the European Union by favouring commercial interests outside the Union to the detriment of our moral duty of solidarity , has contributed to helping our competitors and detractors profit from our weaknesses to attack us m ore effectively .
Ladies and gentlemen , our words on this dossier should be precise , and our speeches should express the ambition we set ourselves in constructing European Union and also its political weight internationally .
As we say in my country , there are not thirty-six truths , there is only one truth : the panel decision undermines a fundamental principle , the principle of European sovereignty .
That is unacceptable , both in form and in content .
The banana affair has overflowed its economic context and become a political issue , and the European authorities must now demonstrate their capacity to trade with the rest of the world while protecting their own interests and refusing to be dictated to about their relations with allies , relations prompted by a rich common history which cannot be denied .
Mr President , the situation created by the WTO 's ruling against the Community banana regime must be appealed , as Commissioner Fischler has recognized .
And the three Community institutions must all be singing from the same hymn sheet .
There are plenty of reasons for this : the first is the Commission 's duty to defend the principle of Community preference and , as a corollary , all the standards that guarantee it ; the second is the obligation to ensure fair market conditions for Community producers with high production and transport costs , and for whom the loss of the European market would mean serious economic damage ; the third is the duty to uphold the agreements with the ACP countries .
But also , and especially , there is the proof that the World Trade Organization is using an instrument to regulate markets for the benefit of the United States , as shown by the fact that its final decisions are entirely in harmony with the powerful interests of the agrifood industry of that country , not only in the report of the banana panel , but also in the other panel report which obliges the European Union to accept hormone-treated meat .
These two questions cannot be dissociated , and I share the view of the Member who made that statement .
Finally , I want to point out that competition policy is not an end in itself , nor can it be seen only in commercial terms .
Considerations of a social and economic order also need to be taken into account , and above all health and environmental considerations .
Mr President , the Green Group in the European Parliament has never regarded the organization of the market in bananas as an ideal solution , but it did at least provide an opportunity for supporting a type of agriculture based on small holdings .
In the ACP countries and the EU , bananas are cultivated mainly by small and medium-sized growers , not on vast plantations like those in Honduras and Guatemala .
Unfortunately , the organization of the market in bananas was used to trigger cut-throat competition between major fruit importers and corporate interests in Europe and elsewhere .
The quota system led to a situation in which quotas were being artificially inflated before deadlines and a flourishing trade in licences had sprung up .
The government of Ecuador was quite justified in complaining that the system of issuing licences cost banana growers in Ecuador millions of dollars , because entitlements to import licences were being transferred to privileged multinational corporations .
Licences should not be issued to importers , but should go instead to the producer countries .
We have often argued in favour of a ' fair-trade ' quota for bananas .
As part of the European Community 's organization of the market in bananas , a specific quota should be reserved for fruit that is grown under specific social and environmental conditions .
In its resolution of November 1996 on trade and the environment , Parliament took up this demand .
Now the WTO has rejected the Community regime .
This verdict from the panel is only the first in a series of WTO rulings that threaten environmental and consumer protection in the EU .
In its next ruling , published at the end of last week , the WTO rejected the import ban on hormone-treated meat from the USA .
In that case , the USA was the main plaintiff - as with the organization of the market in bananas , even though US banana production amounts to no more than 8000 tonnes .
The US corporate lobby drafted the complaint to the WTO in detail and followed its progress through the panel negotiations in Geneva .
The WTO must amend its rules so as to give a hearing to weaker parties , developing countries and the environmental lobby .
I have almost finished , Mr President .
If it fails to do so , it will become - as Sir Leon Brittan clearly admitted at yesterday 's meeting of the Committee on External Economic Relations - nothing more than a tool of the USA and the economically powerful countries against the rest of the world .
And in fact , that is how it looks today .
Mr President , the result of the World Trade Organization 's panel on bananas is unacceptable and , quite frankly , of dubious impartiality .
Not only did the panel fail to take into account the interests of the European Union but more particularly - and much more importantly - it completely failed to listen to the producers , especially the small producers , representing the ACP states .
Well , it really would be a serious matter if the World Trade Organization , in this matter and in other matters , too , were to continue to work and act not in the interests of a more balanced and freer world market , as laid down in the Marrakesh agreements , but exclusively for the benefit of certain powerful interests , whether those interests be national or representative of multinational enterprises .
The common organization of the market in bananas was difficult to achieve but , overall , the result was a balanced one , including the banana protocol to the Lomé convention , a fundamental contractual agreement which is , moreover , recognized by the Marrakesh agreements and covering eleven traditional banana-supplying States which , if this decision were to be confirmed - would either be further impoverished or forced to abandon an opportunity for trade in favour of further forms of assistance .
There was a slogan a few years ago , ' trade not aid ' , but here we have a case where trade is being denied to those outside the sphere of the big multinationals .
That is why the Commission must use every possible means of recourse and appeal to the World Trade Organization in order to gain a just settlement . Frankly , we are somewhat surprised , and saddened , by the terms in which the Council has expressed itself in this chamber .
In fact , the two great questions that arise today are these : whether the agricultural and commercial policies of the European Union can have a future within the new world organization ; and whether the actions of the European Union in dealings with its partners in the developing countries can bring a new structure and a new framework to the machinery of international regulation , rather than being swept aside by the interests of a few big international undertakings .
Mr President , after so much bad news for Community and ACP banana producers , there is a ray of hope with the initiative from the European Council and Commission that has given rise to this debate and the resolution we will probably vote on tomorrow .
As somebody said , the statement from the Council representative was rather perplexing , but hearing the position of the Commissioner , Mr Fischler , I am satisfied that he seems to have recognized the magnitude of the problem .
The common organization of the banana market has not had a moment 's peace in its short life : it has been subject to all kinds of attacks , both in the legal arena and in the battle for public opinion .
No productive sector can thrive in such a climate .
I do wonder what powerful enemies European banana producers have , that can mobilize and pressurize so persistently .
Regulation 404 / 93 has been an effective instrument for organizing the European banana market up to now .
European producers have been satisfied , supplies to the markets have been guaranteed , prices have been maintained within the logical contingencies of the market and the European consumer has not suffered in any way since the Regulation came into force .
Certainly Latin American producers have not been negatively affected , as has already been said .
In view of all this , why do we have to succumb to the interests of one of the powerful banana multinationals ?
The banana multinationals have a dark history of interference in Latin American politics .
Can they have such a decisive influence on Europe too ?
What will the Commission do to maintain the standard of living in certain European producing regions for which the banana is the principal and sometimes the only source of wealth ?
If it were to agree to change the current system and make Community production non-viable , I would not be able to explain that to the inhabitants of the island where I was born , which has survived on bananas alone for two centuries .
Mr President , Commissioner , strange though it may seem - and knowing my mythology - I never thought that , in the European Parliament , the apple of discord would be replaced by a banana of discord .
In fact , this is an historic replacement and it will go down in the annals of the European Parliament , especially now that the trade Leviathan which exists worldwide succeeds in overcoming treaties , abolishing conventions , fighting against people unable to produce cheap bananas .
Why ?
Because they earn more , because they have a better standard of living , because they have come closer to the standards of living of Europe .
But the Leviathan does not want that to come about .
It wants to monopolise all banana trade at European and world levels .
We no longer have the excuse that , when the Soviet Union existed , it brought down Colonel Arbentz in Guatemala , when he was a nuisance for United Fruit .
We no longer have that excuse !
The only excuse we have now is that ' pax americana ' wants to fight the whole world and conquer it .
Without referring to that almost archaeological entity which used to be known as ' Community preference ' , I should like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to the membership of the WTO panel .
Who are they ?
The Commission tell me that there are three people on that committee .
One representative from Hong Kong , one representative from Switzerland and one representative from Australia .
I do not want to judge them unfairly , but I have to say that these are three countries which do not exactly have very pro-European feelings , and they certainly would not be accepted without discussion by any court .
I do not contest the existence of courts but I should at least like to see impartial judges sitting on them .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that the statement by Commissioner Fischler is indeed to be welcomed - with the rider given by Mr Hindley .
I suggest that the message relayed by the Commissioner be sent forthwith to the traditional producers , simply to give them some encouragement and hope for the future .
During our visit to the Windward Islands last week , Mrs Kinnock , Mr Thomas and myself felt the enormous responsibility that the people of these islands were placing upon us .
They are desperate for help to combat the WTO ruling , an action that had the full might of the American Government behind it .
The GATT Round was not concluded until the banana regime was in place - for those who can remember , a lot of hard work and delicate negotiations went into securing that agreement - and now we see it blown apart by the USA , a country that does not export bananas and suffers no job losses because of it .
If the allegations in the American press are to be believed , then one multimillionaire can call in the chips to get the Clinton administration to put the boot into small countries in the name of free trade .
In our discussions last week , everyone from farmers to prime ministers gave us the same clear message : if the ruling from the WTO prevailed , good governance and democracy in those countries would be at risk ; economic disaster would prevail , followed by social unrest ; and , of course , tourism flourish only in countries that stay out of the news headlines .
Bananas are the only crop that guarantee a regular weekly income .
Take that away and poverty would follow .
But , above all , they said : we look to the European Union to confront the USA on Third World issues .
An appeal is essential , but this can only be a first step .
The countries of the eastern Caribbean accept globalization and liberalization of trade , they are modernizing and diversifying , but they need help and they need time !
The WTO ruling gives neither , and that is why we have to confront it , and we definitely have to appeal .
Mr President , of course what we recognize in this debate is that the long-running banana drama actually crystalizes the elements of the debates in Europe about the whole issue of preferential access .
The special trade allowances which we give , as wealthy countries , to poorer countries as a ladder out of poverty are now being challenged by those who prescribe blanket liberalization as the only option .
And as others have said , in the European Union we have our very special and unique relationship with the ACP countries .
That relationship is based upon an understanding that trade is the engine of growth for developing countries .
Of course the very word banana produces an easy snigger and a laugh and the fashionable Euro-sceptic banter we hear often relates to bananas .
But as Terry Wynn said , when we were in the Windward Islands last week , we actually faced the stark realities that people in those islands are facing themselves , as they try to meet the challenge from dollar bananas .
They are now depending upon the European Union to buy them time .
These people are not holding out a begging bowl - they are only asking for recognition that they have small landowning democracies in countries which have human rights and which protect workers ' rights .
These standards of course are not to be found in the feudal conditions which exist in Latin American plantations .
It is not as if these countries have a big share of the market .
Two-thirds of the bananas that we import are now from Latin America .
As Terry Wynn said , we have to ask why America lodged this complaint .
Was it because Carl Linden who heads Chiquita brands began channelling $ 500 000 into the Democratic campaign during the presidential elections ?
Linden took coffee with President Clinton and actually slept in Lincoln 's bedroom .
The payoff for those favours , it seems , was a WTO ruling which effectively threatens the entire social fabric of a region .
Finally , in his speech last Friday in Barbados , the President of St Lucia said : ' bananas are to the Caribbean what cars are to Detroit ' .
I hope the European Union will help Bill Clinton to understand that fact .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the findings of the preliminary report of the Banana Panel of the World Trade Organisation are contrary to the interests of the European Community and in particular to those of Portugal and the autonomous region of Madeira , which is a part of my country , and even more to the traditional banana exporters of the ACP countries .
We all know what the findings of the WTO Banana Panel report are but they coincide with positions taken by the United States and certainly seem to defend the interests of the Chiquita multinational which markets LatinAmerican bananas throughout the world .
The Community has the right and obligation to defend Community banana producers according to the principle of Community preference and ensure that agreements which we have signed with ACP countries in the framework of the Lomé Convention are respected .
Mr President , Commissioner , if the European Union is forced to accept the findings of the WTO Banana Panel report , that would call into question the defence of the principle of Community preference and this would mean speeding up liberalization of the banana COM , calling into question also the already precarious economic and social stability of banana-producing countries , as well as the ecological and environmental balance as a consequence of abandonment of these crops .
Commissioner , I should like here and now to remind you of the final part of your letter , in reply to mine , dated 20 May 1997 , which said that you were aware of the importance of banana growing on the island of Madeira from an economic , social and ecological point of view .
That being so , I call on you and the Commission to present a clear strategy on the banana market , bearing in mind the legitimate interests of Community and ACP banana country producers .
Mr President , as President-in-Office of the Council I have listened very carefully to what the honourable Members have said .
They have made clear their concern about the possible implications of the ruling , and they have spoken of their great concern for banana producers in the European Union and also in particular for producers in the ACP countries . We share their concern .
We shall take account of the interests of these producers in our search for a solution , and we shall have to examine in detail how best we can protect them in the short and longer term .
I would just add one point of a general political nature which has not yet been made in the debate .
This trade dispute is taking place within the World Trade Organization 's legal system , and I use that term advisedly .
The European Union and its Member States have voluntarily agreed to abide by the WTO 's rules , and we ourselves were involved in setting up the WTO panel procedure .
We voted in favour of making the panel 's rulings legally binding , and even urged that they should be made so .
Some honourable Members have expressed severe criticism of these rulings , but I do not take this to mean that they feel we should disregard them altogether , since this would be tantamount to rejecting a very carefully constructed system of laws governing international trade .
The Council feels that this would not be in the interests of either the European Union or the producers we are trying to protect .
Finally , the Council will be examining the ruling in greater detail in close consultation with Commissioner Fischler and his services , and will draw its conclusions once it has considered all the various aspects .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Medina Ortega said earlier , today 's debate has very clearly demonstrated the strength of feeling in the House concerning the banana issue .
I should like to thank the many Members who have spoken out in favour of lodging an appeal .
All I can say at this stage is that the Commission will exercise its full responsibility in that respect .
However , we must also realize that we shall need to consider in detail and carefully prepare the grounds on which we base an appeal , because as you are well aware , an appeal will throw the case open once again .
It would hardly be in your interest , I am sure , if the outcome of the appeal were to be a stiffening of the original ruling .
That is why it is vital to prepare an appeal very carefully .
Another factor also has to be borne in mind : there have as yet been relatively few rulings under the new procedure .
The fact is that with the establishment of the WTO , the procedure was reorganized , and it could now be said that each case represents a precedent .
These first cases will be the basis from which the WTO develops its case-law .
For that reason too , we must take particularly careful note of all the cases which are currently pending and being decided .
Therefore , I would also ask that we should keep quite clearly to our agreed procedures , taking one step at a time , and also debating one step at a time .
I would almost go so far as to say that it is counterproductive to engage in a debate now on how we should react to one final ruling or another .
The very last thing that it would be in our common interest to do would be to seek to influence the WTO 's final ruling in any way .
Indeed , this is also a reason why we should refrain from stating our positions in public in the final stage of the proceedings .
Nonetheless , one thing is clear : banana producers in the European Union have the same rights as any other farmers in the European Union - they are entitled to look to the objectives set out in Article 39 of the Treaty with regard to Community preference and general solidarity with our agricultural producers .
It is equally clear that we have a responsibility towards the ACP countries , with whom we naturally also have a contractual agreement .
And , as I see it , we can in any event continue to stand by that agreement in the interests of those concerned .
Bearing all this in mind , the Commission will , as I said earlier , set about analysing the WTO ruling in detail and then decide on the right way in which to proceed .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
I have received nine motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The debate will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Situation in Zaire
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Zaire .
Mr President , the Council remains extremely concerned at the developments in Zaire , both in political and humanitarian terms .
Despite the recent face-to-face meeting between President Mobutu and the ADFL leader Mr Kabila , there are still no real negotiations taking place between the parties to the conflict .
The refugees and displaced persons in eastern Zaire are in an agonizing situation , and repatriation is still not taking place without difficulties .
On 4 May , a meeting organized by the special representative of the United Nations and the South African Government took place between President Mobutu and Laurent Kabila on board a South African naval vessel which bears a rather difficult name .
This meeting - for which there had been pressure from many quarters , including the European Union - did not bring the breakthrough which had been hoped for .
No cease-fire was agreed between the parties , and nor was there any agreement on the transition process .
Shortly after this meeting , Mr Kabila announced that the capital , Kinshasa , would be taken by force if President Mobutu did not resign within a week .
The most recent reports indicate that Mr Kabila 's ADFL is closing in on Kinshasa .
This has also led to an upturn in the fighting in the past few days , and the increased resistance from the Zairean army over this period has resulted in a very large number of casualties .
If the ADFL were to proceed with an attack on the capital , this could lead to further serious bloodshed , with heavy casualties among the civilian population .
In the meantime , on 10 May the transitional parliament in Kinshasa - which I would point out has not been democratically elected - chose as its president the Archbishop of Kisangani , Monsignor Monsengwo .
As president of the transitional parliament , Mr Monsengwo is also a possible successor to President Mobutu , in the event of his death or resignation .
In fact , both the political opposition led by the former prime minister Mr Tshisekedi and the ADFL have reacted negatively to his appointment .
It is also very doubtful whether Mr Monsengwo will accept the post .
The Council emphatically supports the recent mediation efforts by the President of South Africa , Mr Mandela , and his Vice-President .
The report that President Mobutu and the ADFL leader Mr Kabila are to meet again today on the South African warship is therefore to be welcomed .
The Council hopes that these talks will involve genuine negotiations which will prevent further acts of violence and represent a first move towards a peaceful transition process in Zaire .
The Council has already given detailed attention to the situation in Zaire on several occasions , and has made its position clear .
In February 1996 , the Council appointed a special representative for the Great Lakes region , Mr Aldo Ajello , to assist the presidency in its efforts to mediate in the conflicts in the region .
The starting-point here has always been that the European Union primarily has a supporting role in the process of political dialogue and humanitarian assistance which is taking place under the auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity .
In this context , on 30 April this year , the Council once again expressed its concern at the situation in Zaire , called on the parties to avoid further bloodshed , and instructed its special envoy to take all possible measures .
The Council pointed to the need for a peaceful transition process and appealed to the parties to cooperate in free elections , to be held within twelve months .
The Council is deeply disturbed at the present lamentable situation of the refugees and displaced persons in eastern Zaire .
Access for international humanitarian organizations to the areas captured by the ADFL is still very limited .
The European Union has repeatedly protested at this to Mr Kabila .
Until recently , the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees only had access to part of the area between Kisangani and Obundu where most of the refugees are hiding out in groups in woodland .
This means that the organization is being hampered in carrying out the repatriation of the Rwandan refugees to their native country .
The loading of refugees onto trains and goods wagons did not take place under the control or protection of the UNHCR and , as we know , these transports have had disastrous consequences .
Recent reports suggest that the UNHCR has been able to extend somewhat the area in which it is active , but thousands of refugees are being found in a seriously weakened condition there .
From 26 to 29 April , a mission to the region was carried out by the special representative , Mr Ajello , and a representative of the presidency .
During this mission , the ADFL leader , Mr Kabila , was strongly urged to allow UNHCR assistance , and he promised to give the UNHCR full access to the territory captured by the ADFL .
The Council is urging him - and will continue to do so - to stand by this promise and provide the humanitarian organizations with all the help they need in carrying out their tasks .
The Council also rejects any time-limit as regards the repatriation of refugees .
The Council is very concerned at the refusal of Mr Kabila to allow the United Nations Commission on Human Rights to investigate allegations of human rights violations in the territory captured by the ADFL .
On 12 May , the UN mission returned empty-handed from Kigali .
The Council is convinced of the need for a thorough , independent inquiry into the accusations , and calls on the ADFL to cooperate fully with the UN mission .
Recent reports on continuing human rights violations in the area controlled by the ADFL highlight the need for a rapid on-the-spot investigation .
In connection with the recent reports , the presidency issued the following statement this afternoon , and I quote : ' The presidency is continuing to receive reports of violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed in the area controlled by the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire , the ADFL .
It expresses its serious concern , in particular at recent reports of massacres at Mandaka and attacks on staff of humanitarian organizations working in the region .
The presidency once again urges all the parties , including the ADFL , to show respect for human rights , and calls on all those who are in a position to do so to convey this demand to the leadership of the ADFL . '
To sum up , the process of political transition in Zaire has not so far been satisfactory .
Hitherto , the international efforts have had little success .
The parties directly involved in the conflict are primarily to blame in this respect .
Against this background , the Council nevertheless expresses the hope that the transition process in Zaire will take place peacefully .
It calls on the parties to engage in negotiations as quickly as possible , so as to arrive at a peaceful settlement and avoid further bloodshed .
The Council therefore continues to support the mediation efforts being made by the international community , in particular by South Africa , but also by the United Nations , the OAU 's special envoy Mr Sahnoun , and the European representative , Mr Ajello .
The European Union can only play a supporting role here in the process taking place under the auspices of the UN and the OAU .
To this end , the Union has repeatedly expressed its support for the peace plan drawn up by Mr Sahnoun , which has also been endorsed by the United Nations Security Council .
The Council remains concerned at the humanitarian situation in eastern Zaire - and also that of the refugees and displaced persons elsewhere in the country - and calls on the parties involved to cooperate fully with the UNHCR and other humanitarian organizations , without restrictions or conditions being imposed .
Finally , Mr President , I would assure you that the Council is continuing to monitor developments very closely , and will do everything in its power to influence the situation positively , however difficult that has appeared so far .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the moment the progress of the negotiations and military action which will decide where power lies in Zaire in the future is partially obscuring the human drama which continues to be played out virtually all over the country .
I am thinking specifically and without exception of all those people in distress , whether displaced persons , or refugees from Rwanda or Burundi .
I deliberately use the term ' partially obscuring ' because the scale of the tragedy and the rare but atrociously inhuman pictures will have disturbed even those most preoccupied with the strategic , economic and geopolitical stakes implied by this change of power .
It is now clear that Zaire is moving towards a new stage in its history .
I have no regrets about the stage which is coming to an end , but the power incarnate in this change causes me grave anxiety because up to now it has flouted every international humanitarian convention , as well as many human rights conventions .
As regards the humanitarian situation , I have very little news to give you , unfortunately , as we cannot get access to the regions involved .
You will have seen the television pictures when the crews accompany the humanitarian workers where they are allowed to go .
For security reasons we are making every effort to get there with witnesses , hence also with certain media .
But apart from that , I frankly do not have much to tell you about Kivu and so on , because we have not been able to get access to that region .
We have even been expelled from regions we had received authorization to go to .
As you know , for once the entire humanitarian community has spoken with one voice and sent a report to the Security Council on 6 May 1997 , through the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs .
Not only have the United Nations agencies , the Red Cross , the NGOs , unanimously produced and published this single report on the situation , they have also made identical recommendations .
I also want to comment on some of the background , and remind you that almost half of the 400 , 000 Rwandan refugees in Zaire who did not return to their own country were located and helped a few weeks ago at Tingi Tingi .
It is also important to remember that in December , when the multinational force was disbanded even before it arrived on the premise that all the refugees had returned to Rwanda and that there were therefore no more refugees in Zaire , few dared claim that about 400 , 000 people were missing from the roll call .
That was in December and by the end of January some 200 , 000 of these 400 , 000 refugees had been found in the Tingi Tingi area .
Hardly had assistance arrived than a new attack was launched against the camp and all these people were dispersed .
100 , 000 of them were recently found in the Kisangani and Ubundu area .
You know what happened in the Kisangani region .
You are aware of the interminable discussions about how to repatriate the refugees , with the FDL and the HCR at loggerheads .
By the time these matters had been resolved 80 , 000 to 100 , 000 refugees in the camps were again being attacked .
The next morning the refugees has disappeared . !
Finally , thanks to the pressure from Mr Ajello of the HCR , we were able to reach the area .
The reports from the witnesses are pretty clear .
What they saw was utterly intolerable .
I must stress that although access to the 56th , 82nd and 94th km will probably be granted in the next few hours , so far we have not been able to get to the places we have been authorized to go to .
In addition , the humanitarian agencies and the HCR in particular have been accused of inefficiency , indeed worse - we were blamed for the massacres and accused of killing the refugees .
Mrs Ogata has already reacted advisedly to these accusations , but we think there is a strategy to distance the HCR and all the humanitarian organizations from the repatriation operations .
This strategy has been tried and will be tried again .
Kigali - and this is official - has proposed organizing repatriation operations jointly with the FDL , through direct financing by donors , thereby relegating the international community and the HCR to the rank of mere observers .
In the last few weeks , as the Council has just said , the European Union , the United States and the UN have been putting on intense pressure through their special envoys to persuade the FDL to put an end to the systematic violations of human rights and allow humanitarian agents and in particular the HCR free access to the refugees .
At last that pressure has made it possible to get the repatriation operations going in earnest .
So far 22 , 000 refugees have been helped .
A period of sixty days had been granted to complete the operations , which constitutes a first at the international level .
In fact this is the first time that a deadline has been imposed for ensuring the repatriation of the refugees , because if any logistic operation is forbidden after a certain deadline , then everything gets more complicated .
Two more points .
First , through the humanitarian office , without discrimination or partiality , and respecting humanitarian principles , the Commission has financed and is financing humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable , whether they are refugees , Zairean displaced persons , or persons affected by the pillage and conflict that has been raging in this region for over seven months .
It is neither our policy nor our custom to ask everyone for their passports , but it has to be recognized that the humanitarian area is extremely restricted or no longer exists in this zone .
We are profoundly convinced that if this humanitarian situation is not dealt with at the highest political level without delay and if the consultations taking place with all the countries intervening either directly or indirectly in the region do not achieve their goal , the humanitarian disaster which is already taking shape could turn into total catastrophe .
There is an immediate need for two measures to be adopted and implemented without delay .
The military extremists apparently engaged in hunting the refugees should be replaced by a disciplined army which cooperates with the humanitarian agencies , and an unconditional agreement must be obtained for the UN Human Rights Committee to investigate the matter , as was originally planned .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I myself have already been criticized in the context of this crisis for - I quote - taking a heterodox position , for Mobutophilia , and lately , for being a psychopath .
I am not going to waste my time responding to such accusations - it seems to me they fit the people who make them more than me , and damage their credibility .
With the Commission , I certainly intended to continue protesting and shouting if necessary , first because I am fulfilling the mandate that was entrusted to me , and secondly because I believe in it .
I am convinced that no compromise is possible on matters of principle and violations of international law , and the international Community has the right and duty to ensure that its members , and above all those who aspire to become members of it must respect those laws if they want to be credible .
Otherwise it will soon be back to the law of the jungle for everyone .
But as this human tragedy draws to a close , we must acknowledge that the entire international community missed an opportunity to prevent butchery at the time of the aborted deployment of the multinational force .
I cannot help noting , with bitterness , that more western soldiers are deployed in Brazzaville today evacuating their compatriots from Zaire than were to make up the multinational force it was envisaged sending in November , alongside the African forces .
( Applause ) I also note that several Member States have now rushed twice as many soldiers to the Congo , ready to intervene , as they have nationals to be protected in Kinshasa .
I never want to hear it said in our capitals again that the lives of African refugees have the same value as the lives of our own citizens .
I no longer believe it .
And equally bitter considerations relate to Europe 's role in that decisive phase .
Despite the very laudable efforts of our special envoy Mr Ajello , it was quite clear that none of the main protagonists in the process , which was as lacking in transparency at the negotiating level as at the military level , wanted the European Union fully involved .
You know what this makes me think about the effectiveness of the CFSP , but still it is worth remembering that when it comes to rebuilding the country and paying for its reconstruction , mineral rights contracts will probably have been concluded in the wings of this transition without Europe .
I think that there is a lesson to be drawn .
We were not able to prevent a human tragedy .
And right at the end , how many lives are we trying to save ? 20 , 000 , 30 , 000 ?
I hope we will not forget that however many lives we manage to save at the end of the day , it will be negligible by comparison with the 400 , 000 lives already lost .
( Applause )
Mr President , I should first like to express my deepest and most sincere admiration for Commissioner Bonino . Not only do I admire the way in which she , personally , is coming to grips with this tragedy , as she has with other tragedies that have left their mark on our world , but I would also thank her for an approach to this situation which is unorthodox - a term which others may well have levelled at her as an accusation but which I regard as more of a compliment in connection with the role of the international community and of the Union in the events in Zaire .
As has already been said , the situation has probably reached a critical turning point , now that Kabila 's troops are preparing to enter Kinshasa .
There is no doubt that at this stage in the evolving situation - when we must continue to deploy all our negotiating powers to the very last moment in order to try to ensure that the political situation in Zaire develops as peacefully , politically and diplomatically as possible - we cannot refrain from stressing the great bitterness and sorrow that exist for the serious errors and oversights of the past . Perhaps , too , before long , someone will be able to add to those errors the crimes that have been committed , or at least tolerated - both old and historical crimes and more recent ones .
In our motion for a resolution we have emphasized three key requirements . First , that the dictator Mobutu should leave the stage ; secondly , that an interim government should be set up which is broadly accepted and which will accept international mediation to set the country on the road to democracy and free elections ; and , thirdly , that Kabila and the faction he leads should immediately allow refugees and displaced persons free access to every region of the country .
Mr President , this is another situation in which we have not seen the European Union playing a positive , highprofile political part , and we can only hope that things will improve in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everything has really been said , now that we have heard the Council and the courageous speech by Mrs Bonino .
However , I believe that we must continue to protest at what is intolerable , in order to preserve the honour of Parliament in this immense tragedy .
We are in fact approaching the end of a particularly troubled and dramatic period in Zaire .
Nevertheless , we are still hearing fresh reports of massacres in Zaire every day , as indeed we have just now .
But this House has no reason to reproach itself .
We spoke out clearly in favour of finding solutions to explosive problems such as that of the refugees .
We were in favour of removing all military forces from eastern Zaire , of maintaining the territorial integrity of the countries involved , of deploying a multinational intervention force , of holding an international conference of the countries around the Great Lakes , of defending human rights , of preparing for serious elections in Zaire as a first practical move towards democratization , and of humanitarian aid .
None of this has happened , apart from the humanitarian aid .
And however extensive it may be , we know that humanitarian aid does not bring political solutions to conflicts .
We are now witnessing the implosion of the Zairean state .
We are once again seeing how weapons talk , or as Mao put it : power comes from the barrel of a gun .
What system will now take the place of the disappearing regime in Zaire ?
Once again , the political groups in Parliament have put their opinions into words .
It is a good text .
But it is hard to find words to protest at what we find so very sad , to give expression to our sense of bitterness .
Firstly , there is the capitulation of the international community , which has done nothing to prevent a murderous disgrace .
Through murders , the fait accompli in international politics , the principle that might is right , is once more being asserted .
However , our protest is also directed - and it pains me to have to say this - at the passivity of the European Union .
We deplore the internal wrangling , the disagreements between Member States , the indecision of the Union .
So far , it has all just been words and communiqués .
Europe has been unable to find a practical solution and to put an end to this conflict .
A historian from Zaire said three days ago on Belgian television - and I thought of this automatically when I heard Mrs Bonino - that the life of a black African is now clearly worth much less than the life of a European from the former Yugoslavia .
Anyone who was listening to him knew what he meant .
Perhaps you have forgotten , ladies and gentlemen , but we declared that 1997 was to be the year of combating racism .
And what are we seeing now ?
During this year of combating racism , Europe is standing by while in Zaire , a kind of ethnic cleansing is being carried out on a massive scale .
It is not the first time , unfortunately , that we have seen this kind of ethnic cleansing taking place in Africa .
But we thought that Europe 's sense of responsibility had since developed in such a way that it would never tolerate such a thing again .
It is therefore more than hypocritical that in 1997 of all years , the year of combating racism , nothing is being done to prevent or put an end to such massacres , a word which was also used by Mrs Bonino .
As you know , the expression ' having dirty hands ' is often used in politics .
I shall make no comment on that .
But I would end by saying that you can also have dirty hands by doing nothing at critical moments .
While we are talking here , tens or possibly hundreds of people are being murdered , and we are drawing up communiqués .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , even as we hold this debate , another meeting is taking place in the Congolese port of Point Noir between President Mobutu and Laurent Kabila , the leader of the rebels of the alliance of democratic forces for the liberation of Congo-Zaire , under the aegis of South Africa , to try to reach a peaceful settlement .
It would have been helpful if Parliament and the Union could have agreed a position in time to redouble their efforts to achieve a lasting solution to the conflict - a very difficult matter - to be based on a peace process geared to preparing for free and democratic elections for the Zairean people .
Kinshasa is now a city under siege : the shops are closed , the streets are deserted , and , following yesterday evening 's curfew imposed as a result of the arrival of Kabila 's rebels at the gates of the city , the population is living in fear of a blood bath .
Despite the calls for calm , the tension is mounting , partly as a result of the contradictory messages people are receiving , some asking them to stay indoors to avoid the worst and others calling upon them to resist by force of arms , while others again are accusing foreigners of planning to massacre the African population .
The slaughter of refugees and displaced persons is continuing in Zaire ; the rebel forces are obstructing the distribution of aid and , despite the statements made for the benefit of the international community regarding a cessation of hostilities , the head of the rebel forces is still favouring the military opposition in the country .
The United Nations Security Council needs to adopt swift and energetic measures to put an end to these massacres and appalling violations of human rights , and especially to the inhuman treatment being meted out to the refugees from Rwanda and Burundi and people displaced from other areas .
It is important that the Union should agree upon a plan of action to help in the search for global political solutions in the Great Lakes region , combining with the UN and the OAU to organize a regional conference , something for which I have called in this House on several occasions .
And , as we have said more than once , there is also a need for a commission of inquiry to be set up to shed light on the appalling abuses perpetrated by the rebels ; and , finally , as a matter of urgency , the humanitarian aid really must reach those who need it , to try to put an end to a tragedy that is truly unworthy of humanity .
Mr President , I hope I will have enough time to express my group 's solidarity with Mrs Bonino against the attacks that have been made on her and to congratulate her on her courage and the sharpness of her analysis .
I also want to express regret that the Council perhaps dealt rather rapidly with the conclusions of the agreement between the African Heads of State and the Declaration of Libreville , which lays the foundations for a possible transition towards democracy , especially at a time when some of the forces are still operational and there could still be battles between the President of the Congo 's Praetorian guard and Kabila 's troops .
Finally , I wonder if we can expect anything good from Kabila , and I am afraid we may be facing a situation comparable to that of Iran .
Twenty years ago , Mr President , no-one supported the Shah any more but Khomeini has sometimes made us miss the previous regime .
Mr President , let us hope we do not find Kabila makes us miss Mobutu .
Mr President , I believe that , quite apart from the meetings now taking place , it can be assumed that Kinshasa will fall to Kabila 's forces in the next few days .
This is one of the most important political events that have happened in Africa during the last twenty years , because it is destined to change the geopolitical balance of the entire African continent .
What is happening in that region , I believe , is a kind of Americanization of Africa - I believe we are seeing the disappearance of any European policy towards that continent .
Politically , the Council has been totally inert in the Great Lakes region , imprisoned by an ancient nation-state logic whose only result has been to deliver up large areas of Africa into the hands of the Americans - from southern Africa to the Great Lakes region and from the Horn of Africa to the Sudan and the whole of Muslim North Africa .
This , as I see it , is the result of a senseless policy pursued by the Council and by the Member States themselves , which have supported dictatorial and tyrannical regimes to the bitter end .
The Zairean saga of recent weeks and the end of Mobutu 's regime are an object lesson in what not to do in terms of a European foreign policy .
Or , more accurately , it is another demonstration of the absence of any European foreign policy , and I hope that the Council will finally take advantage of the opportunity provided by the revision of the Treaty to arm itself with a common foreign and security policy which will avoid any future repetition of Europe 's recent humiliation in the Great Lakes region of Africa .
Europe has been totally absent from the political scene , and , although I customarily tend to be rather hard on the Commission , I must give it credit for having tried to play a positive role in this matter . That , however , was not a matter for the Commission alone , and so the results have not been totally favourable .
In conclusion , I have one final request , because I believe that we must now ask Kabila , as the military victor , to take specific action in the field of human rights and the rule of law , and to organize a regional peace conference and free elections ; I ask that the Council and the Commission should give a clear response and not hide behind the latest strong man , who on this occasion is no longer Mobutu but Kabila .
Mr President , not one organized body of the so-called international community has responded adequately to the crisis in the Great Lakes region .
The facts of recent months show that the standing-down of the UN intervention force has resulted in a humanitarian and political disaster .
And in that context , the responsibility of the United States is overwhelming .
I therefore found it simply disgraceful a few weeks ago to see the US envoy Mr Richardson stroking the head of a dying refugee child whose existence he had denied some months before .
This kind of moral and political hypocrisy will destroy the international community .
Ultimately , however , the Union and its Member States have also limited themselves to what the President-in-Office described in such fine words : giving attention , writing communiqués , sending whole teams of ordinary and special representatives - but where has been the coherent action ?
To my mind , the only person who has taken the lead with a view to implementing a European policy is Mrs Bonino .
She has said throughout the world what Europe should have done , but she did not have the means to do it .
And the result is that we have once again had to restrict ourselves to humanitarian aid , which in this case has not even reached the people because of the many obstacles we have experienced on the ground .
But what we are seeing in the meantime is that firms from those countries which made the UN intervention force impossible - and I repeat : the United States and Canada - are now reaping the fruits and picking up mining concessions at ridiculously low prices , which once again will do nothing for the Zairean population .
Today , therefore , the second round of negotiations between Mobutu and Kabila is taking place .
I hope that these will produce an agreement so as to avoid any bloodshed in Kinshasa , because with the 50 000 soldiers of the Zairean army from various factions , there really could be more casualties there than anywhere else .
However , the fundamental long-term question still remains : what happens afterwards as regards the distribution of power ?
When I read in the newspaper today that Mr Kabila is saying that the dictator Mobutu has to go , I say ' excellent ' , but when he then adds that all the power is now going to the people from the alliance , my heart sinks when I see what this alliance has already allowed to happen in areas where it has assumed power .
That is why I would appeal strongly to both the Union and the Member States that no outside power should say who is to be given power in Zaire ; it is the Zairean people who should have the chance to say who is to be given power and how that power should be distributed .
So no African power and no Western one either , and I also hope that we shall apply strict conditionality with regard to aid for and recognition of the new regime , and make them dependent on whether the Zairean people has a real say , yes or no .
That must be the decisive factor .
Madam Commissioner , we may have lost everything else , but you have possibly saved our honour , and for that you deserve our thanks .
And you are right , the situation in Zaire certainly warrants our interest .
Laurent-Désiré Kabila 's troops have the capital within their grasp , and he is making demands in line with his military achievements ; the major United Nations agencies are denied access to a vast territory because of massacres of civilians ; a corrupt dictator was set up and supported by successive governments of Union States , bringing discredit on our whole Union and its action ; the United States has built up influence in the region , the political situation on the ground is extremely complex , power is effectively in the hands of a warlord not particularly inclined to make concessions . Surely all this very much limits our opportunities for action on the ground ?
What can we demand ?
Nothing , of course .
What can we hope for ?
That the massacres will stop , the weapons will be laid down , free elections will reflect the popular will , and the Union will regain its lost prestige , at least in part .
If I may say so , Mr President , we have our work cut out .
Mr President , as Commissioner Bonino has said , the situation is still deteriorating rapidly , and what concerns us most is that Europe , after so much talk and so many debates , has proved incapable - as the Commissioner has said - of even beginning to solve the problem .
True , we have read with interest , and indeed enthusiasm , the statements made by Super-Commissioner Bonino .
True , we must give her credit for her commitment , which has been unfailing if sometimes exasperated .
But the basic problem is that we are wondering what this Europe , with a free hand , thinks it is doing in being absent from the scene at such an important time , when human beings - women and children - are being slaughtered and murdered , and yet we are trying to unload the responsibility onto other people . At all events , we cannot find the key to the problem and , in the absence of a common foreign policy , we cannot find any way of intervening or even generating those synergistic effects with other international forces that would allow effective intervention .
This really is one of the reasons for discouragement , a reason which both leaves us perplexed and urges us to accept greater responsibility with a view to trying to find solutions for the future .
The issue is a humanitarian one , but not only humanitarian : it is also about the acceptance of responsibility , because if we have had four or five or six or even seven debates on Zaire , and on other situations too , in the last two or three or four months , and we read the denunciations printed in all the national and international newspapers , and yet we cannot find a solution , it is clear that something is going wrong .
So we now call upon the Intergovernmental Conference to do something - and this call should be a loud and clear one from all the political groups .
That is the message we want to give to the Commissioner : that she is doing her duty , but that we would like her to do even more .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , much as we regret that it has come about through force of arms , we welcome the ending of the dictatorship in Zaire .
It was a dictatorship lasting over 30 years and it will remain an example of how terror can ruin an immensely rich country , subject its population to misery , encourage the brain drain , create a corrupt political class and destroy a society .
Looking to a democratic future , I think it is essential for Mobutu , the chief representative of that dictatorship , to abandon power , and do so as soon as possible to avoid further fighting .
And looking to a peaceful future , the new system needs to be capable of cementing the democratic forces around a consensus about the terms and timetable of transition until free elections can be held with their transparency guaranteed by the international community .
And here I believe the United Nations and above all the European Union need to play a fundamental role , taking responsibility for the political and social reconstruction of Zaire .
All too frequently our European Parliament regards its function of democratic control of the European Union 's relations as fulfilled with the despatch of observers to some initial legislative elections .
I think the powers article 218 of the treaty confers on the European Parliament , as well as the provisions of legal instruments where we have control over application - I am thinking , Madam Commissioner , of article 5 of the Lomé Convention - should be used to their full extent .
I therefore propose the creation in this Parliament of a permanent service to monitor political conditions in states with which the EU intends to sign treaties requiring the consent of Parliament .
Reconstructing Zaire and bringing peace to the whole region also requires the solution of the problem of the refugees and displaced persons whom we cannot forget , as the Commissioner has quite rightly said .
I want to tell her that her action has been correct , although it has not been followed up as it should have been by the whole international Community .
The new government must guarantee humanitarian organizations free access to the victims of the conflict and , in turn , the European Union must grant aid through ECHO - and we hope this will be the last time , but it is needed now if this population is to be helped .
That will enable us , if not to undo the mistakes of the past , at least to contribute to shaping the peaceful and democratic future a country as rich as Zaire should have .
Mr President , there is ultimately no point in us discussing Zaire here today unless the European Union can finally bring itself to do what a number of speakers have called for and adopt a clear position on the subject .
Simply exchanging one head of state for another will do nothing to improve the situation , either in Zaire or in the neighbouring countries .
As other speakers have said , the only way forward is a complete espousal of democracy .
Without a fundamental change , there is a danger that the third largest country in Africa will fragment .
The fact is that present-day Zaire is an artificial creation of the nineteenth century , and the African countries - underrating in some respects their own history and culture - have agreed in the OAU Charter to respect the borders that were drawn by the colonial powers in the previous century .
Broadly speaking , that agreement has worked and succeeded in preventing wars between nations , despite numerous domestic conflicts .
However , looking at Zaire today , we have to say that it is one of those countries consisting of a number of ethnic groups where the only way to secure the future and prevent disintegration would seem to be through the adoption of a federal structure .
With such a structure , individual ethnic groups can enjoy a certain measure of independence and , in my view , this is a country which can only be governed securely as a federation .
At the moment , we cannot say whether Kabila will prove to be another dictator or a statesman .
He has not spelled out how , as the leader of an alliance of democratic forces , he envisages the transition to democracy , nor how he intends to set about holding the first democratic elections in a country beset by geographical and ethnic problems on such a scale .
Mr President , so the last-chance summit is being held today .
No-one believes in it any more .
It is a last lap leading Zaire ineluctably towards a tragic destiny .
There is open conflict .
The alliance forces are advancing and it seems nothing can now prevent Mr Kabila entering Kinshasa in triumph .
Mr Kabila has the upper hand and will be the leader of tomorrow , for better or worse .
What does he care about being the target for criticisms , condemnations and pressures from Europe ?
France , Belgium , and dare we say it , Europe , not to mention the international community , have for too long abandoned that country to its sad fate .
In this general chaos is it still possible to play any role other than that of humanitarian donor ?
I seriously wonder .
The United States , with South Africa , may succeed in organizing negotiations covering the transition period and the situation after Mobutu .
Europe must support the talks with South African mediation and set everything in motion so that this Zairean crisis ends with free elections being held .
No doubt that will also be the last chance for us to be credible in the eyes of the African people and in the eyes of the world .
Mr President , the departure of Mobutu , much as it was hoped for , is no cause for rejoicing .
On the contrary , we should cry shame on Laurent-Désiré Kabila , because alongside the ' liberation of the Zairean people ' he organized genocide against completely innocent women and children .
I join my colleagues in recognizing Mrs Bonino 's courage in denouncing that fact .
What is going to happen now ?
The ball is also in the court of the European Union and its governments .
How are they going to recognize the Kabila regime ?
What conditions are they going to put on ?
Will they dare to tell him all the Rwandan soldiers who committed massacres must leave Zaire and cannot claim the title of members of the army of a country worthy of the name ?
Are they going to demand the effective organization of a transitional government and the preparation of a more democratic order ?
Are they going to dare to demand respect for human rights in Zaire ?
I do not know , but we ask these questions , because perhaps this will be the role of the European Union . Perhaps at last the Union will have a coherent policy towards Zaire and its people .
Because it is the Zairean people who matter here , those women , those children , those Zairean men who have suffered under an iniquitous and predatory regime , and who may have to fear another dictator now .
I want to end by saying this : Che Guevara spent six months in the Congo when Laurent-Désiré Kabila first opened a front in 1960 .
He came away discouraged , discouraged by many things , the complexity of the situation , perhaps also by Kabila 's attitude at the time , by the fact that Rwandan soldiers were already accompanying him in his struggle .
What would he say if he were still alive , in the name of the values I know he upheld ?
He would not be just discouraged , he would be disgusted , like all of us .
But we cannot let this disgust remove our sense of responsibility .
Well done , Mrs Bonino !
And Mr Patijn , we hope you will be able to shake up the European countries .
Mr President , I have been listening extremely carefully , not only to the statement by Mrs Bonino , but also and above all to the honourable Members .
I was struck by the sense of involvement which they all showed in this terrible political , humanitarian and indeed human tragedy .
It brings it home to us that after the settling of what we used to call the great strategic conflicts and the East-West conflict , it is not true that , as the American writer Fukayama put it , ' the end of ideology is the end of politics ' , because there is still a world in which the Member States , the Union , the Commission and the international organizations have to do everything they possibly can to prevent large groups of people from being deprived of their rights .
In this conflict , the main political question has been whether the objective would have been achieved if Western countries , the African countries or the international community had intervened militarily .
Not only the European Union , but also the international community as a whole was faced with this question when the tragedy in eastern Zaire unfolded , but I would also draw attention to the tragedy which had already taken place two years earlier .
The issue was raised at a certain stage , and an international group was set up to organize matters , led by Canada , under the auspices of the United Nations . However , because of the lead time which this always involves , events on the ground developed in such a way that military intervention in the form envisaged was no longer a real option and would not have helped to solve the problems .
I have to say to you that I personally - as a politician , a Dutchman and a European - regret that the international community and the European Union , at a certain point , were in fact obliged to watch the tragedy that was unfolding , once the military option had become unfeasible in political , military and logistical terms .
We cannot turn back the clock , but given the intensity of the discussions we had in the Council , and with the Commission and the other players among the international community , I would warn against adopting an attitude of self-criticism too easily now and reproaching ourselves for not having intervened militarily .
I worked for many years in the Ministry of Defence .
For years , I worked with generals in the Dutch Defence Ministry , and I was constantly impressed by the sense of responsibility shown by military leaders , with generals always asking the right questions when the policy of using the military apparatus was being discussed .
Just think about this , and about the consequences .
Are you ready to accept them , and also the losses ?
Can you justify this to your parliament ?
And are you prepared to accept that military intervention as such has its own political dynamic ?
That is the kind of question that was discussed . As the conflict developed , the international community , the United Nations and the permanent members of the Security Council judged that military intervention in this humanitarian tragedy was not the appropriate course of action , because these questions were asked .
It was because those advising on the matter took an unfavourable view of the relationship between the possibility of achieving the objective on the one hand , and the risks and resources on the other .
I can understand the frustration which is emerging from this debate - it is the frustration which we , as responsible politicians in the Council , have also felt over the past days , weeks and months because we could no longer stem the tide of events on the ground , where at a certain point reason was overtaken by the gun .
We must go further .
Naturally , at the next Council meeting , we must try to gear our objectives to the following priorities in order to bring this human tragedy to an end .
I believe that the Council intends firstly - and it will certainly use its special representative and its diplomacy to this effect - to aim for a cessation of hostilities and the opening of negotiations and , when these are under way , to help them succeed in bringing about a peaceful transfer of power in Zaire .
Secondly , this must be linked to the right of international organizations to do their work in the areas and for the people that are in need of it .
When there is a cease-fire , and when a political agreement exists in principle on a transition which is clearly imminent in Zaire , every effort must then be directed towards establishing a minimum of stability in this vast country , where so many people are having a hard time of it at present .
This must happen according to the rules of the game : the establishment of an interim regime which will prepare elections , the holding of elections which produce a credible result , and then the establishment of a government with a legitimate authority after the elections - a legitimate authority which is worthy of receiving every support from the West to bring about stability , freedom and peace in this long-suffering country .
The Council is ready to work along these lines in terms of the action that is required of us , without further discussion .
From this position , I would once again express my special appreciation of the efforts of the Commission , and in particular Mrs Bonino - against all the political odds - to make the best of things and , through her tenacity , which all of us admire in her , to do the little which could still be done .
Are we becoming any wiser as a result of this tragedy ?
We are aware of the political limits as regards the extent to which the Member States in the West can shape the order of things in Central Africa .
We recognize the domestic political constraints on influencing these kinds of events militarily ; and we know the limitations of the common foreign and security policy , with its present inadequate range of instruments , when it comes to playing a preventive and remedial role in this kind of tragedy , but that is now being discussed within the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be fairly brief .
I want to thank you for your support , but I do not think I have done any more than my duty as Commissioner responsible for Humanitarian Aid .
You asked me to do my best to ensure respect for the humanitarian conventions and one of their provisions is specifically freedom of access to victims .
Addressing the Council because the question does in fact arise , I can say that neither I nor the Commission have any colonial , military or other ambitions in the region , but there is a real problem .
We felt aid through military intervention was probably not the most effective option and it presented political risks - I shall come back to this point because I agree with your analysis - and that it was better to intervene with humanitarian aid .
The problem we faced was that humanitarian aid was blocked from a certain point , in that we were not allowed access to those who needed help .
That constituted a flagrant violation of the humanitarian conventions , and without any other resources , we were not in a position to force access .
That is actually what happened .
Aid to people in distress was no longer possible .
Also we still had humanitarian personnel on the ground .
So we were forced to keep quiet for several weeks , for fear of reprisals .
You can see what a difficult position we were in .
However , on 6 May the humanitarian community went public .
After weeks and months of trying to calm the situation through prudent negotiation , we all decided jointly that decency demanded we break our silence .
Another point I want to stress is that I often wonder , when we are considering possible military intervention wherever it may be , whether European opinion would be prepared to accept the loss of human life involved .
Perhaps it is easier to envisage than to implement .
But the fact is that while questions are raised about loss of human life resulting from military intervention and the problems this might cause as far as public opinion is concerned , aid workers are increasingly being killed too .
Now it would seem that aid workers losing their lives , whether they are Médecins du Monde , Red Cross or human rights observers , does not present a problem .
It is a bit of a topsy turvy world when the international community reacts to the killing of specialized career soldiers whose job is to go into difficult or risky situations - and who are not there in the present case for understandable reasons - but does not really react to a massacre of aid workers .
There is a general sense of impunity and , frankly , a kind of return to barbarism .
I had the slight impression that it was accepted in the treaties and humanitarian conventions that humanitarian aid was sacrosanct .
We did not think anyone would fire on the Red Cross .
Well in the area we are talking about that no longer applies : in fact people do shoot at the Red Cross and there is no appropriate reaction .
This hardly encourages people to stay put and I think the aid workers are owed a debt of thanks for their commitment and their determination .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
Would the people in the gallery please refrain from any public demonstration .
Our Rules strictly prohibit that .
I would be very sorry to have people removed from the gallery , but if there are any more outbursts that is what I will have to do .
So please maintain the silence our Rules require .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
I suggest we move on without delay to Question Time to the Council .
You will appreciate , ladies and gentlemen , that discussion of the very important statement by the Council and the Commission on Zaire has affected the timetable for questions to the Council .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0165 / 97 ) .
Question No 1 by Juan Izquierdo Collado ( H-0293 / 97 )
Subject : Cohesion Fund
What is the Council 's view of the continuity of the Cohesion Fund post-1999 ?
Mr President , before I answer the question by Mr Izquierdo Collado , I have a point of order .
Because we have overrun to some extent , I have a serious problem with the rest of my schedule .
My flight is due to leave at 9 p.m. , and before then I also have an important discussion planned with a delegation from the European Parliament in connection with the Intergovernmental Conference .
I would ask you - though I put myself entirely in your hands - to limit Question Time to an hour and allow me to answer the remaining questions in writing .
Mr Patijn , you put me in a difficult position , because as I said just now this has been a day when the timetable has been changed - to meet everyone 's needs .
As President , I have to respect the time we have available , but I cannot force the Council representative to do the impossible .
We will therefore begin Question Time and when you think you have run out of time , I will try to close Question TIme .
That is rather reversing the burden of proof , Mr President .
You determine the procedure here .
I have explained to you that I have a problem with my schedule .
I am asking for Question Time to be curtailed and you are saying : well , just see how long you can go on for , and leave when you are ready .
No , I should like to reach an agreement with you on the procedure .
My proposal is therefore that I answer questions until 7.20 p.m. , and if you are in agreement with that , I should like you to give it your approval .
I will suspend Question Time to the Council at 7.20 p.m. , and I wish the European Union every success in the meetings you are going to hold .
You have the floor to reply to Mr Izquierdo Collado .
In reply to the question by Mr Izquierdo Collado on the Cohesion Fund post-1999 , I must point out that the provisions concerning the Cohesion Fund and its tasks are included in the Treaty , namely in Article 130d , second paragraph .
Moreover , Article 16 of the regulation establishing the Fund stipulates that the Council must review that regulation , on a proposal from the Commission , before the end of 1999 .
Since the Commission has not yet submitted a proposal on the subject , the Council takes the view that , for the time being , it is unable to adopt a position on the future of the Cohesion Fund .
For the sake of completeness , I can also report that this matter has not yet been discussed at all within the Council .
I can tell honourable Members that the Commission organized a conference at the end of April on the economic and social cohesion of the European Union , called the forum on cohesion .
This gathering , which was of an informal kind , addressed the Union 's structural policy in general , and we are naturally waiting to see what conclusions the Commission will draw from this .
Lastly , I would also remind the House that the European Council in Madrid requested the Commission to carry out a thorough analysis as soon as possible of the European Union 's system of financing , with a view to presenting - immediately after the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference - a communication on the future financial framework of the European Union after 31 December 1999 , taking account of the prospect of enlargement .
Since this communication from the Commission is of course not yet available , I think that as a representative of the Council , it is inappropriate for me to prejudge it .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my question was not about whether the Council had taken any decision , but about your own opinion on a most important issues , the cohesion fund .
In view of the importance of this Fund for certain regions and countries of the Union , and without waiting for proposals from the Commission , does the Council think it should include the continuity of the cohesion fund in the financial perspectives as from 1999 ?
I think the honourable Member is right in referring to the political and economic importance of the Cohesion Fund .
But it is impossible to form a judgement on this in isolation from the other challenges facing the European Union in terms of economic policy and the financial support for it .
That involves the question of how the European Union copes with enlargement in the coming years , particularly in the next century , taking account of the fact that the candidates for future membership of the European Union are well below the EU average in terms of both their general level of prosperity and the development of their physical and technological infrastructure .
In this broader context , we also have to answer questions such as : what is the future of the common agricultural policy and what will be the costs of further restructuring , if we are to absorb the agricultural sector of Eastern Europe ?
That is why , in my view , the European Council in Madrid was right to ask the Commission to outline for us - quickly and before any decisions on enlargement - the problems and the options which are facing us in this broader context , so that when decisions come to be taken on enlargement , the Member States and their national parliaments can see how this broader context might develop in the first five or six years of the next century .
We are now waiting for this analysis from the Commission .
Before that , it is necessary for us to conclude the Intergovernmental Conference without delay .
If we succeed in doing this at the European Council meeting in Amsterdam in June , I would expect that the Commission will produce this analysis of the future financial framework very quickly , from which we shall then see the possibilities as regards the future of the Cohesion Fund .
Question No 2 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0298 / 97 )
Subject : Ban in certain transit regions of the EU on movement of heavy vehicles by road on Sundays
What is the Council 's view of decisions by certain national governments of the EU to ban goods vehicles from travelling through transit regions on Sundays ?
This question by Mr Camisón Asensio concerns the banning of goods traffic on Sundays in certain transit areas .
It is important to establish from the outset here that the authority to impose any restrictions on goods traffic on Sundays within a Member State lies in principle with the Member State in question , provided such restrictions are in accordance with the general principles of Community law , especially those of proportionality and non-discrimination .
I would point out that , under the terms of Article 155 of the EC Treaty , it is the task of the Commission to ensure that the provisions of the Treaty and the measures taken pursuant thereto are applied and respected .
In this case , the Commission is monitoring the development of the situation on the ground on a daily basis , and it is responsible for identifying and correcting any possible distortions in this sector .
It would therefore seem advisable for the honourable Member to seek specific details from the Commission .
Furthermore , I would stress that the Member State at which his question is directed , namely France , is not the only country where restrictions of this kind are applied to goods traffic on Sundays .
There are similar restrictions in Austria , Germany , Italy and Portugal .
Also , one area of the honourable Member 's own country - the Basque country - has recently adopted provisions aimed at limiting goods traffic on Sundays and public holidays .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am glad you broadly share our concern about this .
It certainly is a basic issue and we also wanted to know the Council 's opinion , separately from the Commission 's , to put on record that the proposals to ban movement of goods vehicles on Sundays , in certain countries of the Union and in certain regions , may have harmful effects .
This is true of France , amongst others , which may damage certain countries with this ban .
In particular it will be prejudicial to the transit of Spanish goods .
In addition , a measure of this kind would restrict freedom of movement of goods and services through a region of the Union , irrespective of which , and that could constitute a violation of the Treaty of Rome .
Does the President-in-Office of the Council not think that the solution might be to create land corridors so that , in case of conflict in a country , it would be possible to travel by these emergency routes and vehicles would not be affected by conflicts in a country which was not their own ?
In any case , something has to be done and the Council should express an opinion .
I believe that the honourable Member is right to ask for attention to be given to this kind of phenomenon , but I repeat - and this is an established part of the whole political and legal system of the Community - that Member States have the freedom - and I would add on behalf of the Council that they must have it - to adopt measures in certain sectors , including goods traffic , which they regard as being in the interest of public order and the safety of their citizens .
I have already pointed out that Community law does of course lay down strict accompanying conditions in respect of such measures .
For instance , there must be a clear proportionality between the effect of the measures in terms of public order and any adverse consequences they may have for freedom of movement or the economy as a whole .
Above all , it is important that these measures do not turn out to be a form of discrimination against the nationals or interests of other Member States .
This is precisely the balance that we must seek to achieve in order to establish a sound basis on which to proceed .
It is extremely important to safeguard the principles of the free movement of goods and persons , and also the freedom of transport within the Community , not least in terms of political acceptance .
I would repeat that the Commission , as guardian of the Treaty , must give particular attention to the principles of balance , proportionality and non-discrimination .
If these boundaries are properly observed , then I would say that under the political and constitutional system of the European Union , it is very difficult to intervene radically in the internal arrangements of the Member States .
Question No 3 by Mr Wibe ( H-0305 / 97 )
Subject : Secret consultants ' report on the Volvo works at Umeå
The Swedish press has reported that the Commission intends to prohibit the Swedish transport subsidy to the Volvo works at Umeå .
This would threaten the existence of the factory and with it about 1000 jobs in the area .

The Commission 's attitude is based on a consultants ' report , the contents of which are , however , being kept secret , even from representatives of the Swedish Government .
Does the Comission not consider that it is unreasonable for a crucial consultants ' report to be kept secret from the general public , and especially from the Swedish Government ?
Can the Council , in its capacity as the Union 's highest decision-making body , oblige the Commission to disclose the report , at least to the Swedish Government ?
In reply to the question by Mr Wibe concerning an allegedly secret report on the Volvo works at Umeå , I must emphasize that the Council is not aware of and has never discussed the issue to which the honourable Member 's question refers .
However , the Council wishes to draw Mr Wibe 's attention to the fact that the competition rules in general and state aid in particular are among the specific areas for which the Treaty has granted competence to the Commission .
It may well be pointed out in this context that , under the terms of Article 93 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , the Council may decide in exceptional circumstances , on application by a Member State , that aid granted by a state shall be considered to be compatible with the common market .
In the present situation - let us be quite clear - the Council is totally unable to adopt a position on this matter , and still less so to oblige the Commission to disclose the report in question , even if only to the Swedish Government .
Consequently , it would seem advisable to me for the honourable Member to approach the Commission with a view to possibly obtaining further information .
We are indeed dealing with something of a question of principle here , namely how a body of the European Community should handle information .
I have to tell you , Mr Wibe , that I do not know whether the Commission possesses this report , but then the main point we are discussing here is whether the Commission , if it holds confidential business information relating to a competition issue , should be forced to disclose that information because of other reasons - for political reasons , or reasons connected with an internal political debate within a Member State .
I think that if we make a practice of this , we shall reach a point where the Commission , in carrying out its duties as guardian of the rules on competition , finds itself in an extremely difficult position when it comes to obtaining accurate information from firms .
I think that in the case of confidential business information - and I gather that what is involved here is a report produced by a consultancy for Volvo , in other words entirely within the private sector - it is unwise to insist on publication of a report which the Commission has in its charge because of its responsibilities for competition law .
In my view , this would in fact cause problems in terms of managing and implementing competition law .
Like Mr Wibe I would also like to thank the Council representative for their answer .
I can tell you that yesterday the Commission confirmed that the report exists .
It was said at the time that the reason that the report cannot be made public is because it may contain confidential business information .
The company involved , Volvo , has since said in the Swedish press that they would like the report to be passed to the Swedish Government .
The company is urging the EU to pass on the report .
So the obstacle preventing the report being passed on , which the Commission cited , is no longer there .
I think it would be good if the Council urged the Commission into maximum openness on this issue .
It is important that openness is not just a theory but that it is applied in practice as well .
Many people in Northern Sweden view this , the fact that regional aid is banned without an explanation , as very arrogant .
So I appeal to you to urge the Commission to the greatest possible openness on this issue .
With this Council presidency , you will find no reservations when it comes to seeking openness .
But I would repeat that what is involved here is the application of the competition rules within the European Union , in which context the Commission has certain well-regulated powers to obtain business information from firms on a confidential basis , naturally with this information and the associated interests being protected .
I think that here the Commission is bound by its own rules , which have been established by the Council and the Commission itself .
Once again , I would regard it as unwise if we were to make any protected business information held by the Commission available for public discussion , other than on the basis of the rules for publishing this kind of protected information .
In my view , to do so would make it very difficult for the Commission to perform its role in this area of competition law .
Sweden is one of those countries in the EU which has some of the longest transport distances .
We usually reckon to have an export disadvantage of between 700 and 1000 kilometres .
This is why for many years there has been a system of transport aid in order to even out competition within the country , which is a point worth emphasising .
This was a form of transport aid which was in fact accepted by the EU when Sweden became a member but now it has been scrutinised once again by the Commission .
Now that the EU wants to change this system , reference is made to a report marked secret .
I am prepared to state quite clearly that this cloak of secrecy , where not even the Government in the country concerned has immediate access to a report , shows up one of the truly worst aspects of the EU .
So I appeal to the Council representative to take the necessary initiative to have this report made public and to help to reassure all those people who are already suffering extremely hard in a region which even now has very , very high unemployment .
I can really only repeat what I have said twice before .
The Council , at least this presidency of the Council , is a committed supporter of maximum openness .
At the Intergovernmental Conference , the whole question of providing a better basis for the principles of transparency and openness is a high priority for many Member States , and that has very much been promoted by the presidency .
But I would repeat once more that even with the maximum degree of openness , industries which make confidential business information available to European Union institutions , either voluntarily or because they are obliged to do so , enjoy a certain amount of protection in terms of whether or not such confidential information is published .
I do not know if these rules apply specifically in this case , but once again , I understand that you discussed this here yesterday with the Commission .
The Commission explained the reasons why it does not wish to release this report at present , and I do not think it is a matter for the Council , not least with the limited legal means at our disposal , to force the Commission to do something which it has good reasons for not doing .
Question No 4 by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0306 / 97 )
Subject : Vocational training and Euromediterranean policy
Among the measures on the development of human resources included in the Barcelona declaration , as adopted at the first Euromediterranean Conference , was the holding of a regular dialogue on education policy , focusing initially on vocational training and involving , in particular , the European Training Foundation in Turin .
To date , the Council has issued guidelines concerning measures by the European Training Foundation for the countries of central and eastern Europe but not for the associated Mediterranean countries .
Given the needs of the Mediterranean region and the crucial importance of these training policies , when does the Council plan to issue guidelines concerning such measures for the MEDA countries and what form will they take ?
In answer to these questions by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo on vocational training and Euromediterranean policy , I would point out that the Council was one of the parties which adopted the Barcelona declaration and the programme of work in November 1995 , and that it therefore fully supports the aim of holding a regular dialogue on education policy , including vocational training , within the framework of the Euromediterranean partnership .
This is restated in the conclusions of the second Euromediterranean Conference which took place in Malta on 15 and 16 April .
In adopting the guidelines for the MEDA indicative programmes on 6 December 1996 , the Council also agreed that assistance for the Union 's Mediterranean partners should be particularly focused on developing human resources through improved supervision , targeting and quality of vocational and management training .
A number of activities are already under way in this area .
At multilateral level , an exchange of views was held at a tripartite conference in Catania on 24 and 25 May 1996 on a whole range of interrelated subjects in the social sector , including vocational training .
Also , financial assistance from MEDA resources is being used to support measures at both subregional and bilateral level to improve the quality of vocational training .
If the honourable Member wishes to have more detailed information on specific activities , I suggest that she approaches the Commission , which is responsible for the implementation of this programme .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Council has answered this question like a bureaucrat , with meaningless words .
It did not answer my specific question , which is how and when the regulation is going to be approved .
It did that for the central and eastern European countries .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , a young Czech , Rumanian or Hungarian can get skills training and benefit from the programmes .
A young person from the Maghreb cannot .
We have an association policy with the southern Mediterranean countries based on equilibrium , based on free trade and based on working together .
How we are going to be able to work with them with the enormous imbalance that there is today as regards skills qualifications ?
How can Europeans do this , open markets and close doors to training people ?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have not answered my question .
This is a serious responsibility .
We are discriminating against the poorest countries , the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
Very briefly , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo is putting the question to the wrong institution , because these are not Council measures , but Commission rules for implementing a programme which it is responsible for executing .
I would leave it at that .
Mrs Izquierdo , you are only entitled to ask one supplementary question , and you have already done that .
Mr President , I just want to point out that up to now the Council has been governing the activities of the European Foundation for the Development of Skills Training as far as the CEECs are concerned , but it is also the responsibility of the Council to govern the activities of the same Foundation for the Mediterranean countries , as agreed in Barcelona .
I should like to give a combined answer to the questions by Mr Newens , Mr Bontempi , Mr Morris and Mr Medina Ortega , because they all concern the Helms-Burton Act and Cuba .
Following intensive bilateral discussions between the Commission and the American authorities , an agreement on the Helms-Burton Act was reached on 11 April 1997 , and consequently also to some extent on the D 'Amato Act .
The agreement relates to a specific code of conduct for both sides .
To prevent any worsening of the conflict over the Helms-Burton Act , the Council held a discussion on the matter on 18 April and adopted the following conclusions , to which I now refer : in the light of the agreement reached between the Commission and the United States and the undertaking entered into by the latter , the Council has agreed that the WTO panel procedures under way in respect of the Helms-Burton Act will now be suspended ; if action is taken against EU businesses or individuals on the basis of the Libertad Act or the sanctions legislation concerning Iran and Libya , or if the waivers described in the agreement are not granted but are withdrawn , the Commission will request the WTO to restart or reconstitute the panel , after which the panel will follow its normal procedures .
The Commission is also requested by the Council to keep it informed of any developments .
The Council points out that the European Union , like the United States , sets itself the goal of promoting democratic principles , human rights and fundamental freedoms where these are under threat and , like the United States , has committed itself to combating terrorism .
However , the Council reiterates its strong resistance to the imposition of extra-territorial legislation as a means of pursuing these objectives .
It regards such legislation as unacceptable both in principle and in law .
In this context , the Council draws particular attention to the deep concern which it expressed in its conclusions of 15 July 1996 regarding the extra-territorial consequences of the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato Acts , and nothing in the agreement with the United States should be interpreted as in any way prejudicing its continuing stance on this issue , as set out in those conclusions .
The Council believes that the negotiations in the context of the multilateral agreement on investment , the MAI , should continue in accordance with the procedures agreed for these talks and on the basis of the relevant mandate .
This mandate can be amended by the Council in accordance with its rules of procedure .
Those are the conclusions which the Council itself has drawn from the Commission 's agreement with the United States administration .
As regards the question by Mr Newens , many businesses from the Member States of the European Union have suffered damage as a result of the Helms-Burton Act .
However , no figures are available on the overall impact on the European Union 's trade with Cuba .
The Council has nevertheless repeatedly emphasized that , in its view , this legislation is in breach of international law , has been damaging to the rights and interests of the European Union in the areas of trade and investment , and has had a discouraging effect on trade between the Union and Cuba .
Finally , on the question by Mr Morris , the Council takes the view that the fact that the television company CNN has been authorized by the Cuban and American authorities to open an office in Cuba is a matter between the United States and Cuba , and does not have any consequences for relations between the European Union and these countries .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I am glad that he recognizes that some European countries which trade in the United States have been intimidated by the very possibility of legal action being taken against them and that there are other American laws which have been used against law-abiding Europeans citizens .
In these circumstances , does he accept that any impression that the European Union is weakening its approach - and that impression to some extent has been given by withdrawing the complaint in the WTO - will in fact damage our trade ?
Will he therefore reaffirm our determination , not only to ask for the World Trade Organization panel to be reconstituted if required , but to take whatever other steps are necessary to prevent the extra-territorial provisions of the Helms / Burton Act being exercised in any way against our traders .
I can assure Mr Newens that the Council will do everything possible to counter third-country legislation with extra-territorial effect which is damaging to the interests of firms and individuals in the European Union .
In this particular case , we were facing a special political dilemma , namely that the United States would have been obliged , for internal political reasons , to invoke the national security exception because of the WTO panel procedure which was under way , so that the WTO would have automatically had to stop the procedure .
This would in fact have meant that , as regards the conflict over the Helms-Burton Act , not only would there have been no ruling , but the domestic political circumstances obliging the US administration to invoke the national security exception would have resulted in the WTO panel procedure set up under the Uruguay Round suffering an extraordinary loss of credibility with regard to settling this kind of trade dispute .
All in all , the Commission and the American administration have tried in this agreement to steer a course which prevents the conflict from being aggravated unnecessarily , with the effects on the WTO which I have described .
However , the US administration is undertaking to try to limit the adverse effects of the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato Acts in terms of their impact on the interests of European Union nationals , and to eliminate them through changes in the law or waivers .
We are now waiting to see the results of this undertaking by the US administration , and if the Commission and the Council in any way have the impression that the American administration will not be able to fulfil the agreements , then we shall not hesitate to restart the WTO panel .
Mr President-in-Office , there is something I should like to ask you : don 't you feel that the application of this agreement is very tricky , in view of the difficulties and even ambiguities that it contains ?
And most of all , doesn 't it seem to you , as it does to me , that there is a risk that this agreement might , in part , produce precisely the same effects as the law did ?
I recognize the difference , but we have heard about disincentives to companies and even to non-governmental organizations already working in co-operation with Cuba as a result of the application and interpretation of this agreement .
I should like to ask what you think about this , and what information you have on it .
The aim of this agreement with the Commission , which has now been endorsed by the Council , although subject to the strict conditions which I have just described to you , is to lead the American administration to enter into discussions with its independent legislature , namely the Congress , with a view to interpreting and , where necessary , amending the law in such a way as to remove precisely those extra-territorial effects which are damaging to European economic interests , not least established economic interests .
If it should appear that , either in law or in practice , the American administration is being obliged to continue to take extra-territorial action against European interests with regard to economic contacts with Cuba , then the Commission and the Council will not hesitate to draw the conclusions I have just mentioned , in other words to restart the WTO panel .
It appears to me that the US is , in fact , lashing out against everyone and everybody .
Apart from the fact that this is adversely virtually affecting Cuba itself , it is also having an adverse effect on American business because they are losing out by billions of dollars and hundreds of thousands of jobs .
Would not the Council agree that the Helms / Burton Act , which opposes Cuba 's admission to the World Bank , the IMF and the OAS until there is a post-Castro government , is very much an infringement of Cuba 's sovereignty ?
Does the Council intend to take action to make certain that Cuba has access to these agencies so that it can build up its own economy to the advantage of its own people ?
I would agree in principle with the honourable Member - and I think this reflects the views of the Council as a whole - when he says that if we wish to promote democracy and human development in Cuba , then isolating and boycotting it as the American administration has done since 1959 is no longer an appropriate means of doing so , especially now that Cuba is no longer a threat to the national security of the United States .
Only the American Government and the US Congress take a different view , and in this respect we have agreed to disagree .
When it comes to legislation containing a ban on Cuba 's admission to the Bretton Woods institutions , for example , I can only say that it is for the rules of the Bretton Woods institutions themselves to determine how that is to be handled .
It cannot be that one member country is able to dictate such matters unilaterally to institutions which are respected on a multilateral basis .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the United States is a country I admire , a country I love , and a country I have had extensive relations with .
It is one of the oldest democracies but one characteristic of its democracy , based on the separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary , is the tremendous rigour with which the law and sanctions are applied .
At this very moment a Community citizen , Mr Ferreiro , is in prison in the United States for running a business supplying food and other basic necessities to Cuba .
My fear is that the European Union 's surrender over the Helms-Burton Law will make the American government think it has a free hand to apply internal American legislation with maximum rigour , which may mean that not just European businessmen , but their children and relatives as well , are faced with this legislation , which they assume does not apply to them but which harms or can harm them very directly
I can only reaffirm to Mr Medina Ortega that the Council and the Member States , together with the Commission , quite simply reject such laws as the Helms-Burton Act on grounds of principle .
That is also why , when this Act was signed in 1996 , the Council adopted relatively quickly , on a proposal from the Commission , a variety of counter-measures or retaliatory legislation , so as to be able to respond if European interests were unduly affected when the Act was implemented .
However , it must be said that such important trading partners as the United States and the European Union - if you will allow me to use the metaphor - are talking here like two elephants which have to walk very carefully through a china shop , where we hope that as little china as possible will be broken in the process .
What I really regret is in fact that both the United States and the European Union , whose views are clearly shared on the desirability of new political and economic developments in Cuba , have still not begun to reach agreement after so many years on the question of how this is to happen , and disagree fundamentally on the matter .
We regret that the United States is continuing to isolate the developments in Cuba , instead of encouraging them .
As a good Liberal , I believe that democracy is very much facilitated by overseas investment , and the blocking of such investment will not encourage the development of Cuba or its political development in this respect .
Question No 9 by Mr Papayannakis ( H-0322 / 97 )
Subject : Synthetic drugs
Following the European Council in Dublin , where it was decided to adopt a joint action for the approximation of legislation and the procedures followed by the police , customs authorities and courts in combating drug addiction and illegal trafficking in drugs and , given the popularity among young people of synthetic drugs produced in the EU Member States , Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkan countries , constituting a serious threat to public health and society , can the Council say what progress has been made to date concerning the harmonization of Member States ' legislation in combating illegal drugs trafficking ?
Have the dangers arising from the development of synthetic drugs been evaluated and do European mechanisms exist to deal with the unexpected appearance of such drugs on the market ?
I should like to answer this question by Mr Papayannakis in the following way .
The policy which is being developed within the European Union to combat drugs is a wide-ranging one , including preventive measures on the one hand - and here we are talking in particular about devoting our attention to public health , information and education - and repressive aspects on the other , such as cooperation between the courts , police and customs services to combat drugs and drug trafficking .
The question by Mr Papayannakis relates in particular to this second aspect , namely international cooperation in terms of criminal law to combat the drugs trade and drug crime .
The question refers more specifically to the extent of the progress made during the Dutch presidency on implementing the joint action for the approximation of the legislation and procedures of the Member States of the European Union in combating drug addiction and to prevent and combat illegal trafficking in drugs .
This long title is often shortened to that of the joint action on drugs .
The action was confirmed by the European Council in Dublin in December 1996 .
The Member States and institutions of the Union are currently engaged in implementing this joint action , part of which covers the harmonization of legislation .
A progress report on its implementation is to be produced for the European Council meeting in Luxembourg .
To enable as clear a report as possible to be presented in Luxembourg in December 1997 , work is now being done on a reporting model , and it is planned to submit an interim report to the European Council in Amsterdam .
The question by Mr Papayannakis concerning synthetic drugs is also related to the joint action on drugs .
With regard to this aspect , the Member States and institutions of the European Union are working on the development of an early warning system .
This is a mechanism for exchanging information quickly and effectively on new substances entering the market for synthetic drugs .
The exact details of this mechanism are still under discussion , and a report on this too will be presented to the Amsterdam European Council .
In this context , I would also draw your attention to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , the EMCDDA .
This institute is based in Lisbon and has at its disposal the Reitox system , for example , which is used to exchange information between the Member States on synthetic drugs , amongst other things .
Through this existing channel , new developments can already be exchanged between the relevant services and organizations .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for the details in your answer , but I did not come here to indulge in polemics between us .
I want to help , and I think there is a problem : these new synthetic drugs have some new characteristics .
They cannot be dealt with by traditional methods .
They are manufactured quickly , they circulate quickly , they circulate very easily , and they are constantly becoming cheaper .
And they are becoming more and more attractive because it is difficult to distinguish between proscribed and dangerous substances and playthings .
In that sense , Mr President-in-Office , I am told that this warning system you mentioned takes a very long time .
It takes two years for a substance to be entered on the list of proscribed substances .
In two years , the manufacturer will have made millions , that pill will no longer exist , and a different one will have taken its place .
What I was asking you then , is what you intend to do about some much more rapid system better adapted to the situation .
And it is not a question of suppression .
Europol is intergovernmental .
It is up to you to tell us what can be done to create such a system .
I think that Mr Papayannakis is quite right to point to the special problems caused by synthetic drugs for our whole policy on criminal law and for all police action , because these are developments which move as quickly as those in the chemical industry in general .
Precisely because of this , it is extremely important that information which is available in Member States - for instance on new substances which in principle fall under drugs legislation - is analysed and exchanged as quickly as possible , so that these new substances can also be outlawed in the legislation of the various Member States and the judicial and police authorities then have a legal basis for responding to them quickly .
That is why so much emphasis is being placed on improving the systems for collecting and exchanging information .
This also applies especially to the so-called precursors , the raw materials which are used to make synthetic and illegal drugs , because the monitoring of flows of raw materials and the exchange of information between criminal investigation services can provide an important indication as to how crime in this area is developing .
In this respect , the collection and exchange of information is the first and absolutely crucial step in being able to take vigorous action .
As the author is not present , Question No 10 falls .
Question No 11 by Mr Sjöstedt ( H-0330 / 97 )
Subject : The interception of telecommunications
The EU has been working with the American FBI for a year on the development of a joint system for the interception of telecommunications , on which a resolution was adopted at a meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 17 January 1995 .
A memorandum of understanding was subsequently concluded between the signatories of the agreement and other states .
In spite of this , the general public and media have been given very little information about this matter .
Will common rules and agreements in this area require harmonization of national legislation , e.g. as regards persons whose telecommunications may be intercepted , the offences of which they must be suspected before such action may be taken and the length of sentences involved .
Is there any link between the Union 's activities in this field and ECHELON ?
In answer to the question by Mr Sjöstedt on the interception of telecommunications , I would first of all point out that it is not the case that the European Union is working with the FBI on the development of a joint interception system .
Experts from the EU Member States have indeed been holding discussions for a number of years with other countries , such as the United States , on the requirements which need to be placed on the industry to ensure that in the design of telecommunications equipment , specific provision is made for interception via this equipment by law enforcement authorities .
These have led to a set of international user requirements , the importance of which was highlighted by the Council in its resolution of 17 January 1995 , to which the questioner has referred .
Other countries from outside the European Union such as the United States , Canada , Australia and Norway have also endorsed these requirements .
The application of the requirements to telephone systems is a task imposed on operators and service providers by the relevant national telecommunications authorities , on the basis of national legislation .
The way in which the technical facilities can subsequently be used for interception is determined by national law , which in the case of the European countries must be in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights .
I would like to thank the Council President for the answer I received .
The new satellite telecommunication systems , which are becoming more prevalent , make it more difficult to use national boundaries as a basis for looking at this question .
We are also discussing an agreement at EU level on whether conversations between different countries may be monitored .
This creates a number of problems where national legislation in different countries is not the same . For example , what legislation should be used to decide if a person may be put under surveillance or not .
There are also strong integration aspects here .
Is it true to say that such extensive cooperation at EU level will require some form of harmonisation in the future when we decide who may be placed under surveillance for example , and establish the penalties for an alleged crime involving surveillance ?
Is this what EU co-operation really means ?
We are dealing here with the area of activity of national intelligence and security services .
In this context , I would say that the European Union has powers under the third pillar to facilitate harmonization .
Of course , cooperation at intergovernmental level is possible , but at this stage I see little support within the European Union for using these powers to bring about harmonization through conventions , not least from a political point of view .
I must draw a distinction here , because your first question related to the agreements on telecommunications technology .
This involves making it impossible to use modern coding and scrambler technology in such a way that intelligence and security services are no longer able to do anything .
That is regarded by the guardians of our internal state security as a serious shortcoming .
I think it is very important for individual Member States - and certainly those which sign the international conventions on the protection of privacy and human rights - to continue to ensure through national legislation and national supervisory procedures that intelligence and security services adhere strictly to certain rules of conduct laid down in national law .
The fact that this may of course also involve international communications does little to affect the principle of national responsibilities .
It is a matter for our governments and our parliaments to produce legislation , and it is for our supervisory bodies in the Member States to ensure that intelligence and security services behave according to the law .
Mr President , I assume that what we are talking about here is not primarily intelligence services , but rather the need to combat large-scale , international organized crime .
I would therefore ask you to indicate what steps the Council intends to take next in tackling large-scale organized crime .
Are there any specific proposals , either in the area of telecommunications or as regards forthcoming measures to be taken ?
On the question of what the Council is doing to combat internationally organized crime , more particularly in terms of intelligence operations by police or intelligence services , I would point out that the European Council in Dublin set up a group of senior representatives from the Member States to carry out a specific study of the phenomenon of organized crime , and to produce recommendations for taking firm action to combat this by means of cooperation .
Under the Dutch presidency , this group of senior representatives began work energetically in January , and in April delivered a report which has since also been considered by the Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs at another meeting at the end of April .
This report contains a number of political recommendations and a long series of technical ones , and will no doubt provide - soon after it has been considered and released by the European Council in Amsterdam - an important stimulus for cooperation between the Member States under the third pillar to combat organized crime .
As the time available for Question Time to the Council has run out , Questions Nos 11 to 29 will be answered in writing .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I just wish to show my dissent about that decision .
My question was next .
I have sat here for almost an hour and a half and waited patiently for my question .
Given the importance of this issue for the United Kingdom , particularly the North-East of Scotland , which is Mr Macartney 's constituency - he would have asked a supplementary question - , it is a pity that we did not get to it .
I would like an assurance that we shall not have a repetition of this in the future .
Mr Patijn , ladies and gentlemen , because of the timetable difficulties we have had today and the work commitments Mr Patijn informed us of at the beginning of the session , we are going to close Question Time to the Council here , but I want you to know that in future I shall make sure that any changes in timetable do not interfere with the time we devote to questions .
I think we have had an exceptional situation today , but at the same time , ladies and gentlemen , I make that undertaking .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.25 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

The sitting is resumed .
Mr Macartney wishes to raise a point of order .
Mr President , on the Souchet report : I want to have an assurance that the legal base amendments which I have tabled and which have been referred to the Legal Affairs Committee will be given ample time to be examined .
This is fundamental to the whole question of the CFP and therefore I require an assurance that the necessary time and resources will be given to the Legal Affairs Committee to examine these amendments before they come back for discussion .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights will verify that before the vote tomorrow at noon .
Straddling stocks - Fishing off Sao Tomé - International fisheries agreements - NAFO Regulatory area - fisheries and acquaculture
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is a clear common denominator in today 's important joint debate on fisheries .
All the reports relate in one way or another to essential foreign waters and their different forms of access and regulation , either through traditional fisheries agreements with third countries - like Sao Tomé and Principe , in the Macartney report , regional multilateral agreements like NAFO , referred to in the Teverson report , or the New York Agreement on straddling stocks and highly migratory stocks , for which I am rapporteur .
All deal with different problems but all highlight a common complaint , which is now becoming habitual , about the still minor role conferred on the European Parliament in the face of the European Commission 's competitive eagerness for excessive regulations with a dubious , or at the very least an inadequate , legal basis .
This is taken up in the Souchet report and my own , with specific reference , in both cases , to Community action in the context of international organizations defining future changes in international maritime law .
Because of all this , Mr President , it was felt worthwhile for the European Parliament to prepare an own initiative report on the international fisheries agreements which are vital to the European Union .
This is Mr Crampton 's report , which is being debated today in this House , after important discussions and amendments in the Committee on Fisheries where he achieved unanimity .
In view of their importance I want to highlight the following points from his report : the international fisheries agreements and fishing in international waters account for 25 % of total Community production .
Imports from third countries are essential for the Community market , as catches in our waters are far exceeded by our consumption .
So these agreements are essential for the Community fleet , the market and Community consumers , for our industry and , consequently , for employment , which , as the report also shows , is concentrated in peripheral Objective 1 regions which are very dependent on fisheries , without other clear employment alternatives , but with a world-class competitive fishing sector , which needs to be supported against third fishing powers seeking access to the same fishing grounds , and not always applying such strict technical conservation measures as the European Union .
Finally , it needs to be highlighted that this policy , so beneficial to the European Union 's interests , takes under 30 % of total Community resources allocated to fishing , a mere 0.31 % of the total Union budget .
So we need to pursue this international fisheries agreements policy in the future , allocating a larger budget to it , always balancing the respective mutual interests , negotiating agreements suitable to both parties , improving existing ones where necessary or adapting them to current circumstances and different legal typologies , applying traditional agreements where appropriate and creating mixed companies or temporary associations of companies where possible .
This is the context , Mr President , in which we are examining the New York Convention of 4 August 1995 , on conservation and management of straddling stocks and highly migratory stocks . Its ratification is subject to consultation of this European Parliament and I am responsible for the report .
We are dealing with a profound and historic agreement which must be supported because it seeks to improve management and conservation in international waters through multilateral cooperation on a regional basis .
It comes down to cooperating on stocks conservation in international waters , by contrast to the position and aims of certain coastal countries which advocate a unilateral widening of their prerogatives , contravening international law , the Convention on the Law of the Sea in particular , and the rules governing the high seas and 200-mile exclusion zones .
Further , and exclusively for the straddling stocks and highly migratory stocks at least for the moment , if the present New York Convention succeeds in coming into force , it should be applied in the future , but it needs to be stressed that this does not provide grounds or refuge for national extraterritorial laws , like the disgraceful Canadian Fisheries Law of 25 May 1994 , or the new draft law C-62 - and we take this opportunity to denounce it once again .
So in our report we call on the Commission to ensure , before final ratification of the agreement , that all the signatory states are interpreting it in the same way and if necessary to take the appropriate legal precautions in the form of reservations and interpretative statements , for the avoidance of doubt , such as authorizing the use of force in certain circumstances , which require clear and uniform interpretation , as there might otherwise be conflict .
Secondly , but very important , there is the question of responsibility , and several Member States have already objected in the Council to the European Commission 's position .
The agreement affects powers that are shared between the Member States and the Commission .
The Commission has responsibility for conservation and management of marine resources , but the Member States retain powers as flag states under international law .
These exclusive powers , which the Member States continue to maintain , authorize them , under international law , to adopt their own legal positions and their own jurisdictional defence within the scope of their own recognized powers .
So it is logical if there is to be reasonable Commission-States cooperation , that there should be dual legal protection by the Member State and the Commission in accordance with the respective competence of each .
That is why article 3.2 of the Commission 's proposal seems excessive and without legal basis , and was unanimously rejected by the Committee on Fisheries . It is extremely ambiguous and inappropriate in seeking to have the States virtually handing over their defence responsibilities to the Commission and , as the Committee on Legal Affairs of the European Parliament points out in its opinion included in our report , the Commission has not provided arguments to sustain that provision .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs points out - and I shall end here , Mr President - in its conclusions 5 and 6 that the arrangements in article 3.2 are likely to pose problems , and that there is still no welldefined Community case law in the area of international agreements of a mixed nature .
So codes of conduct between the Community and the Member States would be better than legal rules .
For these reasons , while the Committee on Fisheries is in favour of ratification of the agreement , it is nevertheless unanimously opposed to point 3.2 of the proposal .
Mr President , on the face of it , the Sao Tomé and Principe accord seems something of little significance to this Parliament .
Yet in many ways it symbolizes some of the problems and the possibilities which arise from our fisheries agreements with third countries .
Sao Tomé and Principe is one of the poorest countries in the world and it is heavily dependent on the income which it receives from the fisheries agreement with the European Union to make ends meet .
It is in a rather unusual position in that the fishing possibilities for the Sao Tomé and Principe fishermen themselves are very limited because of the peculiarities of the waters around the islands .
They are of more use as a base for tuna fishermen coming from Europe than they are to the local people , and so they are a very special resource in the sense of forming an exclusive economic zone , an EEZ , but , are not rich fishing grounds like those in some other parts of Africa , for example off the Namibian coast .
This gives them a very special perspective .
I am happy to support this report .
There have been many occasions when I have been critical of fisheries policy but I think most of this particular report is commendable .
It proposes a reasonably generous settlement with the government of Sao Tomé and Principe .
If I were to nit-pick about some of the details , I would say that it is rather weak to use the phrase ' shall endeavour to do ' in a legal document .
To any lawyer that means that it is not binding .
Therefore that sort of language should have been toughened-up .
There are two cases : one concerns bycatches , which is rather a sore point with both conservationists and the local fish-consuming community ; the other concerns the desirability of hiring Sao Tomé and Principe crew on the fishing boats .
This is stated as something to be striven for rather than something which is a requirement .
When this comes up for review these points should be toughened-up .
This is a pretty weak compromise between saying nothing and saying something and it is not binding .
In other words , the agreement is not brilliant , but it is reasonably satisfactory .
We come back time and time again , in this Parliament , to two criticisms .
One is that these agreements are not specifically tools of development for the country concerned , but are seen as commercial fisheries agreements .
That is the nature of the beast .
Time and time again , in the Committee on Development and Cooperation and in the Committee on Fisheries , we have said that this is not the best way to achieve results , which are supposed to be based not just on the commercial interests of the European Union and its Member States , but on those of the people concerned .
I have visited some of these countries , as have many other Members .
We have talked to the local people .
They appreciate having some government revenue , but a lot more could be done to achieve sustainable fisheries and also to achieve sustainable development in the broader sense .
This issue of development tools will not go away until we have changed the basic approach and have a hybrid between the two considerations : the commercial fishing interests of the EU and the development aspect .
My final point concerns consultation .
This Parliament loves to be consulted , but we would much rather be consulted before something has taken effect than afterwards .
People criticise us for various things .
They do not usually criticise us for giving opinions when it is too late for them to have any effect .
That is what they should be criticizing .
It is high time that we changed the regime so that Parliament could give its opinion before an agreement comes into force , rather than the other way around .
We are always passing judgement on agreements that have been decided and hoping that the Commission or the Council will then take note of our points the next time round .
That is not the best way of doing things .
Having said that , the Commission proposals have my support and that of the Committee on Fisheries .
We commend the report and all the committee 's amendments which have been put forward .
Mr President , my report concerns the NAFO area .
However , I will talk about it for only a short time because although it is an important report , it is not contentious and is primarily concerned with detail .
I welcome the changes put forward in the NAFO Agreement which have now been implemented .
These involve the greater use of observers .
These people are already on board fishing vessels and we should use them to maximum advantage to understand the characteristics of those fisheries and in particular the area of discards .
This concerns everybody involved in fisheries and will provide greater understanding of wastage and how that system can be improved , also in terms of the Hail system and declaring the target species to be caught .
In reality , there is a sub-plot , primarily in shrimp-fishing .
This is an area which is being opened up , in particular by Icelandic vessels and it needs greater control .
That is what has stimulated the amendments which seek to ensure that shrimp-fishing remains sustainable over a longer period .
We are asking Parliament that it be looked at and further reports made .
However , important though NAFO is , the international fisheries agreements are far more important .
One thing that is clear - and which the Commissioner tells us as do the Council of Ministers very regularly - is that there is severe over-capitalization of fishing fleets , not only in Europe but worldwide .
In fact , something like two-thirds of worldwide fish stocks are estimated to be over-exploited .
It does not require a great understanding of economics to see that the cheaper you make it to enter a particular market , the more the capacity will be and the more that supply in terms of capital or vessels and equipment will outstrip the availability of resource .
What is happening is that the European Union , with its international fisheries agreements , is contributing to this global problem , namely the over-subsidization of the fishing fleet worldwide .
In fact , the FAO has estimated that there is a very large and unacceptable total subsidy to fishing fleets worldwide .
Because of this there is overfishing , further depletion of stocks and the need for nations to buy more fishing rights elsewhere .
Then we get into a competitive and spiralling problem leading to further depletion of stocks .
We have to stop this process somewhere .
I believe that the European Parliament should be a world leader in environmental protection and that we should be spearheading the cessation of subsidies to international fishing agreements .
The Liberal Group is suggesting that we take a very radical approach to conservation and in general to the future of fishing worldwide .
We should decide that this is an area where it is very easy to tie up private costs with actual costs so that the costs of fishing agreements should be borne by the boat owners and the fleet operators .
In that way we will start to bring capacity into line with global fish stocks .
That is only a start but it is an essential one .
We are not for a moment saying that should be a unilateral decision by the European Union .
We must negotiate with the other major fishing nations - Japan , Korea , and what used to be the Russian Federation , although they are not major players now .
We need to start to get some agreement internationally to stop this subsidy and this depletion of stocks in the world 's oceans .
If those negotiations are unsuccessful then we should take the process to the World Trade Organization and have that body police this area and treat the subsidy of international fishing agreements as unfair methods of competition .
Only in this way can we begin to get the marine ecology in some sort of global balance .
The policy itself is not necessarily expensive in terms of the European Union as a whole but the Commission appears to want to expand this area .
Yet the cost to the Community in this area is approximately ECU 280m per annum and Peter Crampton 's report suggests that only 1 , 300 vessels benefit from this policy .
That is a subsidy per annum of around ECU 200 , 000 per vessel .
Surely we can spend that money more effectively elsewhere in the European Union , for example in the peripheral regions , and I would suggest my own constituency .
There have to be better ways of spending that money and targeting it in terms of structural funding .
The Liberal Group says that we should stop this folly , strike a positive note for conservation globally and the Commission 's message to us as Member States should also be taken globally .
We must stop this kind of subsidy .
Mr President , I am speaking for the first five minutes as rapporteur for the Fisheries Committee which passed my report a little while ago .
For the remaining time I will express some of my own personal views and question marks about fisheries agreements in general .
The European Union has 26 fisheries agreements with third countries , 15 with countries in Africa and the Indian Ocean and 10 in the North Atlantic countries with 1 in Latin America .
They fall into five main categories : reciprocal agreements , access to surplus stocks , access to stocks in exchange for financial compensation , access in exchange for compensation and market access and second generation agreements involving the constitution of joint enterprises .
Many of these agreements operate with few problems and the main concern with fisheries agreements is with the financial compensation type .
These are mainly signed with developing countries .
The Commissioner , and I quote her , recently said ' we arrive , fish , pay almost nothing and leave with zero control ' .
It is for this reason that the report concentrates on the financial compensation type of agreements .
The European Union obviously has to balance its own immediate interests and the future survival of its fleet while at the same time acknowledging that the sustainability of global fishstocks is in everybody 's long-term interest .
In the report , I refer to this as enlightened self-interest .
This entails a measure of forward planning which the present so-called policy does not have .
The Fisheries Committee welcomes the Commission communication ' Fisheries Agreements - current situation and agreements ' as an initial first step .
A clear , coherent approach to fisheries agreements is essential to ensure the successful conclusion of future agreements .
The signs are already there that the waters are , if not yet stormy , turbulent .
The difficulties of signing a new agreement with Senegal and the indications from Morocco that it will not sign a further agreement when this one comes to an end in 1999 are significant .
A whole body of opinion is now saying that a fresh approach needs to be adopted , not just for reasons of fair fisheries agreements and development , but also to ensure the survival of these agreements for the future .
At a recent fisheries Council meeting , the Commission stated that global fisheries sources had become squeezed and that a new set of priorities was needed .
This report aims to assist in that process .
It sets out a series of principles .
These principles include the sustainable use of marine resources , prevention of depletion , that all parties must cooperate on things like stock assessment , monitoring , cohabitation of industrial and artisanal fisheries , and so on .
It also stresses the coherence that is necessary between fishing policy as represented by these agreements and development policy .
This is particularly important .
Moreover , we should ensure that we abide by the codes of conduct , e.g. the Food and Agricultural Organization 's code of conduct for responsible fisheries , and many others that we have signed , and strive to ensure that all other nations do the same .
Mr Teverson just referred to the Food and Agriculture Organization .
They have also said , in addition to what he said , that 70 % of the world 's fish are being harvested near or beyond what is sustainable .
Apart from these principles , we lay down in the report a set of guidelines for a uniform procedure which must be gone through when we are negotiating fisheries agreements : the acquisition of the fullest possible information on stock levels ; consultation with the representatives of the local fishing industry ; a cost- benefit analysis ; a mechanism to report back on the results of research ; and the education and training programmes which are funded as part of these agreements by the Community .
Then we mention in the report the role of the European Parliament .
We are not satisfied with the role of the European Parliament .
It is very much marginalized in the area of fisheries .
Parliament has repeatedly said that we should be much more fully involved in the process of agreements , including being consulted on the negotiating mandate that the Council gives to the Commission , and for the fisheries agreements to be concluded with Parliament 's assent procedure .
For the remaining time , just a few personal points .
It was a long and complicated vote in the committee .
As a result , when we actually saw the printed report , I noticed that there were a number of contradictions , there were a few inaccuracies and the balance of the report had altered somewhat significantly .
The Party of European Socialists ' amendments seek to remedy some of these defects .
I have to ask some questions .
Can we really say that the European Union 's present main objective is the maintenance of existing structures in the fishing industry ?
That would seem strange .
Can we really say that the European Union should be responsible for shipowners ' profitability ?
We do not say this about the steel industry or the car industry .
Why about the fishing industry ?
We should certainly be creating the conditions under which they can be profitable but we are not responsible .
Should these agreements be fully funded by the European Union ?
In the Directorate 's newsletter Pesca the Commission writes that concerns about limiting cost may result in shipowners or even Member States taking a greater share .
We have to consider , I submit , what the Court of Auditors tells us and what the European taxpayer would tell us if he knew exactly what was happening .
Can we seriously consider , as is mentioned in this report , fish as a perishable resource ?
Fish swimming about the ocean are a perishable resource ?
I ask you to think about that .
Can we say that exporting the European Union 's fleets ' excess capacity to third country waters is a valid option for the future ?
The Commission has already stated that these agreements are not a long-term solution .
We have to tackle our problem in our waters ourselves .
This is a good report .
I hope people will support it .
I have personal difficulties with it but this is the Fisheries Committee 's decision and I think it is an advance on what we have had before .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , under the consultation procedure , Parliament has been asked for its opinion on a Commission proposal for a partial amendment of Regulation No 3760 / 92 of December 1992 establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture .
The proposal has three objectives .
The first is to authorize powers to be conferred on the Commission for incorporating , without consultation , in the Community legal order provisions concerning technical measures on fishing gear and its method of use adopted by international fisheries organizations to which the Community is a contracting party .
The second amendment is aimed at determining the fishing opportunities which the Council may allocate to third countries , within the limit of the annual total allowable catches , and technical conditions under which such catches may be made within Community waters .
Finally , the third amendment proposes to confer powers on the Council to determine technical resource conservation measures of a temporary nature relating to the conditions under which the quotas may be fished .
It seemed to our committee that the second and third amendments proposed by the Commission represent a technical improvement of Regulation 3760 / 92 aimed at incorporating into Community legislation a group of measures on resource exploitation which will improve the rational management of fishery stocks .
Given that the sole aim of these two proposals is to create a specific legal basis to enable the objectives I have just mentioned to be achieved , our committee has made no objection to these partial amendments to the regulation .
On the contrary , it welcomes this improvement to the Community fisheries and aquaculture system .
On the other hand , our committee had strong reservations about the possibility of delegating powers to the Commission to transpose directly into the Community legal system binding acts adopted by international organizations under the terms set out in the Commission proposal .

Article 4 , paragraph 1 of Regulation 3760 / 92 , provides that the Council acting , except where otherwise provided , in accordance with the procedure laid down in article 43 of the treaty , shall establish Community measures laying down the conditions of access to waters and resources and the pursuit of exploitation activities .
These measures shall be drawn up in the light of the available biological , socio-economic and technical analyses and in particular of the reports drawn up by the committee provided for in article 16 : the Scientific , Technical and Economic Fisheries Committee .
The reference to the procedure under article 43 of the treaty means that , in order for decisions to be adopted in this field , the European Parliament must be consulted .
Under the current decision-making procedure on fisheries within the European Union , authorizing powers to be conferred on the Commission to incorporate binding legal acts adopted by international organizations to which the Community belongs , as proposed here , means Parliament , and moreover the Council , would be cut off from the decision-making process in respect of acts relating to a significant part of the common fisheries policy . In fact , the role of regional and sub-regional fisheries management organizations would be considerably strengthened .
So we do not think it is good democracy for a technical body to have exclusive responsibility for the whole decisionmaking process , from negotiation to integration into the Community legal system , without any control of any kind at any stage .
The consultation procedure under article 43 of the treaty is practically the only means whereby the European Parliament can be given adequate knowledge of the decisions adopted in organizations such as the International Baltic Sea Fisheries Commission , the North-West Atlantic Fisheries Organization , the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission , the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources , which are all organizations with a major role in the fisheries sector .
Moreover , the implementation of the provisions arising from the recent United Nations agreement on straddling stocks and stocks of highly migratory species , adopted on 4 August 1995 , makes it more than ever important that Parliament should be consulted on decisions adopted in international commissions and organizations , which are tending to become the main protagonists in the drafting of the law of the sea .
In view of these various considerations , Mr President , our committee proposes that the conferring of powers on the Commission for the adoption of technical measures , as provided for in the proposal before us , should be rejected , but that the other two proposals for amendment relating to the exploitation of resources should be accepted .
I would end by making it clear that the draft legislative resolution before you was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Fisheries and the two amendments tabled by our committee which accompany it , Nos 1 and 2 , are merely amendments to improve the proposal .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the debate on the future of international fisheries agreements must take into account certain basic ideas or principles .
First of all , the fact that the European Union is a world power in the fishing sector which is registering a growing trade deficit , a deficit which means more imports of fish which someone other that the European Union is continuing increasingly to fish - without it being less-developed countries .
Secondly , the fact that the sector directly or indirectly employs hundreds of thousands of people , including those in the processing and preserves industry , which therefore gives it a social weight which is far greater than its direct economic importance , further worsened by the fact that many local communities depend on fishing activities .
Thirdly , the fact that there is a growing need to combat techniques which ravage fishing stocks , calling for growing internal controls which are both efficient and transparent , which must also be extended , in equal ways , to highly competitive third country fleets without failing to respect those which rationally and responsibly develop their activity .
Fourthly , the fact that where it is applicable , we must try and find ways of developing the own capacities of lessdeveloped third countries , preserving the respective territorial waters and only gaining access to the respective excess resources situated in exclusive economic areas , principles which should also be applied to neighbouring countries of the European Union .
Fifthly , setting up as a principle the maintenance and extension of various types of existing fisheries agreements , without any attempt to privilege any one of them , therefore attending to the various financial and economic characteristics and capacities of European Union fleets .
In accordance with these five principles , we can state that the report considers these guidelines without detriment to the initial perspectives which were diverse and some of the contradictions which still exist .
We should also reassert the fact that certain attempts to focus any future negotiation on the exclusive basis of ' third generation ' agreements , aimed only at the creation of mixed companies , cannot and must not be accepted exclusively , since they can result in the relocations of companies , not only of production but also preservation and processing , with direct effects on unemployment , making it worse , and the social and cultural devastation of many regions of the European Union , apart from the effects of increasing fish imports and the fact that these agreements will actually only be accessible to anyone who has large financial dimension and capacity , which could easily lead to the bankruptcy or disappearance of a huge number of SMEs in the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , the international fisheries agreements certainly have an economic and commercial value , there is no getting away from that , but they must also be compatible with cooperation and development policies .
Rightly , we are moving towards the second-generation agreements between states , and away from a somewhat exclusive and , if you like , eurocentric dimension to international agreements .
We are considering the problems of employment , processing and the maintenance of environmental balances , but especially we are thinking about the consistency that our fisheries agreements must exhibit with the international conventions , which are a very important reference base as far as we are concerned .
These agreements are also important because they are designed to eliminate the pirate vessels which , as you all know , are looting fish stocks from international waters . Above all , though , the agreements look towards a concept of co-operation and development , while at the same time helping to establish hygienic and sanitary practices in the countries concerned .
Of course we must pay due heed to the traditional cultures of these peoples , but the fact remains that in the ACP regions and in the SGP States these agreements fulfil an important function .
I should add that we must also take account of the fact that the fisheries agreements focus not only on the aspect of quotas - something which would not have existed previously - but also on the economic aspect .
There are still some third countries which are not always making the best use of these agreements , and in some cases they are serving to enrich the local ruling cliques , thus creating a problem of democracy originating from the administration of European resources , which are not all that extensive .
By contrast , other countries have begun to make dynamic moves into the international market , becoming nothing less than competitors of the European Union .
Take the case of Morocco , which despite having negotiated an extremely favourable agreement with the European Union is trying to reposition itself in the market , negotiating agreements with other countries . This creates a problem , partly because the agreements signed by us were not solely connected with fisheries but also extended to other important sectors such as agriculture and the opening of the market to certain specific Moroccan products .
From this point of view , then , we must be very vigilant , remembering that we cannot withdraw but that , on the other hand , an excessively liberal view , such as Mr Teverson would like to see , would not work .
We must remember that , even if we have a problem with the self-sufficiency of the food supply in the European Union , which is a very important point , and even if these agreements help to improve that self-sufficiency , liberalization would be likely to be harmful and would naturally result in the deterioration of those quality mechanisms and hygienic and sanitary standards that we have worked to bring about , while also creating conditions in which the workforce in third countries would be exploited , something which we do not like to see today .
For example , the second-generation international agreements also attach great importance to social guarantees , a not insignificant point , although we must be alert , since there are a lot of unscrupulous people who , once embarked on the high seas , make use of fishing licences under international agreements to indulge in smuggling .
For this reason , we must take steps to ensure meticulous controls .
I believe it is important to continue along this road , and to improve things further , but also that it is important to move forward to a further stage , going beyond the concept of bilateral international agreements .
I would hope that the European Union would negotiate more and more with other associations of States , or , to put it another way , that the ACP or SGP States , for example , were to set up their own delegations for fisheries with which the European Union could conduct specific negotiations .
With this in mind , we could try some experimental approaches in some areas , especially areas which are environmentally and geographically homogeneous and comprise groups of States ; in areas like those it would be useful to talk to some of these associations on a more than just bilateral basis .
So I believe that a good job has been done .
I thank the rapporteur , and I also believe that the amendments that will be adopted will prove their value .
One final point , if I may , Mr President : I would like to thank the Commissioner for the co-operative way in which she has worked with Parliament on the international agreements .
Nevertheless , Commissioner , the time has now come for us to join battle : we need a new legal base for the parliamentary assent , which is a fundamental matter for us : your goodwill is important , but we now need to move on from this stage and obtain that legal basis .
Mr President , I should like to use today 's debate on fisheries as an opportunity to highlight the importance of the legislative work we do in the Committee on Fisheries , and the value and status of that work within the policy of the European Union .
Fishing is a long-established and traditional occupation which also has a future .
It includes key aspects such as the area of international policy , based on international fisheries agreements - as described by Mr Crampton - and on the European Union 's involvement in various international organizations , for example NAFO .

This means that , in a sense , fisheries are part of the European Union 's common foreign and security policy , and its policy on development .
However , one of the failings of the Maastricht Treaty was that it did not take account of our efforts to ensure that future international fisheries agreements were subject to the assent procedure .
That would have had the effect of strengthening the rights of the European Parliament , both in this area and more generally .
To that extent , we believe that by bringing our action concerning the fisheries agreement with Mauritania before the Court of Justice pursuant to Article 228 of the EEC Treaty , the Committee on Fisheries is promoting the further institutional development of the EU .
Moreover , fisheries policy is also part of structural and employment policy .
An estimated 20 000 people are employed directly on fishing vessels operating under fisheries agreements .
To that number should be added between 25 000 and 50 000 shore-based jobs .
And that leaves aside downstream employment in the processing industry .
I cannot overemphasize the point that these jobs are being maintained in structurally weak areas which depend on fishing and offer no alternative employment .
Fisheries policy is also part of environment policy , because of the significant impact which it has on marine ecosystems .
And , last but not least , fishing is part of food policy .
As a rich source of protein , fish provides one of the basic nutritional building-blocks .
Our task over the next few years is to reformulate Europe 's common fisheries policy to meet the needs of the period after 2002 - in other words , the very near future .
So what is to be done ?
The Commission must draw up guidelines for the evaluation of protocols which are about to expire , as well as future protocols .
Amongst other things , these must contain the most reliable information possible on the state of fish stocks , an element of coordination with other Community activities , and an informed cost-benefit assessment .
The working atmosphere in the Committee on Fisheries is good , and allowed us to reach a workable consensus on the Crampton report .
I hope the conclusions of the report will also be supported by the Commission and the Council , and I would therefore ask you to vote in favour of the Crampton report , and all the other reports .
Mr President , after 20 years , it is indeed high time that a detailed evaluation was made of the fisheries agreements , and this is what I should like to discuss in my few minutes ' speaking time this evening .
Any such evaluation must take account of budgetary , social and environmental aspects .
The fisheries agreements are designed to ease the pressure on stocks in the Union 's waters , but they have not done anything to help resolve our overcapacity problem .
Ad hoc solutions and short-term thinking cannot and must not be used to eliminate the problem of structural overfishing in our waters .
We must not simply try to shift this problem onto other countries , and we certainly must not make the mistake of exporting our system of poor fisheries management .
The Commission says that these agreements do not affect development policy because it is only surplus stocks that are fished , but I find this hard to believe .
It is difficult enough for the Union to estimate its own stocks , let alone for the developing countries who have to do this without the benefit of the West 's advanced technology .
We need to solve our overfishing problems internally within the Union instead of exporting them to other countries .
The only solution that we in the Liberal Group can see is to reduce fleet capacity , because tighter controls do not provide sufficient guarantees .
Restructuring is what is needed , and the funding currently earmarked for the agreements could be used to finance this instead .
Finally , I entirely agree with Mr Teverson when he says that the escalating costs of the agreements are unjustified and European taxpayers ' money should no longer be used to pay for them .
Such heavy subsidies simply encourage overcapacity , which in turn leads to further depletion of stocks .
I fear that we Liberals are still alone in supporting our amendments , but I am sure that in a few years ' time the majority in Parliament will come to share our views .

Mr President , let me reassure Mr Eisma that as far as the Green Group is concerned , we have long been calling for us to stop exporting overfishing , because this is effectively what we are doing .
There is no point in saying that we want to prevent this from happening : it is already happening now , and it has frequently caused problems in the past in connection with the fisheries agreements with the ACP countries in particular .
We have seen it with Morocco , which is not an ACP country of course , and also with Mauritania , where ECU 52 million are on offer in return for permission to fish a certain quota , and when you think that this represents 6 % of their gross national product , you can well understand that there is a certain amount of pressure involved and that considerations such as the accurate monitoring of fish stocks and so on are easily pushed into the background .
We have had serious talks on the subject with Senegal and Namibia , which led to the setting-up of a fisheries working party under the ACP-EU Joint Assembly . This is still in operation , but the conflict between our interests and theirs is becoming increasingly obvious .
As far as today 's problems are concerned , I would say , particularly in relation to Mr Crampton 's report , that what we were originally told and what the explanatory statement says is much better than the actual text of the resolution , which has been greatly watered down , presumably by those who are determined to protect our interests .
I know that Mr Crampton is here , and that is why I should like to draw attention to two of our amendments , Nos 3 and 4 , which are designed to ensure that fish stocks are managed at a regional level .
This goes a step further than what is said in one of the recitals , all of which we can accept .
But if the principle of a regional approach is to be applied in practice by saying that any agreements with various countries on one type of fish stock must be dealt with on a regional basis , the Committee on Fisheries cannot agree with that , and we hope that the plenary will now amend it accordingly .
Mr President , I have to clear up a confusion about the point of order I raised earlier .
You said that we would vote on this tomorrow .
If you check , you will find that is not the case .
What I was looking for was an assurance that we would not come back to this matter until the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights had a chance to debate it properly .
If you could confirm that when I have sat down it would be helpful .
The whole question of the Souchet reports is fraught with difficulties about the proper legal basis .
Mrs Souchet has gone half-way in rejecting what the Commission is trying to do .
But there is a very dangerous precedent being set here , if the Commission is allowed to get away with evading the provisions of the acquis commaunitaire and the provisions of the various fundamental treaties which set up the common fisheries policy .
That is why this issue of going to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is so important .
Let me make it quite plain that I am not against reviewing the common fisheries policy .
On the contrary .
I have - as the Commissioner well knows - been well to the forefront in urging a review of the CAP , but it has to be a review in the context of 2002 .
We all have to work together to have a properly worked out amendment rather than one achieved by some circuitous back door route .
That is why this whole issue of the Souchet report is not important so much for the content as for the procedure .
So I am raising this as a fundamental question .
Once we can get the procedural legal point out of the way , then let us discuss the technical measures .
But this has to be done on a proper , sound , legal basis .
Mr Macartney , I already indicated at the start that the vote will only take place once we have the report from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights on the legal basis . It is quite impossible to vote on this report without it .
Mr President , international fisheries agreements are extremely important for employment in the European fishing sector , so the Union must try to keep rich fishing grounds outside the Union open to European fishermen .
But this has its limits .
International fisheries face the same problem as do the Union 's own waters : a catch capacity which is too large for fish stocks to be maintained .
In negotiating fisheries agreements , the Union must not only assert its rights under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea , it must also fulfil its obligations , and this is why it cannot allow itself to export unlimited overcapacity to international fishing grounds .
According to the FAO , many commercial fish species are currently under threat .
There is certainly a large question mark against the figures they use , but the signs are clearly there , particularly since local fishermen in various developing countries are having to contend with dwindling catches .
Some of the statements in the Crampton report calling for access for Community fishermen not only to be maintained , but also expanded simply go too far .
Where there is overfishing and the local industry is developing , the Union must give precedence to the local fishermen .
The Union must also ensure that the fisheries agreements are consistent with development policy .
We need to move away from the first-generation agreements in which the governments of the coastal states concerned gave European fishermen fishing rights in return for a sizeable sum of money .
The local populations obtained very little benefit from this arrangement .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur that we must try to replace these agreements with second or third-generation agreements , under which the financial aid goes to benefit research , training , monitoring systems and other activities in the domestic fishing sector .
Where necessary , the exclusion zone for local fishermen must also be extended .
In short , what we need is a long-term fisheries policy which guarantees that fish stocks are maintained and supports development policy .
Thank you very much , Mr President . Madam Commissioner , everyone who has followed fishing issues closely knows the argument which tends to surround the agreements policy , and as you see , this report 's passage through committee has also aroused lively debate .
But although the outcome does not meet everyone 's expectations of course , to be fair , the report is balanced and places the agreements in a more realistic context .
It recognizes , first of all , the importance of the agreements for the Community economy , and not just for the countries which benefit because their fleets are in third countries ' waters , but also - this point is often forgotten - for other countries with important processing industries which can be supplied with Community raw materials as a result and not have to rely massively on imports which would be much more expensive without the fishing agreements .
The same argument applies to consumers , who continue to have access to a market for good quality products at reasonable prices .
But there is concern about other aspects which are still not functioning entirely satisfactorily and the document takes this up .
There is concern that Community fleets should set an example of respect for resources for other fleets operating in third countries ' waters , that local fishermen should receive proper information about what the various agreements mean , and that there should be transparency and control over financial compensation paid by the European Union and its shipowners .
Finally , the report seeks to clarify another point of confusion : the fisheries agreements are fisheries policy , not development policy .
Yet it would be wrong to forget the important role they play in the development of local communities , thanks to the financing and experience provided by the Community fleets , to the point that - and this is another little-known aspect - in many cases it is third countries themselves which ask the European Union for fisheries agreements .
The most recent case - and here I am correcting some of my colleagues - is Senegal , where pressure to renew the agreement has come not just from Community interests , but also from the Senegalese sector itself because its processing depends on Community catches in its waters and some industries risked paralysis if the agreement was not renewed immediately .
As you know , some were already complaining before the agreement was renewed .
So taking all these factors into account , I must support Mr Crampton 's report as it stands and I cannot agree with the amendments tabled by others .
Finally , I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs , but I want to highlight the Souchet report , Madam Commissioner , regarding Parliament 's loss of power in the consultation procedure , and we obviously have to oppose your proposed reform of article 4 of the basic regulation .
You will appreciate that it is our right and our duty to defend the powers of this Parliament , and article 43 is considerably diminished by your proposal , so we shall continue to whittle away at it .
Mr President , I am speaking mainly to the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights in relation to Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna 's report on the proposal for a Council decision on ratification by the European Community of the agreement for the implementation of the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea relating to the conservation and management of fish stocks found both inside and outside exclusive economic zones and highly migratory fish stocks .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and the Committee on Fisheries share a common position , adopted unanimously in both committees moreover , to the effect that the proposal to introduce a new article 3.2 establishing mixed or joint procedure by the States and the Commission is not proper .
Personally I would favour the Community assuming full responsibility for this matter , but at the moment we know that the second title and the external powers of the Community are not recognized .
Given that the Community does not have full competence in matters of external policy , it seems to me very dangerous to introduce a dual procedure , and I think it is preferable to wait until jurisdiction develops in accordance with United Nations law rather than introduce this ambiguous situation .
On the other reports on fisheries agreements , I would like to mention that all of them - like Mr Varela SuanzesCarpegna 's - were unanimously approved by the Committee on Fisheries , reflecting the magnificent atmosphere in the committee under the present chairman .
The opinions of the various committees were unanimously approved as well .
So we have a solid package .
And I especially want to congratulate my good friend , Mr Crampton , for his work as rapporteur .
Listening to him last night , I was reminded of characters in English literature , characters he must know well , created by a great British writer , Mr Robert Louis Stevenson : Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde .

I am totally in agreement with Dr Jekyll , that is , Mr Crampton the rapporteur , and his magnificent report , unanimously approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and I do not agree with Mr Crampton as Mr Hyde , criticizing his own report as rapporteur in the Committee on Fisheries .


Account needs to be taken of the fact that the fisheries agreements represent only 0.003 % of the total Community budget .
And when Mr Teverson said that the percentage per ship was very high , he did not explain that the reason it is so high is that Community policy has been and is to reduce the number of ships .
And as we reduce the number of ships and the Community fishing effort , we have to apply the amounts needed to maintain fishing capacity .
I find the Commission 's current budget proposals quite alarming and , frankly , I do not think the European Parliament should second those proposals , and I hope it does not .
When the resources allocated to fisheries are so limited and the intention is to reduce them further , that seems irresponsible to me because of the tremendous effects they are going to have on people and even on maintaining the quality and quantity of fish in the sea .
I think we must hold out strongly against it .
I would like to end with a comparison : the poorest regions of the Community are generally island regions - for example , the Azores and Corsica - and the only Community region called an island which is above the Community average is the Ile de France and I do not think there is much fishing in the Ile de France because it is some way from the sea .
Community fisheries policy has a lot to do with the island location of many regions dependent on fishing and that usually goes hand in hand with a level of poverty requiring an economic contribution from the Community , based on type of region and the maintenance of ecological balance .
Mr President , allow me to begin by congratulating Mr Crampton on his report .
For one thing , it sets out our fisheries policy priorities .
For another , it offers a brisk reminder as regards the proper application of the code of conduct of 12 December 1996 .
And that is surely necessary , because the Council is continuing to circumvent us in our capacity as one arm of the budgetary authority - not least as happened in relation to the fisheries agreement with Mauritania .
I find myself wondering why we actually agreed a code of conduct at all .
Similarly , the Commission blithely disregards the fact that it is now obliged under the code of conduct to inform us fully and in good time of the current state of the negotiations on international fisheries agreements - in other words , actually during the negotiations .
This was confirmed only recently when Mrs Bjerregaard addressed the House during the debate on the fisheries agreements with Guinea and Angola .
The fisheries agreement with São Tomé and Principe which we are discussing here today provides yet another example of how important it is for the Commission and the Council to apply the code of conduct systematically .
In this case , the Council decided on the provisional application of the protocol on 25 October last year , so that the Commission could immediately proceed with the payments .
In the Council 's eyes , that was more important than consulting Parliament in good time .
In fact , we were consulted for the first time on 20 September - four months after the protocol had been initialled and barely six weeks before the first payment was due to be made .
Surely that is no way for democratic institutions to deal with one another !
Let me remind the House that if in fact the code of conduct was rigorously applied , it would put an end to this disgraceful practice of provisionally implementing international fisheries agreements .
Moreover , we are already faced with another similar case - I refer to the agreement with Senegal which was initialled on 26 March .
This time , the first payment is due on 31 July .
This means that we face another instance of provisional application because , as usual , the Council has not bothered to consult us .
However , the guilty party this time is the Commission .
I should like to take this opportunity of emphasizing once again that the last Commission official in charge of negotiating fisheries agreements with third countries was , like his predecessors , made fully aware of the importance of observing the democratic procedure for ratifying an international fisheries agreement - even if negotiations on such an agreement go on until three in the morning - and was told that agreeing deadlines for payment three or four months after the initialling of an agreement would simply no longer be acceptable .
The Crampton report also backs our repeated demand for the question of the application of the assent procedure to be clarified as part of the continuing negotiations on the revision of the Maastricht Treaty .
Therefore , as the member of the Committee on Budgets with permanent responsibility for reporting on fisheries issues , I welcome the decision that was taken by the Committee on Legal Affairs on 17 April this year to finally make an example of the agreement with Mauritania and contest the Council 's chosen legal basis for that agreement in the Court of Justice .
Mr President , one of the reports we are going to pass is the report on the international fisheries agreements .

First I want to congratulate Mr Crampton on this report , because many of us opposed the initial proposal and yet , by an exercise of flexibility , Mr Crampton has been able to achieve a compromise which is undoubtedly positive for the Community fishing sector .
Our fishing fleet has obvious socio-economic importance .
It generates activity and employment in areas where there are usually few economic alternatives .
So when our fishing grounds in Community waters cannot supply the catches required by the capacity of the European fishing fleet , we must look for alternatives in waters of other third countries .
It is a social obligation .
But we must also bear in mind that the Community runs a deficit in fish , so the needs of our own trade balance impel us to look for and promote this type of alternative for our fleet .
That is clearly stated in this report , which is why it deserves our full support .
The report also states that these fisheries agreements are perfectly compatible with cooperation policies for developing countries and actually make a contribution to them by dynamizing those economies .
So the fisheries agreements themselves can actually be active instruments of the cooperation policies , in addition , of course , to serving the interests of the Community fishing sector .
And the report underlines another sad reality .
The resources intended for these fisheries agreements , which must be financed by the Community budget , are not sufficient .
Year after year , the budget of the European Union increases and yet the amounts devoted to fishing in general , and to the fisheries agreements in particular , are not growing to the same extent but are diminishing in relative and indeed absolute terms - from ECU 278 million to ECU 273 million last year .
I think this is very difficult to accept , especially when the total of Community resources earmarked for the fishing sector accounts for only 0.9 % of the budget and the part intended for financing fishing rights is only 0.31 % of the budget of the European Union .
How can we justify to our fishermen the fact that while agriculture , the other primary sector , has 45 % of the Community budget devoted to it - ensuring that it has an income support policy - fishing , on the other hand , only receives 0.9 % ?
This is also denounced in one way or another in this report . And as the European Parliament is a budgetary authority , logically this should give us food for thought too .
The report gives a realistic description of the Community fleet 's ever-increasing difficulties of direct access to the fishing grounds of other third countries .
Those are the facts .
And they mean we have to try to find alternatives in second and third generation fisheries agreements .
And I want to close with one thought , Mr President : we increasingly need a genuine European foreign policy to back up all our policies , including our socio-economic policies , and including our fisheries policies . That is a thought the Commissioner has had many times .
For example , in agreements with Russia our cod fleet needs to be able to obtain compensation to access Arctic resources , and the enormous advantages Norway gains from our markets ought to mean greater opportunities for the Community fishing sector .
In the future a common foreign policy which also covers trade policy , economic policy and cooperation policy may facilitate the development of international fisheries agreements .
The Crampton report underlines the need for coherence between the various Community policies .
Mr President , Commissioner , for the foreseeable future , the European Union 's international fisheries agreements will have to balance two conflicting sets of interests : on the one hand , there is the need to secure access for the EU fleet to the marine resources of third-country waters ; on the other , there is the vital interest of developing countries in improving the exploitation of their own marine resources in order to supply their growing populations .

The rapporteur , Mr Crampton , has tried to tackle problems and set out demands which are geared to the future , and he deserves particular thanks for doing so , because one thing must be understood quite clearly : a strategy which is based on ' more of the same ' will be a non-starter .
Indeed , the problems are already too urgent for that .
The capacity of the world 's fishing fleet has doubled over the last 20 years , and the pressure on fisheries resources is steadily increasing .
The competition for fish as a declining source of food has intensified , with the result that it is becoming more and more expensive to exploit marine resources .
Tackling these problems requires transparency , a coherent approach and , above all , honesty .
One of the requirements of a transparent approach to international fisheries agreements is to consider who benefits from such agreements and on the basis of what criteria access to third-country waters is granted .
If the benefits of fisheries agreements are to be assessed in a comprehensible way , we must insist on a cost-benefit analysis - which must also consider the possible consequences of not having such agreements .
In particular , we wish to see the Commission adopting an integrated approach in this area , instead of the present ad hoc way of dealing with things .
Under Article 130v of the EC Treaty , the Community is already legally required to adopt a coherent approach to its various policies and to take account of their impact on developing countries . Clearly , however , it is also in the Union 's own interest to seek to achieve a balance of interests with the developing countries , framing bilateral fisheries agreements in such a way that these also play a part in developing the local economy and improving supplies for the indigenous population .
We expect second-generation agreements to further consolidate the element of cooperation with those countries that wish to have it .
Finally , an honest approach to international fisheries agreements also means admitting - to our own fishermen as much as anyone - that the long-term solution to the problem of overcapacity in the Community fleet does not lie in ever more intensive fishing of third-country waters .
Other mechanisms must be brought into play here , because this is a regional , rather than a sectoral problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there has often been a lack of will within the European Union over international fisheries agreements despite the fact that they are part and parcel of the Common Fisheries Policy .
Old arguments are trotted out , old chestnuts , such as budgetary costs , balance in the use of resources or the supposed contradiction between these agreements and the European Union 's cooperation policy with ACP countries .
Access by the European Union 's fishery fleets to the waters of third countries only has a raison d 'être if it is in the interest of both parties .
Therefore no country , including those in the ACP , will sign these agreements with us unless its own interests , be they material , economic or social , are looked after .
Therefore , I fail to understand certain paternalistic positions calling into question the sovereignty and legitimacy of those countries in reaching international agreements .
On the other hand , it is a known fact that the European Union has an approximate 55 % deficit in fish supplies for its market .
We also know that 25 % of Community fishery production is guaranteed by international fisheries agreements .
It is also a fact that these agreements maintain around 50 , 000 jobs in the European Union .
In the face of these facts and circumstances , I think that we have every justification and can say that the current 270 million ECU spent annually on international fisheries agreements is money well spent .
If we demand , as some people wish , an analysis of costs and benefits , then the same will have to be true for all Community policies , beginning with the one which costs the most - the Common Agricultural Policy or CAP .
As far as agreements with developed countries in particular are concerned , it is regrettable that the European Union should not have considered it a priority to look at the fisheries sector in economic trade negotiations with those countries .
I am thinking in particular of North America , where millions of tonnes of fish in international waters have been exclusively handed over for exploitation by Norway , Iceland , Canada and Russia , something which is very revealing .
Then there is the agreement with Greenland , for which quotas were attributed to Member States of the European Union which do not use them , including countries such as Portugal , which until it joined the European Union historically used to fish in those waters .
I should like to begin by thanking Mr Crampton for the work which he has carried out on his report .
But I must say , with every respect , that his report often confuses economic and commercial questions bound up with the common fisheries policy with questions which are more related to cooperation policy and tends in general to overestimate the problems of others compared with our own problems which are very many , especially in this area .
I therefore hope that the amendments tabled by the Committee on Fisheries will be approved , to make this report a balanced , realistic one serving the interests of the European Union .
Mr President , there are a hundred million people in developing countries who depend for their very basic survival on fishing - not just for their livelihood but their survival .
There are another ten million people in developing countries who are employed in the fishing industry full-time ; that is their source of employment .
Another ten million people are employed part-time in developing countries and fishing is one of their activities .
These are extraordinary statistics .
A hundred million people is more than twice the populations of Spain and Portugal put together .
It is almost twice the population of the United Kingdom .
And these people depend for their basic survival on fishing .
The Crampton report is a good report in that it points out certain parameters and certain principles which we should be basing our fishing and development policy on .
We need a new European fisheries development policy .
It must go beyond the framework of commercial agreements .
These are costing the Community budget about 30 % of the fisheries budget .
This cannot be right .
For next year 's budget we are going to be reducing the PESCA projects by 50 % .
And here in our own Union , where there are tremendous problems of decommissioning and areas suffering from unemployment because of constraints and the need to conserve stocks , we are reducing expenditure while at the same time we are spending a third of our budget on commercial agreements .
The Community has its priorities wrong and we need a new fisheries policy .
There are problems with the Crampton report .
Some unhelpful amendments were tabled at the final meeting of the Committee on Fisheries .
There are some small difficulties , which result in the kind of mishmash which Mr Cunha mentioned .
But the report offers a way forward and we have to seize the opportunity for a new development in the fisheries area .
Concerning Mr Macartney 's amendment to the Souchet report , if we are going to have reform of the CFP , it should look to the year 2002 as agreed and we should have discussions .
It should not be slipped in by the back door , as some people appear to be trying to do .
Then there is the matter of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea , in the Suanzes-Carpegna report .
I cannot understand Amendment No 2 .
I thought the whole emphasis of the European Union was to settle disputes with the Commission and the Member States .
But some people on the Committee on Fisheries seem to think otherwise .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I want to add my congratulations to those received by the rapporteurs for their reports in this joint debate and I want to concentrate particularly on the international agreements , especially thanking Mr Crampton , in his Dr Jekyll incarnation , for the valuable work he has done and also for the flexibility he has shown in achieving compromise solutions in the Committee on Fisheries , even if the result was not entirely to his liking .

This is also a good time to think about the future of the Community fisheries agreements , which have frequently been attacked from myopic political positions based on partial analysis of the relative participation of the Member States , sometimes on imaginary conflict with development policy , and occasionally on dubious reasoning associated with fairly unsound cost-benefit analysis .
These are all attempts to undermine a policy which is not only vital to maintaining the activity in an important sector of the Community fleet , but - as the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries has mentioned - also for regular supply of the Community fish products processing industry at reasonable prices and high quality .
Because there is no getting away from it , the European Union is faced with a clear dilemma : either to abandon its current policy of negotiation or to make it more effective .
If it abandons it , there are two possibilities : either the field would be left open to fleets of third countries filling the gap left by the European Union , or we would be witness to a partial renationalization of fisheries policy , because the Member States themselves or their economic agents would negotiate more useful agreements .
I think the actual interests of coastal third countries counsel continuing with this policy , because the European Union negotiates fishing opportunities based on a rigorous analysis of the state of the fishing grounds , establishes appropriate technical measures , and contributes to the promotion of fishing control activities with the states with which it negotiates , and to the development of the national fishing sectors in those countries .
What is the best option , negotiating fisheries agreements with a responsible political body like the European Union or the anarchy the free play of economic forces would lead to ?
I think the answer is obvious .
As a Parliament committed to respect for the environment in all its facets , driving development policy forward , concerned about keeping our fishing fleets active and our processing industries regularly supplied , we must continue to support a Community policy of fisheries agreements which has proved its worth both to Member States and third countries .
And we must do so without abandoning the necessary improvement in the institutional procedures which will sharpen Parliament 's protagonism in the context of this policy .
It is very easy to criticize , but there are few alternatives .
So I encourage you , Madam Commissioner , coolly and rationally , to press ahead with this policy , which is difficult but has produced such good results so far .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Crampton for his skill , especially as he succeeded in getting an initial draft report that was perhaps a little extreme in its demands approved unanimously in the Committee on Fisheries by incorporating the amendments that were passed .
As this own initiative report deals with the international fisheries agreements , which are so important for the Community fishing fleet and arouse such genuine passion , his achievement was all the greater .
I want to highlight three points from the report : first , the preservation of fisheries resources , a principle underpinned by Community and international rules and which is so fundamental for assuring the future of the European fleet .
Secondly , as a socialist , I am pleased the Crampton report acknowledges the importance of preserving existing employment , both on the sea and in the processing industry .
Even if it does not have great incidence on the whole Community , fishing is a vital economic activity for the development of certain peripheral regions with income levels below the Community average and high levels of unemployment , regions where fishing is the principal activity and whose socio-economic structure would fall apart if they could not count on the international fisheries agreements .
And thirdly , the report records that , in spite of their commercial nature , the fisheries agreements provide certain benefits for developing countries contracting with the European Union .
Claiming that they are not commercial agreements , but are geared to the development of the ACP countries , would mean these fisheries agreements would have to be financed by the European development fund and not by the slim budget of the common fisheries policy .
But anyway , that idea does not relate to reality .
As Mr Crampton has already mentioned , over half the 26 agreements have been signed with ACP countries , but our fleet principally operates in the waters of other countries .
I think we should stop thinking international trade is sinful .
The development of these countries is helped by giving them an outlet to the market and buying their products and hence collaborating economically in their development .
The European Union could survive without a fisheries agreement with Sao Tomé , but that country would be deprived of a principal source of income if it did not have an agreement with the European Union .
Trade benefits both parties and so do the international fisheries agreements .
Mr President , all the very valuable reports before us tonight deal with agreements and treaties on how best to regulate and control fishing in national and international waters at a time when there are very considerable concerns about over fishing and reduction of fish-stocks .
The report by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna contains a reference to the duty of the country under whose flag a vessel is flying to exercise jurisdiction and take action if that vessel infringes the regulations .
I should like to draw to the Commissioner 's attention the difficulties being experienced in exercising that duty in relation to some socalled quota-hoppers .
I have been told of recent cases of non-British vessels sailing under the British flag , which were prosecuted in a British court , found guilty and fined , simply sailing away to another Member State leaving the fines unpaid .
Some system must be found to ensure that all vessels sailing under a particular national flag are made accountable to the courts of that state , and the Member State of which the captain and crew are nationals must cooperate in ensuring that this blatant flouting of conservation measures is stopped .
Very many fishermen , all over the EU , from communities like Grimsby in my own constituency , have become unemployed as a result of conservation measures .
Vessel owners have received EU compensation ; but the people who worked on the decommissioned boats in the UK did not even receive statutory redundancy pay , let alone EU compensation , because they were designated casual workers even if they worked on the same ship for many years .
This is a serious injustice which continues to cause great resentment against the European Union in general as well as the common fisheries policy .
I would ask the Commissioner to ensure that future decommissioning is done in such a way as to ensure that not just the vessel owners , but also those who worked and risked their lives at sea , receive some sort of appropriate compensation for the loss of their livelihood .
A fishing set-aside to compensate for reduced days at sea is also a measure that possibly could be taken .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report reflects the duality and political tension raised by this subject .
On one hand , we point out the costs , and the benefits , with the Commission itself stating that the current budgetary situation is such that with the cost of current agreements we have very little room for manoeuvre when negotiating new agreements or renegotiating existing ones .
From the point of view of cooperation and development , we emphasize the option for local fleets of third countries , where the Community fleet is already fishing , such as the example of the fisheries development plan concerning the Kingdom of Morocco .
On the other hand , the Member States are systematically confronted with fleets and fishermen depending on international fisheries agreements .
I can detect a certain amount of anti-Europeanism here , with calls for progressive extensions and increases for fishery rights of third countries , emphasizing the virtues of a hypothetical bilateral negotiation of fishery rights to renationalize fisheries policies .
Our real challenge is defence of the Community fleet without taking anti-environmental or anti-European positions .
In my opinion , all of these budgetary discussions about costs and benefits are all part of the scheme to try to transfer available financial resources to other objectives and this in the end reflects an incomplete picture in the whole approach to the European project , in a sector of huge political relevance and with enormous impact on employment in certain coastal regions of the European Community .
Apart from that , the international fisheries agreements represent only 0.31 % of the whole Community budget and there is no doubt that a policy without agreements , at 1996 costs , would result in an increase in the sea-product trade deficit of at least 1 , 400 million ECU a year , whereas extra direct unemployment in this sector would come to something like 450 million ECU per year in unemployment benefit .
On the other hand , any proposals bearing in mind a controversial and complex shareout of costs between shipowners and the Commission or a freeze on Community financial contributions would lead to a strengthening of the aforementioned trend towards ' re-nationalizing ' fisheries policies .
That was the appeal I wanted to make because the political cost of such an option would be incalculable as well as the economic impact on fishery areas .
Finally , it is in particular from the viewpoint of resources management that we must assess the future of international fisheries agreements .
Sea resource management is the keystone for sustainable fishing and initially it will be for coastal states to see to this management without discrimination between national and Community fleets .
There is now a new international legal framework in the fishery sector confirmed by the United Nations Convention on Maritime Law , and I should also like to point out the code of conduct for responsible fishing .
The resources we are talking about are finite and only sustainable fishing will allow the sector to continue , as well as international fisheries agreements .
Mr President , in reply I shall say a few brief words about each of the reports , leaving until last a number of comments on the own-initiative report by Mr Crampton regarding the international fisheries agreements , which have been at the focus of this evening 's debate , and to which all the speeches made have in any case referred .
Taking them in order , I look first at the report by Mr Varela .
The Commission played an active part in achieving the ratification of the United Nations convention relating to the conservation and management of straddling stocks , which the Commission believes represents a concrete step towards the protection and sustainable exploitation of resources .
I am of course fully aware of the problems that arise , and especially of the need to prevent certain partners from continuing to undertake unilateral initiatives , Canada in particular , and I should like to reassure Mr Varela that action is being taken , through diplomatic letters and all other available means , to try to prevent or at any rate put a stop to this kind of behaviour , which is not acceptable either to Parliament or to the Commission .
As far as the amendments are concerned , the Commission 's position is as follows : Amendments Nos 1 and 3 relate to various concerns regarding the provisions on the distribution of powers between the Community and the Member States and regarding the need for the agreement to be interpreted in accordance with the Convention of the Law of the Sea , but the Commission considers that these concerns have already been taken into account in the declarations annexed to the proposal or in the agreement itself .
Furthermore , with regard to Amendment No 2 , the Commission considers this unacceptable in that it supports the idea of unified representation of the European Commission in disputes with international bodies .
Although I understand the underlying philosophy , Mr Varela , I would not want to see the same situation arising with the fisheries as has arisen with the CFSP , because hitherto - like it or not - at least the Community has spoken with a single voice .
If each Member State were to defend its own interests we should , I think , have a repeat of the second pillar situation in the matter of foreign policy , where the cacophonous cries and conflicting interests of the Member States would not , it seems to me , provide us with a more effective instrument .

Moving on to Mr Macartney 's report , the Commission thanks the rapporteur for his excellent work ; in fact the annex to the protocol has been amended to give the competent authorities of São Tomé e Principe better control over the fishing activities of foreign fleets in the exclusive economic zone .
The Commission agrees with the spirit of Amendments Nos 3 and 5 , and agrees that it is indeed necessary to improve the provision of information .
It cannot accept Amendment No 6 , because the Council lays down the directives which are negotiated once only for each agreement and not for the renewal of the agreements and the various protocols .
In this case the Commission , whose task it is to conduct the negotiations , also ensures compliance with the directives that have been submitted by the Council .
With regard to the other amendments , the Commission has always believed that the fisheries agreements concluded with the ACP States are eminently commercial in nature even though , as emphasized in the subsequent report by Mr Crampton , those agreements do very often contain development aspects , which also apply to third countries , for example with regard to the signing-on of crews or the landing of catches for on-board processing .
In any event , pursuant to Article 130b of the Treaty of Union regarding cohesion , the Commission intends that the appropriations in favour of these countries should reinforce the fisheries sector synergistically with development policy .
I must say , though , at this point , that it is frustrating for the Commission , having listened to you for two hours , not to be able to reply to Mrs Aelvoet because she is not here . I do want to reply to her , anyway , because I feel that this House nourishes a number of stereotypes and , frankly , I no longer know what words to use to clear them up .
I cannot accept time and time again the example of Senegal , because this is not correct .
The Senegal Agreement was finalized at the request of , and pressure from , the Senegal authorities , including the fisheries sector of Senegal .
Secondly , we had a joint action with DG XIV and DG VIII so it was a development and fishery agreement .
Third , following our pressure , we received a letter from the authorities of Dakar saying that they have finally decided to allocate 50 % of the total amount of the agreement to the fisheries sectors .
This simply proves that we are trying to take your concern into account .
I cannot listen again to the claim that we are competing with the local fishery .
This is not true .
Our fleet is fishing in high seas 200 meters deep .
Local Senegalese fishermen cannot fish 200 meters deep .
They do not have the tools and equipment .
We are competing with the Japanese fleet .
So let us tell it as it is so that what can be corrected can be corrected .
Let us face the real problem and not some stereotype .
I do not really know how I can overcome that .
I will leave the Crampton report to the end because it deserves more comment and turn now to the report by Mr Teverson .
With regard to Mr Teverson 's report on multilateral co-operation in the NAFO area , the European Community , as you know , being a contracting party , is required to incorporate into Community legislation all the recommendations made by the NAFO fisheries committee , which is why the two proposals for regulations in question lay down certain monitoring measures , as indeed you mentioned , including observers , which follow up the recommendations made by the fisheries committee of the NAFO .
The Commission welcomes the fact that these proposals have been the subject of favourable comment in the Teverson report .
I have of course taken note of the anxieties you have expressed , which are reflected in the proposed amendments , but I cannot for formal reasons introduce them into the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation 189 .
In any case , the Commission undertakes from now on to pass to the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries a copy of the report drawn up by the NAFO scientific council on the fish stocks situation .
The problem is that the stocks are analysed and evaluated by the NAFO scientific committee , in which the European Commission participates , but there are no specific reports ; what I can do is to make the results of that scientific report available immediately .
As regards the final report , by Mr Souchet , the Commission has to say frankly that , having examined the European Parliament 's report on the modification of this fundamental system , it cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
The reason , Mr Souchet , is that in order to comply with the undertakings given at international level , all that is needed is to incorporate the technical measures into the Community legal system . The scope of those measures is extremely limited , in that they relate to the determination of fishing gear and its methods of use , and they are adopted by the management committee on the basis of Article 18 .
Well , in this context , the Commission really does not think it is appropriate to apply the Article 43 procedure , after the measure in question has been adopted by the international organization concerned , since the Union does not in any case have a margin of discretion regarding the content of the measures .
The Commission , furthermore , cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 4 , because they go beyond the legal framework of the proposal under consideration .
Having said all that , let me give you just one or two thoughts on the fisheries agreements .
I told you already that I feel a great amount of frustration because even the debate tonight showed that the opinions in this House are completely divided .
That means that the only thing I can do is stick to the final report , which apparently reflects the consensus after a long debate , and try to be as pragmatic as I can .
Let me take this occasion to say that you cannot simply transfer the overcapacity to third countries .
For seven months the Commission has tried to push through a capacity reduction of 30 % of our fleet .
It took me seven months to achieve this result.This was achieved in a spirit of compromise - my original request was higher .
I am simply underlining that we are trying to work in every way we can which includes a reduction in capacity or fishing effort in our waters and not simply a ' transfer of over-capacity elsewhere . ' This is not correct .
It is quite astonishing that Member States who have never reduced their capacity in previous years or which have even increased their capacity in that time , not only create the major resistance in the Council to my proposal but there is also criticism because I am ' simply transferring over-capacity . '
Maybe you are not referring to the Commission but to your Member States or governments .
When you talk about decomissioning , Mr McMahon , your country , rightly or wrongly , did not use the decomissioning scheme with Commission financing over the past ten years !
( Interruption by Mr McMahon ) I am sorry , but that is not my problem .
Everybody has his own responsibility .
I assume mine but I am not the scapegoat for everything including Hiroshima !
I was not born then .
So , Britain lost £ 12 , 000 , 000 by not using the decomissioning scheme and its fishermen were obliged to sell their boats and their licences .
And others bought them .
And I cannot prevent that .
I cannot prevent people buying if you do not know how to prevent people selling .
If you can tell me how to prevent people from selling , I will probably learn how to prevent people from buying .
As far as compensation , not only to owners but to workers , is concerned , that was the proposal of the Commission but several Member States - I will not name them but you know very well which - did not accept that proposal .
That is the same as the use of structural funds .
The proposal of the Commission which finally got through consisted of an invitation - not an obligation because it was not possible - to use part of the structural fund for social benefits to the fishermen .
The proposal is not binding but it went through .
Some governments , including one you know well , are not using that possibility and I cannot enforce it .
So let us apportion responsibility where it should be .
Secondly , on financial compensation , what do we mean ?
Do we mean developing countries or to all agreements ?
If we are referring to all agreements can we just have a look to the Greenland Agreement which is ECU 50 million for no fish .
So please take an initiative .
I did and made no progress in the Council .
So , why do we not try ?
And I hope you will be as tough when we talk about tomatoes , which are paid for , or strawberries or other commercial agreements .
So , if your proposal is that we should not pay for any agreement , I hope you will be coherent on other agreements and also when solidarity is called for in the case of epidemics .
Here we are talking about ECU 280m , of which ECU 180m are for ACP countries .
All the others are northern agreements , some of which have no fish .
Thirdly , you have to take account of the 20 , 000 people working on this agreement when we talk about employment .
This relates to the provision of resources for which we are 50 % dependent and if we simply had to buy 50 % of the fish which is needed for our consumption , we would pay anyway .
( Interruption from Mr Teverson : We do not do this for any other sector , do we ? ) I do not want to compare agricultural funds with the fisheries fund .
If we are to be coherent we have to stick at some point .
It cannot be that we have two different ways of dealing with things .
Or if we do , it does not make a lot of sense , Mr Teverson .
Not even when we pay subsidies for faults or mistakes made in some Member States out of solidarity .
The fisheries agreements are of commercial value .
That is the point .
We can try to evaluate it , if you want .
The Commission is not in a position to make a cost-effective evaluation , but we can have an external body do so if you want , for the sake of accountability to the taxpayer .
Maybe there are several issues we have to take into account .
I have tried to make some points .
I realise that this is not the final debate we will have on fisheries and international agreements .
But I want to tell you how frustrated I am .
I received no recognition from this House for the progress and changes we have made in the fisheries agreement .
Mr Crampton mentioned that I declared that the time in which we come , we fish , we pay a little , is over .
That is what I have been trying to achieve .
The new agreements are second or third generation agreements .
Mr McMahon referred to the many people depending on the fishery industry in the third world .
Maybe he was just counting the fish , for that is not exactly the truth .
Take Namibia , for example .
It wants to develop its own fisheries sector .
It has the fish but it does not have the boats .
So there is room for a balanced agreement with Namibia , on the basis of joint enterprise .
Otherwise it will build its own fleet and the overall global fleet will simply increase .
What is wrong in putting together its fish and our boats and our know-how ?
What is wrong with that ?
Mozambique is in the same position .
It has neither the know-how nor the boats nor the fleet to fish its own waters .
That is the reason why they are selling to the Japanese and to others .
So more in-depth knowledge of the countries with which we have international fisheries agreements could be of some value and give us a better understanding of what is going on .
It does not mean we are perfect , but we should recognize that we have made major changes in this dossier .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on what she said , 90 % of which I agree with .
I share her frustrations with many of the Member States , especially , perhaps , in recent times , my own .
We recognize that the Commission has come a long way .
Indeed , in this report from the Committee on Fisheries we congratulate the Commission on one of their latest documents : ' Fisheries agreements : current situation and agreements ' .
I think they are moving in the right direction .
My report is supposed to try and help .
Mr President , the Commissioner asked that the blame be placed where it belonged .
She is right to do so .
In particular she is right to blame the UK Government , although she did not single it out for its failure on decommissioning .
But equally , as the guardian of Community law , she has the responsibility for the legal competence of the subject of the Souchet report .
I hope that she will go back to look at the legal base which we are examining in this Parliament .
The two go together .
If we uphold the correct legal base and assign blame where it belongs , then let us be consistent there too .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.00 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I refer to page 11 , item 7 of the Minutes - the debate on my report .
I wish to make a personal statement following the speech by Ms McKenna , in which she said : ' I know that Mr Titley is a lobbyist for what I would call the merchants of death . '
As a dramatic statement , that is in line with the best editions of Irish literature ; as a statement of fact , it is entirely untrue .
It is not in the best interests of the House , particularly when debating the Ford report on lobbyists , for accusations of this nature to be made by a Member of this House .
I can assure this House I am not a lobbyist for anybody , and , as to merchants of death , we do not meet many of them in Bolton market , so I am not sure what she means .
She also said that I advocate in my report that the European taxpayer should contribute to the arms industry .
There is no such claim whatsoever in my report .
This only propagates a Green newsletter which is widely distributed , and which , if it were in the United Kingdom , would be libellous .
Therefore , I would like to make it clear that these statements are entirely untrue .
Mr President , I wish to make a statement because yesterday in southern France a certain number of goods , mostly Spanish ones , mostly fruit and vegetables , attacked and destroyed .
I wish to condemn this act of aggression and call on the Community authorities to remind the French authorities of the need to ensure the free transit and free circulation of goods .
Unfortunately , we witness similar attacks from time to time in various Community countries in recent years , and I think we all ought to echo your protest and condemn these attacks each time , because the national authorities should indeed protect the free movement of workers from other European countries who come into the European Union .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Nuclear industries
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Soulier ( A4-0131 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission on the nuclear industries in the European Union ( Illustrative nuclear programme according to Article 40 of the EURATOM Treaty ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0339 - C4-0532 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to remind you that this debate is a première .
The Commission was not bound , by the provisions of Article 40 of the Euratom Treaty , to consult the European Parliament .
It has , however , done so .
Apart from your natural elegance and the good manners that you have shown to the European Parliament I should like to tell you , Commissioner , that you were right to do this .
We all need the support of public opinion when it comes to energy problems .
It is quite remarkable to see that in Europe , over the last 40 years , nuclear policies have been worked out by small groups of men - scientists , politicians and industrialists - without any real public consultation before decisions were taken , in particular through the intermediary of their national representatives .
It is , therefore , a good thing that an institution like ours should have its word to say about energy policy , both in terms of Member States and at the level of the European Union as a whole .
The second comment I would like to make is that the geopolitical conditions have changed since the signing of the Euratom Treaty as well as the prosperity of 30 years which passed between 1950 and 1980 .
The question of the European Union 's energy independence has become a crucial one .
The world , contrary to what was thought in 1989 , is still somewhat unsafe , and it is from rather unstable areas that most of the Member States ' petrol and gas resources come .
Do we really think - and do the public really think - about the situation we would be in if Russia , the Middle East , North Africa , were for a time inaccessible to us ?
The Gulf War showed that the West was very quick to intervene because the threat was not a theoretical one .
That is the yardstick by which we must measure the interest of a nuclear industrial policy .
In my report I have asked questions about its efficiency and the risks , and I think that my report is both moderate and pragmatic .
It is moderate because we have to be modest .
What do we know of technological inventions to come in the next few years ?
How can we can really make any judgment about a given type of nuclear reactor without far-ranging scientific knowledge ?
Of course we must trust the experts , but we must also debate together the conclusions of their work and its findings .
On this subject , I should like to say that I oppose most of the amendments tabled by Mrs McNally for two reasons .
First of all Mrs McNally contradicted her own amendment when she recognised that the Member States have the sovereign right to opt for or against nuclear power and that their choice had to be respected .
In the amendments tabled for the plenary session , Mrs McNally wishes to extend to all Member States a ban on nuclear power in the long run .
This is not in keeping with the initial thought .
But , above all , I should like to tell her that it is not possible not to bear in mind scientific progress .
We are all bound by technical progress and technological advances , and from that point of view we have to trust in progress .
I should like to mention the following points .
Europe is more than 60 % dependent for its supplies .
If today or in the coming years nuclear energy was banned or suppressed we would be dependent at a rate of over 80 % and , therefore , I would say we would be in greater danger .
Secondly , of course , we are all in favour of renewable energies !
Are they sufficiently advanced at present to enable us to replace what we extract from nuclear sources ?
There is no doubt that at the moment the answer to that question is ' no ' .
Third remark : this industry , at the present time , directly or indirectly employs some 400 , 000 people in Europe .
And we want to get rid of those jobs with one amendment !
Finally , industrial nature hates vacuums !
By that I mean to say - although I would not put money on it - that if we put an end to European nuclear industries , the United States and Japan which , unlike you , Commissioner , would not ask us any questions , would be there to replace us , whether in Europe or another continent .
And then , to finish , before a very brief conclusion , we have also in this area a duty of solidarity , interested duty , without any cynicism , towards the countries of Eastern Europe : in particular Ukraine and Russia .
Their nuclear power stations deserve safety levels which are equivalent to ours .
If we just get up and go , we would also be replaced in that domain , and it is our very own safety which is at stake and I think that , therefore , we should maintain a level of technology which is high enough for us to be able to take action in that area .
I have not issued an unreserved approval of the nuclear policy .
But I have placed the necessary emphasis on the need to win over public opinion , and the fact that we must fight against the ageing of nuclear power stations .
It is almost a biological phenomenon of society and one that we must face up to .
We cannot leave nuclear power stations as they are , but we must also trust technical procedures which are currently available to us and which probably will continue making progress to eliminate waste .
But we should not , as Mrs McNally has asked in her amendments , put an end to research funding .
Everyone talks about great ambitions for Europe !
But what would Europe be without energy ?
What would agriculture be without energy ?
What would be the use of an internal market if we had no energy and if industry slowed down ?
What would be the use of a single currency if we had less to buy ?
Totally banning the nuclear market at this time is a fantasy for the rich and a theoretical pipe dream about man 's future !
Mr Rapporteur , the Bureau is always rather lenient towards rapporteurs , we know how difficult it is for them to have their say in a short time , but I would prefer speeches to end without the statement ' I am finishing ' . That would save a bit of time .
Mr President , it is tempting for me to ask for as long an extension as the previous speaker , but I shall see if I can do without it .
I should like to begin by thanking Mrs McNally for her great efforts in trying to persuade the Energy Committee to include the Environment Committee 's suggestions in its report , unfortunately without success .
However , I would also thank her for tabling some proposals here in plenary which are in keeping with the spirit of the Environment Committee 's opinion , so that we can have the chance of voting on them .
It surprises me , in fact , that the Energy Committee was unable to accept a number of the Environment Committee 's proposals .
Both committees agree with the Commission that the choice of energy sources is a sovereign matter for the individual countries , and for them alone .
The logical consequence of this is therefore that we cannot keep the Euratom Treaty in its present form .
The aim of the Euratom Treaty is to promote nuclear energy .
It should thus be revised in such a way that health and safety are the prime objectives .
The resources should be used for work on the environmental problems associated with the use of nuclear power , including the question of the storage of radioactive waste and safety issues arising from the decommissioning of nuclear power stations .
That would be in keeping with the Maastricht Treaty , unlike the promotion of nuclear power .
I am well aware that the rapporteur for the Energy Committee , Mr Soulier , is very impressed by nuclear power , but it is not the purpose of the Union to promote it .
On the other hand , it is our purpose to promote the environment .
It would be desirable to do this by tightening up the existing action plan for the improvement of safety at nuclear power plants in Central and Eastern Europe , something which directly affects safety in the EU and is also in accordance with the objectives of the Maastricht Treaty .
The conclusion is that every effort should be made to improve the environment and the safety of existing plants , and not to build new ones .
If individual countries wish to invest in nuclear power stations , that is their affair .
It can never be the task of the EU .
The EU 's efforts should be concentrated on the environmental aspect of the energy issue , in other words energy savings , efficiency , renewable energy sources , and so on .
Mr President , thank you Mr Soulier for your introduction .
You have tried hard to be factual in your report and that is appreciated but you must admit that , on the whole , your report is rather optimistic about the future of nuclear power in Western Europe .
The EURATOM Treaty is 40 years old this year .
We have not had a party to celebrate it and like many of us it is beginning to show its age .
It was written and signed in 1957 and it bears all the hallmarks of the philosophy and expectations of that time which are no longer applicable .
It was a new technology which fired many hopes , some of which have been realized , most not .
The actual requirement on the European Commission was to bring forward a publication which would show production and investment figures in an indicative programme .
In the past that would have shown a constant increase in nuclear power .
If they had produced what they were asked to this time , it would be the smallest piece of paper with the least written on it of anything produced because the intentions for investment in Western Europe in nuclear power are practically nil .
This certainly applies to my country as well as France and I think to Germany and every other country .
There is no intention to build a lot more nuclear power stations .
Why not ?
Because in the years since the high hopes of the EURATOM Treaty were set down , the public have come to realize that there is a price to be paid for nuclear power .
That price is knowing how to dispose of the radioactive waste , how to ensure our safety - two or more dramatic accidents in those 40 years have shaken the public 's faith - and how to cope with the costs of decommissioning .
The liberalization of electricity directive is one big reason why there will not be investment in nuclear power in Western Europe .
If Western European nuclear enterprises want to take their expertise around the world that is a matter for them , not for the European Union to support .
I deprecate the installation of nuclear power in some countries where the culture and the requirements for such potentially dangerous forms of energy are not available .
If Mr Soulier 's paragraph 18 which says ' there is no alternative to nuclear power ' is passed , we will vote against his report .
We had a prime minister once who said ' there is no alternative ' .
She was wrong .
Mr Soulier is wrong .
There is considerable potential in rational use of energy ; if research into renewable energy had been funded at the same rate as nuclear energy has been over the last 40 years , we would be in a very different position .
We do not have to decide for another 15 or 20 years about investment in a new form of power .
There will be many solutions in front of us at that time .
I regret , Commissioner , that you did not fulfil your task .
I understand why you were unable to do so and I hope your inability to show investment figures shows that in the future nuclear power should not be the main form of energy in this European Union .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Soulier for his excellent report .
The economic efficiency of nuclear power has been proved beyond doubt .
At present the proportion of nuclear power in the EU 's electricity production is one-third , and it cannot be rapidly replaced by other forms of energy .
Investments in the nuclear industry and research should be continued , and the same time new jobs will be created .
Compared with traditional means of energy production the overwhelming advantage of nuclear power is its compatibility with the environment , since it does not pollute the air with carbon dioxide which accelerates the greenhouse effect .
It thus also helps to achieve the emission limits agreed on at the Rio Environmental Summit .
The report takes no account of the suitability of nuclear power or of the question whether it should be approved as a source of energy , and that is as it should be .
Member States must respect the decisions of other Member States .
The most important thing is that those countries which do use nuclear power should ensure a high level of safety in their power stations .
Reactors and powers stations age , but their ageing must not weaken their safety .
From a safety point of view the EU must use its know-how and expertise to help the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and of the CIS in solving their nuclear safety problems .
This matter was referred to in the Energy Charter .
The resources set aside for this purpose must not , however , be taken away from other nuclear research .
The nuclear industry must always be monitored comprehensively from production to the final storage and destruction of nuclear waste .
Decisions must be taken on the final storage places for highly active , because it is not right that waste should have to be kept in temporary storage .
Moreover research on reducing the radioactivity of waste must continue and resources for such research must be increased .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Soulier , for this excellent report which provides a genuinely balanced view of the nuclear industry in the European Union .
The illustrative nuclear programme makes short-term projections which take account , harmoniously , of the new directive on the liberalization of the electricity market , and that is very important .
It is also formulated within the framework of the White Paper on the energy policy of the European Union and adopts the main themes of that White Paper : competitiveness , security of supply and protection of the environment , applying them to the field of nuclear policy .
So it is an extremely balanced report , too , as regards it terms of reference .
I believe it is fundamental , as is very clearly stated , that each Member State should be free to decide for or against the nuclear option . I myself , although I come from a country which has previously decided against the use of nuclear power , believe that we must not be too hasty in forming adverse conclusions regarding this very special energy resource , because the various activities of the nuclear industry do in any case concern , directly or indirectly , all the Member States .
It is therefore a matter of importance that the European Parliament should give its own opinion on this sector , which is covered by the EURATOM Treaty , partly because of the consequences which this debate may have on public opinion , doing something to remedy the existing democratic shortfall .
I am also in agreement with Mr Soulier when he says that we need to examine with more interest other types of reactors .
Technology moves quickly and the ageing process is insidious , so we need to take a look at new solutions in the fields of medicine and pharmaceuticals .
We really do regret the fact that this aspect has not been adequately considered by the Commission .
In conclusion , Mr President , the safety factor certainly imposes a responsibility on all Member States towards the citizens of Europe , but we agree with Mr Soulier 's view that a great deal must be done to strengthen and improve this safety aspect , not least in connection with the States of Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner . First of all I should like on behalf of the Liberal Group to congratulate Mr Soulier on his report .
He seized the opportunity of drafting a realistic resolution on a controversial subject and I think that is rather clever for a Frenchman .
My group has no objection in principle to nuclear energy .
It is a clean technology which is constantly becoming more sophisticated and safer and once a nuclear power station is built it seems to provide cheap electricity .
But even the safest power station is manned by people .
Accidents usually happen not as a result of inadequate technology but of human error .
The transport of nuclear material through densely populated parts of Europe involves major , even unacceptable risks , not to mention the risks involved in air transport .
There has been another example of this just this week involving transport in England .
Nuclear waste is stored temporarily in all Member States and I would ask Commissioner Papoutsis when we are finally going to get a definitive solution .
I would also like to know whether he supervises air transport in Europe .
For this is what Europe 's citizens are worried about .
They may not express it in words but they do in action such as blockading nuclear transport .
In economic terms I identify two other problems .
The Commission must safeguard conditions for competition now that the electricity market has been opened up .
This means that there can be no subsidising of new nuclear power stations , either by national governments or by Europe .
That would seriously distort the market for other forms of energy .
That is why our group will vote against paragraph 18 .
Export of technology from the European Union to less developed countries must be preceded by information targeted at the population on the pros and cons of nuclear energy .
A sustainable environment , ladies and gentlemen , does not end at the external borders of the European Union .
Mr President , to date , three nuclear indicative programmes have been published at Community level to present long-term projections .
The 1997 Indicative Programme , which we are debating today , offers a picture of the nuclear industry in the European Union , analyzes the problems posed by technological development and puts forward some suggestions in reply .
The Committee on Energy 's report , presented by Mr Soulier , on the Commission communication is a balanced one .
In my opinion , it succeeds in avoiding two pitfalls : blind trust in the nuclear power industry and highly unreasonable fears of that same industry and related fantasies .
It is based on technological development and European knowledge in nuclear matters . These are definitely advantages to be enhanced .
The report rightly poses the question of the European Union 's growing energy dependency .
It shows that nuclear energy , which on average supplies 35 % of electricity supplies in Europe and up to 75 % in France , makes a very large contribution to reducing this dependence .
At the same time , it does not ignore questions linked to the environment , safety or human health .
As for the very controversial issue of radioactive waste , it puts forward practical proposals linked to the rapid development of science and technology , in particular the elimination or diminution of radioactivity by means of particle accelerators , their transmutation , or generator-free reactors .
For this purpose , major investment will be needed in order to implement a programme guaranteeing the permanent storage of radioactive waste without any danger for future generations .
In tandem , the report recognises that Member States have the sovereign right to opt for or against nuclear power and forcefully asserts that their choice must be respected .
For my part , I hope that this balanced approach - which is respectful of each Member State 's choice - will be approved by the European Parliament .
From this point of view , I welcome the rejection in committee of the dogmatic amendments tabled by the Greens , based on scientific guess-work and ideological prejudice .
The French members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left will maintain their opposition to these amendments in the plenary session .
The Commission document falls within the context of the Directive on the liberalization of electricity and the framework of a common energy policy .
This approach - about which Mr Soulier 's report says too little , in my opinion - seems dangerous , in my view , since its main objective is to adapt the energy market to the principles of free trade and competition , speeding up the process of liberalization and deregulation , without any concern for the economic , social and regional consequences .
For these reasons , I am opposed to a common energy policy which would be a strait-jacket and a permanent threat to the Member States ' energy choices .
I therefore propose that we encourage cooperation , and coordination of national policies in the development of research .
Energy is not a commodity like any other .
It cannot and must not obey the principle of free trade - that would run the risk of calling into question the quality of access and treatment for users , but also the energy choices of each country , and the necessary long-term view to guarantee supply safety and lessen energy dependence .
With these reservations , I therefore confirm that I shall be supporting the report drafted by the Committee on Energy .
Mr President , let me just say to the previous speaker : our amendments are not based on ideology but quite simply on facts that can be proven .
I can understand that this does not suit her , as a Frenchwoman , but nevertheless one should not mix up the facts .
As for the Commission 's nuclear programme , it is marked by the thinking and environmental approach of the 1960s and in no way takes account either of current knowledge and needs or of the fact that half the Member States have no nuclear power at all .
On closer inspection it actually becomes clear that countries that do have nuclear power do not want to build new nuclear power stations because their people do not want it and also because it is too expensive .
It is in fact cheaper not to build nuclear power stations , for to build a new 1000 megawatt reactor costs between five and eight times as much as to build a modern conventional reactor .
Yet the Commission is calling for long-term regional and economic framework conditions that are nothing more than specific aid programmes - which we have already had in 1972 , 1976 , 1984 and 1990 .
And we are now basically being presented with a fifth aid programme for the nuclear industry .
Your document is also littered with mistakes and half-truths .
You state that nuclear installations are designed and built to contain virtually all the byproducts of their operation , even under accidental conditions .
That is surely quite wrong , for I wonder how the radioactivity from Windscale-Sellafield can be measured off the coasts of Canada and I wonder how come the drinking water at The Hague is contaminated with tritium and I wonder why nuclides escape during the normal running of nuclear power stations ?
This cannot be accepted as it stands .
Even to say the costs of dismantling a nuclear power station are 10 % to 15 % of the construction costs is a nonsense .
Firstly , we have only dismantled small nuclear power stations - two to date - and secondly they had extremely short running times , namely four to six weeks .
Now France , for instance , is postponing the dismantling for 50 years , England is doing so for a whole 100 years , so I do not know how these costs can be calculated .
Then you say that progress has been made in disposing of the waste from European nuclear installations .
That is a bit much !
Indeed fears are growing here .
Surely you are not calling it waste disposal when I put the rubbish bin in the hall .
That is not disposal .
It is not clear which geological barriers are the correct ones .
We do not even know into what matrix we are squeezing it , let alone how to evaluate and set the criteria for the long-term safety of nuclear storage sites .
Lastly let me say this : we have two thousand tonnes of weapon-grade plutonium and uranium in the world , and that is bad .
To this the Commission says : we want to process it into MOX fuel .
I say : that too is nonsense , for most light-water reactors are not suited to that .
The nuclear industry had 40 years to prove that it is clean , safe and cheap and that the waste can be disposed of safely .
It has not managed to do so in those 40 years .
So the only conclusion to be drawn is : out with this dinosaur technology !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am astonished by the counter-truths and gratuitous remarks contained in the report drafted by the Committee on Energy .
I shall mention just two .
In Recital F it says that : ' Whereas the issue of the environment cannot be dissociated from the development of the nuclear sector , first as regards the reduction in CO2 emissions to which it contributes ... ' .
This is simply untrue .
Several studies dating back to the early 1990s clearly show that CO2 emissions caused by electricity production and electro-nuclear energy approach 54 grams of CO2 per kilowatt / hour .
These emissions mostly come from enrichment but also from the extraction of uranium mineral .
Yet this enrichment is carried out using fossil energies in most of the countries where it occurs , contrary to what is stated in this report .
Nuclear power stations themselves do not produce carbon-dioxide but the nuclear cycle does .
What are the alternatives ?
For example , gas turbines or co-generation turbines which only emit 33 grams of carbon-dioxide per kilowatt / hour of electricity - and there are even more effective systems than that .
From the economic point of view , the nuclear sector , since the Chernobyl accident , has been unable to take out insurance policies because no insurer would agree to assure against this type of risk .
That is why I can only commend my colleagues to vote for the amendments tabled by Mrs von Blottnitz .
I am a Luxembourger and my country is surrounded by nuclear power stations , especially the one in Cattenom and that is why I can in no way bring myself to agree with Mr Soulier .

Mr President , we need a fundamental discussion of the use of nuclear technology for supplying energy .
Accidents and leaks from nuclear reactors have increased rather than decreased in recent years .
We are all aware of that .
If there is broad opposition to the transport of nuclear material , as there is in Germany , for example , this transport also has to be included in the estimate of costs .
That is another reason to look closely at the nuclear industry as such .
It is certainly a fairytale to say that we cannot do without it .
In fact nuclear energy poses a constant threat that will continue long after our generations have died .
I believe it is also a question of democratic policy .
In the foreseeable future Sweden will abandon nuclear energy .
Then the countries against it , including my own , Austria , will be in the majority .
It is also a matter of democratic decision-making to consider how to get out of it .
It is quite incorrect to declare that nuclear energy is an environmental technology , because in fact radiation survives for thousands of years .
Who would be so presumptuous as to give guarantees of safety over such a long period of time ?
And the statement , supposedly based on scientific evidence , that nuclear fuel can be used in a cycle is one that I do not think anyone in this Chamber believes .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Soulier .
He has succeeded in drafting a balanced report on this difficult subject , seething with passions but bereft of any objectivity .
I also wish to refer to the subject of the Commission communication on nuclear industry , as it is not only electricity companies that exploit nuclear power stations , but also that huge workforce which Europe needs so much : equipment , materials , services and engineering .
There are many projects currently being developed throughout the world for new power stations in Iran , Turkey , Brazil , Korea and China .
And we need work .
I refer to high technology .
It is the nuclear industry , ladies and gentlemen , which has enabled our industries greatly to improve technology .
China now has 2 , 100 nuclear megawatts and by the year 2020 wishes to have 20 , 000 .
I think that countries like Portugal and Italy and others which have no nuclear power stations could export equipment and could also end up playing a very important role - this is something which we need , Commissioner .
I would , therefore , ask you to do all you can to enhance the export of equipment for nuclear power stations , services and engineering .
In the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy - and , even more so , in the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - we are always talking about internalizing all costs .
Yet no-one admits that nuclear energy does this .
It is the only energy , the only energy in terms of kilowatts per hour in which we consumers not only pay for that kilowatt but also the current and future cost of the treatment of waste and the dismantling of nuclear power stations , which have to be closed once they are obsolete .
I would like to see other sectors such as the chemicals , food , coal , gas industries and power stations doing the same .
It is not a question of an ideological defence - as Mr Desama said so well - in favour or against nuclear energy - nuclear energy is a complementary energy .
All I want to say is that it is a whole technology and we should therefore ask individual countries and the Commissioner to do the most that they can to create jobs and export our goods .
Mr President , I must congratulate André Soulier on his excellent report .
Although some people are still trying to denigrate nuclear power , we should never forget that nuclear power supplies more than one-third of the energy of many European countries , it ensures supply security , it creates qualified jobs and , above all , the use of nuclear energy contributes to the reduction of carbon-dioxide emission .
We are not , however , blindly smug about nuclear power .
We must also take care to maintain the safety of nuclear installations and improve the management of waste .
The European Union today disposes of a nuclear industry which is reaching its maturity , which ensures the mastery of the whole cycle of nuclear fuel and which , therefore , guarantees optimum risk management , which is not yet the case in the East .
Nor should be forget that the problem linked to the ageing of existing nuclear power stations is dealt with in depth by the rapporteur in the light of recent technological progress which stems from research begun several years ago .
That will prevent us from being caught out when we have to modernize existing nuclear installations .
Research must indeed be pursued in order to reduce the radioactivity of waste and its elimination .
Projects such as sub-generator reactors developed in particular by Carlo Rubia deserve all of our attention and I know that the Commission is working on these .
We must do all we can to pursue the policy undertaken to reduce waste and the storage of residual waste in order to ensure and maintain our energy independence .
While safety and management at the end of the combustible cycle are reaching satisfactory levels in European Union countries , they must be improved in countries of central and eastern Europe and in the countries of the CIS .
This calls for us to pursue efforts which have already been made and we should also support the remarkable report drafted by Mr Soulier , our colleague .
Mr President , unfortunately I cannot congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Soulier .
I think the report glosses over the basic questions and that it is contradictory .
I consider it quite intolerable for the explanatory statement to contain the phrase : ' Nuclear power ... has demonstrated its economic effectiveness . ' At the same time the report also admits that central questions such as cost , dismantling and storage have still not been resolved .
Secondly , the question of Eastern Europe has just been raised .
That will be a difficult issue during the accession negotiations .
How is this problem to be resolved in terms of costs ?
Thirdly , paragraph 17 refers to balanced investment in research .
Exactly the opposite is needed .
We need an unbalanced research policy that favours research into renewable , alternative energy sources .
Fourthly , it is said that specific information should be provided on the advantages and disadvantages when exporting nuclear technology .
It is far more important to examine alternative energy sources in these countries .
On all these points I quite definitely reject the report and will support all the amendments relating to abandoning nuclear energy .
Mr President , it is no secret that my own party , the German Social-Democratic Party , is against nuclear energy .
Nor is it a secret to colleagues that I personally , although a convinced Social Democrat , take a different view .
So I want to offer the rapporteur warm congratulations .
I would have written a similar report .

Let me say the following to Mr Weber : if it really were true that nuclear energy does not save on CO2 , then can he explain why about 7 tonnes of CO2 a year is produced per capita of population in France and 11 tonnes per capita in Denmark , which has no nuclear energy .
These calculations can be refuted by the real figures .
Turning to the matter in hand : what is our role here ?
We are not building nuclear power stations .
We are not deciding whether and where a nuclear power plant is to be built .
But we are responsible for keeping the crossborder damage as low as possible - in other areas too , not just the nuclear area .
So it is our duty to see to safety , which is why it makes sense , even for those who do not want to use nuclear energy , to make research funds available .
And available not just for us but for the whole world , to cooperate , to offer technology , with a view to reducing the risks .
And now to the technology itself . People very often have the impression that nuclear energy is becoming a dated technology , yesterday 's technology , so to speak .
That is utter nonsense .
In any case there has never been a technology that simply stopped at some point .
Every technology goes on being developed .
Nuclear energy , nuclear research are also continuing to develop and in any case the research is free ; this is even laid down in our German constitution .
It will go on developing and is doing so on a worldwide basis .
There are a number of examples of this .
The question facing us is : do we want to hold back our knowledge , to destroy it in a sense ?
Or do we want to offer our knowledge , so that other sovereign states that are willing to invest in this sector can at least do so safely ?
Nuclear disarmament is another subject we should consider - with a view to destroying stocks rather than building up new ones .
Here too we have an enormous know-how in the European Union .
No , I really think we should not close our eyes to reality here but make our contribution towards reducing the risks in nuclear as in other forms of technology .
Mr President , in 1985 Portugal said ' no ' to nuclear power , when faced with an advanced project to build four nuclear power stations .
It said no for environmental reasons , but above all for economic reasons .
Two years later and a number of ' Chernobyls ' , and history has shown that the Portuguese were right to say no .
We now see that seven European countries have decided against nuclear power .
Even in the others , no new nuclear power station is being built and one of them , Sweden , has the intention of beginning to dismantle its nuclear power stations by 2001 . Spain has also decided to bring a halt to its programme .
Why ?
Because the costs are huge for the environment , for public health and also for national budgets .
The argument of the low cost of nuclear energy is fallacious , because no consideration is given in those estimates to the cost of research , civil liability in the case of accidents and , above all , the cost of storing solid waste and dismantling obsolete nuclear power stations which , at present , cannot extend beyond forty years .
No-one has dared actually to carry out that dismantling , not even in America .
I agree with Mr Soulier , the rapporteur , when he calls for a list to be drawn up of functioning nuclear power stations and existing waste as immediate measures .
But I must insist that the European Union 's energy policy has to clearly to point to ending nuclear power in the medium term .
In principle , I agree with André Soulier that countries should be able to choose their own system , a principle which is , after all , the basis of the whole European Union project , given that the Union can decide only to support programmes based on renewable energy sources and energy efficiency .
This is the central question , it is a political question .
I support the inclusion in the Treaty of a chapter on energy , but only in this perspective , and changing the legal base so as to depend on Article 189C which provides for co-decision with the European Parliament and majority voting in the Council of Ministers .
The sustainable energy policy supported in the Stockmann report , also supported in the Commission 's Green Paper , is given backing by Portugal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I know that my point of view is not the majority one of my group , which I respect but do not share , but I must say that , in my opinion , my view is the only one which goes beyond short-term interests . As politicians we are obliged to defend points of view which go beyond short-term interests .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what I have to say represents my personal view and not the view of my group .
I cannot congratulate the rapporteur Mr Soulier for what he has written in his report .
His report is an encouragement of the use of nuclear energy .
And while we can accept that in the countries of the European Union there are enough rules concerning safety and the protection of the environment , this report says nothing about third countries or countries associated with the European Union .
Commissioner , I will mention two examples which worry me a great deal .
In answer to a question of mine on the resumption of operations by unit 1 at Kozloduy , Commissioner Van den Broek said to me - I have his answer here - that ' the Commission has contacted the government of Bulgaria because unit 1 was brought into operation again without the necessary repairs having been carried out beforehand ' .
A few days ago , you all read in the papers about the fault in unit 1 , and while it may have been announced that there were no leaks , I do not know what might happen tomorrow .
The second example : again in reply to my question on the nuclear plant Turkey is building in the Akköy area , an area particularly prone to earthquakes , he answered that ' the project cannot go ahead because - he said - no study concerning the environment has yet been carried out by the relevant Ministry in Turkey ' .
Despite which , the plant is being built , as I read in a Canadian paper - because a Canadian Company is building it - and indeed , with a type of reactor that will enable its nuclear waste to be processed into atomic weapons .
Commissioner , what are we going to do about all this ?
Mr Soulier , why do you say nothing about those cases ?
Because nuclear energy is a time bomb which , when it explodes , does not confine its effects within the frontiers of the country concerned .
They spread .
So when Bulgaria and Turkey are in Europe , what will we do then , Mr Soulier ?
Commissioner , when I read the Commission document and also Mr Soulier 's report , I thought the heading was wrong .
It should have read : ' Save the radioactive dinosaurs from extinction ' .
When you look at these documents you find that the point of departure for considering energy supplies in Europe is totally wrong .
They start out from the assumption that the people of Europe will all cry : ' We want nuclear power , we want nuclear energy ' . But that is totally wrong as a point of departure !
The people want warm homes , they want light and the industry wants to be able to produce efficiently .
After that we have to decide which energy sources can be used in the most efficient and environmentally friendly manner .
And if we do just that , we find that energy saving , the efficient use of energy , offers the best chance of satisfying these demands .
We find that gas-steam power stations are cheaper than nuclear power stations .
We know how combined thermo-electric power can be used and we know about the potential of renewable energy sources .
This would offer a far better way of satisfying the people 's needs than opting for the old technology of nuclear power .
We also know that the report glosses over the problems involved here , e.g. the question of subsidies from public funds , the question of the potential risks of nuclear power stations that are ostensibly running normally .
Here I can give you a few crumbs of information about what has been found in Germany : there is a risk of leukaemia .
Then of course there is the unresolved problem of decommissioning .
All in all , this is therefore not an objective picture .
I cannot understand why the document clutches at the straw of exports .
Surely it is giving an idealised picture to say that some countries are quite free to decide between nuclear power or a different form of energy .
A lot of money is at stake here .
There are powerful industrial interests that want precisely that , namely for nuclear power stations to be built .
Surely we are not offering them our know-how voluntarily .
That would indeed be giving an idealised picture .
No , if we spend European money on this sector , then it can only be for two purposes : firstly , to make the remaining term of operation safe and secondly to guarantee sensible waste disposal .
And that is very definitely the position of the German Social Democrats .
We should get away from the pressure of individual power station builders and energy suppliers who say it is essential to continue using this dated technology .
Let us confine ourselves to the two remaining tasks .
Let us not offer these old radioactive dinosaurs a future .
There is a future without dinosaurs too !
Mr President , Austria decided against the use of nuclear energy in a referendum , and that is the strongest mandate a politician can have .
At present there exists no nuclear power station in which an MCA , a maximum credible nuclear accident , can be excluded .
So every nuclear power station in Europe concerns us all .
The question of nuclear waste , which will produce highly dangerous radiation for thousands of years , has not been resolved at all .
Yet we happily go on producing .
We really are a curious , inhumane , immoral generation .
Do not misunderstand me : nuclear energy may be a great opportunity for mankind .
But we still have to invest a lot of money and also time in research .
It would be irresponsible not to try to develop this young technology further , but it would be equally short-sighted not to put just as much money and brain-power into developing renewable energy sources .
Today we can only say a definite no to every new nuclear power station , every report in favour of it .
But we are also against quite simplistically no longer giving assistance in the areas set out in the Euratom Treaty , e.g. in relation to research and also to safety standards .
People are always looking boldly to the future , sometimes via the circuitous route of a very very terrible past .
Let us remember Chernobyl .
We have to assume responsibility here , today , in the present .
We have to vote today according to the best of our knowledge and to our own conscience .
Mr President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur Mr Soulier and the Members of Parliament 's Committee on Energy who took the initiative to prepare this report .
With this report , Parliament is taking part in the dialogue developing at the Community level on the future of nuclear energy , a thing to which I attach particular significance .
And I must remind you that exactly this debate was part of the European Commission 's commitment , but also part of my personal commitment during the hearings of Commissioners in Parliament before the Members of the Committee on Energy .
I must say , however , that the report by the Committee on Energy - the report by Mr Soulier - is a realistic and moderate report , and I must also say that the European Commission will take into account the constructive criticism you have applied to our proposal .
I am glad of your support for the idea that Member States should adopt certain common principles of application in the sector of nuclear energy for peaceful uses .
I also consider necessary the invitation extended to the Council to hold a debate on the issue .
As for the institutional framework , as you know , at the Intergovernmental Conference the Commission is supporting the inclusion in the revised Maastricht Treaty of certain special orders on the subject of energy .
We believe that those orders will make it possible to approach energy-related issues in a homogeneous way , but one which takes into account the particular features of each type of energy source .
In that way , the share of the various energy sources available for our future supply could be maintained , but at the same time the particular economic characteristics of the use of those sources could be taken into account , such as whether they are sustainable energy sources , as well as the impact of each energy source on the environment .
Nuclear energy covers a significant fraction of our energy needs .
Its role can be preserved only if the production of electricity from nuclear energy and the subsequent activities of the fuel cycle can take place under conditions acceptable to European citizens , so far as public health and safety are concerned .
And when I refer to European citizens , I include the citizens of countries in Central and Eastern Europe , and those of the new independent states .
The European Community 's efforts to improve nuclear safety in Eastern Europe must continue and their effectiveness must be improved .
Most agreements concluded by the Community with third countries include orders that require cooperation and information exchange in the energy sector , and especially in the nuclear section .
The issue of the safety of the Kozloduy reactor , to which Mr Kaklamanis referred very specifically , is one we are aware of and of course concerned about : concerned about what has happened and concerned about developments .
The Commission is very willing to contribute towards improving the safety of that reactor , and I would like to hope that cooperation with the Bulgarian authorities will allow progress in that direction , so far as the future is concerned .
As for Turkey , there as in all the other countries , the European Union insists that a prerequisite for the operation and funding of those reactors must be to secure the highest possible safety standards .
However , the efforts to be made on our side relate mainly to the treatment and disposal of wastes .
Here , our efforts should tend towards certain effective measures .
I too agree with many among you who have spoken , that those efforts should be intensified , mainly in the direction of research and technological development programmes that aim to restrict the quantities of high-activity wastes .
The Joint Research Centre , and more specifically the plant at Karlsruhe has developed research activities which have looked deeply into the subject of transmuting radioelements with long half-lives into ones with short half-lives .
In that way , the radiotoxicity of wastes for final storage could be limited and the packaging of each radioelement could be finally decided , once it had been separated .
I should also recall that in recent years Europe 's nuclear industry has achieved considerable progress in the area of reprocessing , packaging and disposal of all types of radioactive wastes .
And as you know , there is already a Community plan of action .
At the end of this year a special report should be available , which is currently being prepared , on the implementation of this action plan for radioactive wastes .
In that context , it is also worth devoting more and deeper study at European level to the possibility of closed nuclear fuel cycles , in other words the reprocessing of used fuel .
And this , because it would contribute towards a substantial reduction of the bulk of waste fuels .
In addition , in cases where mixed oxide fuels ( MOX ) are used , we believe that there may be prospects of replacing plutonium where this would be most appropriate , and mainly in the reactors themselves .
The experience gained by the Community 's industry in the production of MOX fuels gives it a technological lead unsurpassed anywhere else in the world .
The application of this technical knowledge to produce fuels from fissionable raw materials of military origin in Russia and the United States of America is a significant contribution by the European industry to disarmament , and I would say , towards efforts for world peace .
There are many types of nuclear installations in Europe today and it will certainly be necessary to continue the efforts undertaken by industrial circles and the authorities responsible for safety to approximate the specifications and to define our joint demands .
In that context , the continuation of Community efforts towards research , technological development and innovation is important , particularly to address the problem of ageing present-day plants , a subject that we will in any case have to deal with after 2010 , though beginning even now and perhaps as part of the debate on the fifth programme for research and technological development , we must adopt a policy of safe and effective decommissioning , and if we wish , take advantage of the new generation of reactors which are more competitive and more acceptable to the population .
It is along those lines that the debates between the Community 's institutional bodies concerning the future of nuclear energy in Europe should proceed .
The European Parliament 's report is an important indication of the direction in which that debate should develop .
Mr President , in conclusion I would once more like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Soulier on his report , and to thank all the speakers for their comments , which I again wish to assure the House that we will take seriously into account .
And let me also say that the criticism levelled at the European Commission for attributing particular weight to nuclear energy is unjustified .
I would say that the European Commission puts before you a balanced strategy for the European Union 's energy planning , the results - and I would say the proof - of which is that the very next subject of the debate in plenary is the report by Mrs Rothe on the basis of the Green Paper on renewable energy sources , a sector to which the Community and the European Commission also attach strategic importance .
Commissioner , let me just put one question to you : do you not agree with me that a Community action programme for waste disposal really does not represent progress in waste disposal ?
That has to be said , you must agree with me there !
I want to know how you can define that as progress .
Commissioner , you have forgotten to answer my question on the safety of air transport .
I would appreciate an answer to my question .
And secondly , if research into nuclear technology is being carried out and subsidised under the European fifth framework programme , is that not tantamount to subsidising nuclear energy and does that not distort the internal market ?
Mr President , I referred mainly to the progress achieved by Europe 's nuclear industry to bring about better methods of processing , packaging and disposal for all categories of radioactive waste .
And I must say that this has not happened by chance .
It happened as a result of political pressure , after the many debates that took place at European level , after expressions of concern by many citizens , and of course , as the result of the commitment undertaken by the governments and the European institutional bodies .
Along those lines , the Community plan of action has helped to enable such progress and I would say that we all ought to agree that since the nuclear industry is to continue its operations and since nobody can claim that it ought to cease its activities , it should promote those methods aiming to improve the processing , packaging and disposal , I would say , of radioactive wastes .
As for the safe transport of nuclear materials , here I should say that all the international organizations , including the services of the European Commission , make every possible effort to secure the best possible conditions for transport safety , and of course we must do all we can to eliminate the illegal movement of nuclear materials , regardless of their category and type .
The European Commission is active along those lines , and I would say , with a great deal of success , according to the specific evidence we have in recent months .
As for the directive on air transport , that is an issue being considered at present by other services of the European Commission , though not those for which I have political responsibility , and consequently , at this time I do not have the information with which to answer you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken today at 12 noon .
Renewable energy sources
The next item is the report ( A4-0168 / 97 ) by Mrs Rothe , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Commission Green Paper : ' Energy for the future : renewable sources of energy - for a community strategy ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0576 - C4-0623 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Papoutsis , I believe that this discussion of the Green Paper for a Community Strategy for renewable energy sources takes us into a key phase of European energy policy .
I also think this debate today follows on perfectly from the one we had just now .
The European Parliament has repeatedly stressed the importance of renewable sources of energy for the Community 's energy policy , most recently in July 1996 in its resolution on a Community action plan for renewable energy sources in Mr Mombaur 's report , and in the resolution of 14 November 1996 on the Commission White Paper on a European energy policy .
So I very much welcome the fact that the Commission has recognised this need and incorporated Parliament 's proposals in the Green Paper on a Community strategy .
I entirely agree with the Commission 's view that the priorities currently set for the choice of energy sources are incompatible with the long-term requirements of sustainable development .
In this Green Paper the Commission is presenting a really god analysis of the situation , although I must say I would have wished to see the basic guidelines of a strategy ensuring the real and greater market penetration of renewable energy sources to be defined more clearly .
So we are now placing great hope and expectations in the announced White Paper .
At present only about 6 % of energy consumption in the European Union is supplied by renewables .
That is an increase of about 1 % since 1990 .
Some Member States supply nearly 30 % of their energy demand from renewables , others less than 1 % , although the potential is quite comparable .
If in this report we now set an objective of covering at least 15 % of energy consumption from renewables by the year 2010 , that is still far less than would be technically possible .
Yet this is a challenge for the European Union , after the stagnation of recent years .
Nor is it enough just to set this objective for the European Union as a whole .
We expect the White Paper to differentiate according to types of energy and to set objectives for individual Member States , based on what is potentially possible and what has already been achieved .
It is not just necessary to respond to this energy-policy challenge .
No , it is also and particularly necessary to seize this enormous opportunity to gear European energy policy towards environmental protection , security of supplies and sustainability , on the basis of a coordinated industrial policy .
Commissioner , let me once again congratulate you as the responsible Commissioner on taking a real step forwards with this Green Paper .
But after this clear analysis of the shortfalls and requirements we now expect a White Paper that offers an equally clear response to this analysis .
We are expecting you to present a package of measures together with a financing plan and timescale .
If renewable energy sources really are to be given a chance to penetrate the market , we need new legal , financial and accompanying measures at European , national and regional level .
Regulatory measures : so long as the prices for energy from the conventional sources , such as nuclear energy , coal and oil and gas , totally disregard the social and ecological costs , it will be very difficult for energy gained from sun , wind and bio-mass to compete .
That is why we urgently need a European energy tax , with renewable energy sources tax-free .
A possible transitional measure would be a European Fund for the promotion of renewable energy sources , financed by a surcharge o the mineral oil tax and the price of electricity .
The directive on the liberalization of the internal market in electricity does prescribe an obligatory licence , but this will remain a blunt instrument until it is supplemented by a supply and indemnification obligation .
That is why the report calls for a European supply directive with adequate indemnification provisions .
To counter arguments about competition , consideration should be given to compensatory mechanisms .
We think legislative measures are also needed in the field of solar architecture and energy saving .
Turning now to the promotion measures : firstly , ALTENER II really must be adopted rapidly and allocated more funds .
Secondly , we call for the formulation of a new Community programme in the White Paper , to be implemented by the appropriate Member State measures .
For instance , one million roofs and walls programme , together with a 15 000 megawatt wind programme ( off-shore and in the mountains ) and a 1 million megawatt biomass programme .
This kind of programme can help create an internal market for renewable energy sources in the European Union and therefore also open up major export opportunities .
While Japan and the USA are being extremely active in this area , we are continuing to behave like a sleeping beauty .
But , first of all , no prince will come to wake us up and secondly , this late awakening could be a very sobering one .
We should apply our combined European common sense now .
I have an urgent appeal to the Commission : please present us with a plan for a genuine export strategy .
After all , surely it is a thousand times better to take over good ideas from the US or Japan than to get into a situation where we can only buy the appropriate energy technology from them .
About a million jobs could be created in the EU if we developed renewables , particularly in rural and structurally weak regions .
I know this kind of Community strategy will cost money .
That is why we ask that on top of the ECU 225 million currently allocated to nuclear fusion , the same amount be allocated to renewable energy resources .
Let me make a personal remark : why not delete the appropriations for nuclear fusion and transfer them to renewables ?
Much needs to be done in relation to the structural funds , to the other programmes , to establishing an active information policy , and we really must tackle these questions seriously , for our children , our grandchildren will blame us if we do not manage to bring about a real change in our energy policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's Green Paper on renewable sources of energy is an ambitious project and forms a good basis for developing a strategy in this energy sector .
Let me congratulate the rapporteur warmly on her report .
Among the great variety of renewable energy sources available , let me lay particular emphasis on biomass , i.e. , wood , rape , elephant grass and other renewable raw materials .
EU-wide , the use of biomass already makes up more than half the crude oil units .
I believe that energy from biomass offers a great future market , with all the ecological and employment aspects for rural areas that involves .
The cultivation of energy crops could create an additional turnover of ECU 11-19 billion for the rural areas .
It would also offer an incentive for cultivating set-aside areas .
This new source of income would also have positive effects on employment prospects in rural areas .
As an inexhaustible source of energy , biomass also ensures security of supplies , i.e. , a certain independence from third countries .
Another advantage is that the energy is utilized near the place of origin .
The reduces logistics and transport costs and means regional energy policy can be optimized .
Biomass is one of the most environment-friendly energy sources and in the long term it can help reduce CO2 emissions .
If we are to make the best use of this energy in future , we not only need to make the necessary arable land available under the CAP and forestry policy in the Member States , but also to increase the contribution of biomass to the EU 's primary energy mix to at least 10 % by the year 2010 and at least 20 % by the year 2025 .
At the same time , of course , budget appropriations for research and the promotion of renewable energy sources must be increased at least to the level of those for research and the promotion of nuclear energy .
I need not stress that here we need a detailed and concrete catalogue of measures , such as EU-wide tax reliefs or exemptions and programmes to encourage investment .
I also believe that in future the Member States must coordinate their programmes more closely , especially in relation to district heating systems .
In regard to the central and eastern European countries , I believe there is a great opportunity here , provided there is a corresponding transfer of technology .
As representative for the rural areas , I also think we need a better policy in the EU as a whole following the new CAP reform .
I believe environment-friendly energy sources have a future .
It is simply up to us to intensify the awareness of that .
Commissioner , the analysis in the Green Paper is excellent .
It shows that without renewable forms of energy - wind , water , biomass - there can be no substantial reduction in CO2 .
The second point , the analysis of the employment market strategy for Europe , is also excellent .
It recognizes how important it is for the money to stay within Europe , circulate here and be used here .
I would supplement these two points with a third . I believe there is no way we can safeguard peace in the 21st century without decentralizing our energy system .
There is probably if not certainly no question of a peaceful distribution of the remaining resources of this earth .
We need only look at Afghanistan , at Chechenya , at Kurdistan , at the Gulf : the wars being waged there are about energy .
If we seriously want a peace strategy , we will have to readjust the energy system .
The European Commission now has to decide whether its analysis is merely an alibi or whether it will draw the appropriate conclusions from it .
If it draws these conclusions , it should accept the course of action suggested by Mrs Rothe , which is an excellent one .
It offers a historic opportunity for Europe as a whole to change its energy policy .
I believe one thing is most important , and we must realise that : on the basis of the analysis you yourself made , the promotion of renewable energy sources is no longer just something to be achieved passively through the many energy initiatives but a political obligation to act on the part of the Commission , the Council and the individual Member States .
The truth will become apparent when we see the White Paper and the accompanying strategic plan .
If the European Parliament adopts Mrs Rothe 's report today , that will prove it is prepared to give the strongest support to the environment , employment and a policy of peace .
Mr President , very hearty congratulations to Mrs Rothe for an excellent report .
She is following up the work of Members right across the political spectrum including , of course , Mr Mombaur and Mr Robles Piquer .
There is great potential here for an expression of will from Parliament .
I want to speak on one point only , and that is the necessity to work with all our might to obtain for the European Union a Treaty on renewable energy , an equivalent to the Treaty on Nuclear Power , the EURATOM Treaty , which we discussed earlier this morning .
This would give tremendous EU added value to our work in trying to promote renewable energy .
It would enhance the competitiveness of the EU .
It would create jobs across the EU .
It is a fundamentally important issue .
Nothing is more basic than food and energy ; and it would capture the public imagination in every single one of our Member States .
There is tremendous enthusiasm for all types of renewable energy .
That is the future .
European citizens know that .
There is the will to grasp the opportunity to have a treaty , to be called , I suppose , EURENEW .
It is noncontroversial .
It crosses all parties ; it crosses all Member States .
Most important of all , it would give us a legal base .
This is what is missing from all the debates on renewable energy : there is no legal base on which we can rely to ensure that we can have the research programmes , the promotional actions which cost money .
I know , as the budget rapporteur for our committee , without a legal base it is very difficult .
Please let us , all together , put pressure on our Member States .
This is the sort of positive action which makes sense to European citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , renewable energy sources are of great social and economic value , which is why I commend Mrs Rothe 's report to this House .
Unfortunately , however , the future prospects for renewable energy sources are not particularly easy at the present time , partly because energy consumption in the European Union is not increasing , partly because the efficiency of gas-fired installations has been very greatly improved , partly because the costs of gas and oil are relatively low and reserves are plentiful , partly because the liberalization of electricity prices in the European Union is making it difficult to foot the political bill , and , finally , partly because of the unreliable nature of most renewable energy sources , based as they are on sun and wind , at least until such time as we manage to perfect efficient and less costly storage technologies .
A study on this is under way at STOA .
There are , however , fuels which can be classified among the renewable sources and which are competitive because they pay for themselves instead of needing to be paid for : I mean plant biomass , non-processable wood and non-recyclable solid urban wastes .
Unfortunately , I gather that most plastic , even if collected separately , then has to be incinerated or landfilled because it cannot be effectively recycled .
I would recall that , in the case of woodbased wastes , carbon dioxide is produced even if they are landfilled ; but they do not produce any useful energy in this way .
It seems to me that waste incineration technologies are reaching a standard of quality which is satisfactory from the environmental and health standpoints , and I would ask the Commission and the rapporteur not to neglect this sector in any strategy for renewable energy sources .
Here again there is a need to support technological development , provide information and educate public opinion .
That is why I subscribe to some of the amendments originally tabled by Mr Robles Piquer , which relate to this specific topic - the recycling of wood that cannot be industrially re-used and of solid urban wastes .
I hope that the House will accept this suggestion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner . I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent report with its many good recommendations on promoting the use of renewable energy .
The long-term objectives in the field of energy is the provision of energy totally based on renewable sources .
This objective unfortunately does not exert sufficient pressure to give priority to developing renewable sources of energy .
The application of renewable energy depends first and foremost on the political will of countries to promote a model of sustainable development .
If we are serious about acting on the climate problem then we need to have many more applications of renewable energy .
My group welcomes the Green Paper although this Commission initiative took a long time coming despite repeated requests from Parliament .
Mr President , the Liberal Group has tabled three amendments , two of which concern the promotion of energy from biomass .
In this way we coordinate energy and agricultural policy .
Good agricultural land no longer needs to lie fallow , it creates jobs in this sector and it benefits the environment as well .
It does not just kill two birds with the one stone , but three .
My group believes it is superfluous to create a separate working party on ' renewable energy ' in the Commission for this coordination work .
A coordinating contact point is sufficient .
The Commission services just need to work more together and coordinate their work better .
The European Commission should also go in for trans-border cooperation .
My final point , Mr President , is that the European Union should promote renewable energy projects .
And here the structural funds should be better involved .
The Liberal Group cannot agree to projects receiving more than 50 % finance from the Union .
That would distort competition and would not guarantee a commitment from the Member States .
My group will vote against that proposal .
Mr President , Mr Papoutsis , you said to the press a few days ago that renewable energy sources are as valuable as sitting on a goldmine .
I agree with you ! That makes what you say in your Green Paper all the more surprising , for it seems to suggest : how can I scoop water with a sieve ?
Your analysis in the Green Paper is quite correct .
But your conclusion on the operational approaches that should therefore be taken is nothing , it is not concrete , shows no ambition , nothing !
Quite apart from the fact that we should have formulated clear strategies and development programmes for renewables years ago .
Let us say no more about that .
Instead , we keep hearing ritual incantations about the obligations under Rio , under Berlin , etc .
Words and more words , but no deeds !
Of course this applies particularly to the Council , if I may remind you of the meagre funds allocated to the JOULE , THERMIE , ALTENER , etc. programmes .
The Commission regrets , I admit , that very little money is spent on renewable energy sources under PHARE and TACIS and most of the money is spent on other energy forms , and in a quite extravagant manner .
This is a kind of money-losing machine with which we try to patch up the eastern European scrap-heap reactors without making them any safer .
If we want to achieve what the Commission says in its analysis , if we finally want to be credible and secure our future markets on this earth - and we are talking about future markets , that is what those who just count the money in hand should remember - this is what our energy policy should look like : an ambitious and binding commitment in regard to the proportion of renewable energy sources for each Member State for the years 2000 to 2010 .
The target should be set so high as to let us fulfil our greenhouse guarantees at last , i.e. , drastically reduce the values .
Secondly , well-stocked EU funds for renewable energy sources and energy saving .
That is an important pillar .
Here we could achieve 35 % .
We need to reallocate the funds we still keep putting into research into fossil energy and in particular fusion - ECU 225 million .
We would see some results from that by the year 2050 at the earliest .
We must ensure , and this is most important , that the internal energy market does not act in a sense as an obstacle to renewable energy sources , as will now become apparent , and we must coordinate all the EU aids to ensure that no more money is spent on measures that increase rather than reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
All these points are important and I can only hope that we will move from the lyrical words of the Green Paper to facts in the White Paper .
Then you will have my full support !
Mr President , I should like to add my own congratulations to the rapporteur , and also to the Commissioner on the Green Paper .
On this occasion I cannot agree with Mr Robles Piquer .
I believe that the 15 % target is too modest , and that the European Union should set itself a much more ambitious objective .
We are aware of the risks , we talked about them during the previous debate on conventional and nuclear energy , and I therefore believe that the time has come to try to raise our sights very considerably as far as this target is concerned . I think we should be looking at 30 / 40 % by 2010 .
That is my first point .
My second concerns the mechanisms for encouraging the use of renewable energy sources .
I believe we should focus on imposing very heavy tax penalties on energy sources with a high pollution capacity ; that we should be aiming for a very simple mechanism , without squandering resources on all kinds of aid programmes but concentrating on the liberalization of the internal energy market .
Mr President , the Green Paper on renewable sources of energy deserves praise for its very detailed examination of the benefits which are obtained from using renewable energy : a cleaner environment , more employment and a better economy .
I note in particular that the EU is now at last treating the CO2 issue seriously , and is taking an active responsibility for avoiding the threat of climate change .
However , I wish to make it quite clear that the maximum use of renewable energy sources can only be ensured if Member States continue to be allowed to pursue an independent energy policy , based on their own circumstances and conditions .
In the light of the subsidiarity principle , it is important that international cooperation should only serve to eliminate the obstacles which exist , so that the Member States themselves can implement a national energy plan with ambitious energy goals .
Conversion to increased use of renewable energy sources requires the whole of society to participate in the project .
In the Commission 's initiative , I do not see the general population being involved as players .
In Denmark , for example , private wind-power groupings have become widespread , and have been very important in terms of popular support for and awareness of renewable energy .
The Green Paper 's section on strategy is unfortunately not up to the same standard as the excellent analytical section which precedes it .
The aims set out are just not far-reaching enough .
The target of 12 % for renewable energy by 2010 is better than nothing , but why not aim for the European Parliament 's own recommendation of 15 % ?
Similarly , the Green Paper should be calling for a common target for energy efficiency .
A better level of energy utilization would provide the same environmental improvements as greater use of renewable energy sources , and should therefore be presented as just as important a part of the EU 's renewable energy strategy .
Finally , I should like to express my satisfaction with the amendments which have been tabled , which clearly tighten up the Commission 's proposal .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate Mrs Rothe on her report .
It is an extremely good and detailed report and it is a step forward .
Let me say at this point , to rescue the reputation of the European Union which has often been criticized during this debate , that in recent years we were able to finance a whole range of projects because we increased the appropriations for renewable energy sources , thanks mainly to the European Parliament 's efforts during the budgetary procedure .
This has to be said quite plainly here .
Things are not all quite as bad as people outside sometimes describe them .
If the Member States fulfilled their obligations and made corresponding resources available , we could make considerable progress .
Nevertheless , further Europe-wide initiatives are necessary , and Mrs Rothe put this very well in her report .
I hope we will endorse it .
For instance , I hope that the funding for our major programmes , such as the Mediterranean programme , or the support for Eastern and Central Europe , for the former Soviet Union , for Asia , Africa and Latin America , will be concentrated more on renewable energy sources .
That is easy to say , but far more difficult to put into practice .
For instance , a large number of appropriations , accounting for many millions of ECU , were not fully utilized in the Regional Fund because the complementary resources were not available , which is because the Member States in question did not produce either the public or the private resources .
For the future I expect a simplification of the access and payment and clearing procedures , as also called for in paragraph 8 of Mrs Rothe 's report .
It is unfortunately the case that many small and medium-sized undertakings and institutes derive little financial benefit from taking part in EU projects .
The preparations alone , the filling in of forms , the preparation of the projects , are so cost-intensive that in the end the financial profits are very small .
That has to be changed .
Finally , let me say that there are still many surprises awaiting us with renewables , for instance in thin-film or photovoltaic technology , where research is needed and must also receive the necessary encouragement .
Know-how already exists and it must be used and , let me say in conclusion , perhaps it should be used in our own buildings too .
We are building a new Parliament in Brussels and in Strasbourg .
Where is the technology we are developing being applied there ?
Here too there is room for improvement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can hardly believe it : the House is almost , if not entirely unanimous .
My warm compliments to Mrs Rothe for an excellent report .
Renewable energies must be promoted by detailed measures in order to disseminate European technology throughout the world - we should stress this - and to restore the health of the climate .
Two billion people in the world can only be supplied with electricity decentrally , which is why it is so urgent for us to act here .
However , let us have no illusions , this is not up to us but to the Member States .
If the 15 Member States do not play along , nothing will come of all this .
I do not like to see people keep pretending here in Parliament that the European Union is responsible for the use of primary energy sources .
It is not !
It is responsible neither for this nor for nuclear energy !
For the rest , we should not imagine either that these energy sources can be introduced without any dispute .
Unfortunately there are still protests on protests up and down the country .
There are protests about the use of tidal power , protests about the use of wind power .
Nobody should seriously imagine that we can introduce an energy source that needs to be promoted and disseminate it around the world without protest - that will not happen !
We have already adopted the action plan ; this report describes it very comprehensively and well .
I also believe that the liberalization of the internal market through the obligatory licence and priority rules has brought progress in certain areas , which the Member States should avail themselves of .
Commissioner , let me say quite clearly that I expect the White Paper at last to give a clearly formulated reply in economic terms to the question whether startup financing with EC resources really can encourage the market introduction of renewable energies - yes or no .
I have not read a single sensible document by the Commission , by a government or by a scientific institution on this subject and I think it is simply not enough to promote 100 000 roofs programmes here .
I would wish to see a more detailed analysis of whether it makes any economic sense at all to spend money on this .
My group supports the report ; we take a slightly different view on the last point .
Mr President , I wish to join with other Members in congratulating the rapporteur , and I would also like to acknowledge the valuable work undertaken by Mrs Agnes Schierhuber , our own rapporteur in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We need a clear strategy for the 21st century aimed at significantly increasing the share of renewable energy sources in our overall energy policy .
Agriculture , which has been going through a very difficult period , has the potential through biomass to contribute positively to rebalancing the renewable energy deficit within the European Union .
Despite considerable advantages in using renewable energy sources , consumption remains at below 6 % in the Union .
This must change , and I hope that our Member State governments are listening seriously to this debate .
Biomass offers farmers and rural areas a real possibility of generating new sources of income through the cultivation of crops such as sugar beet , cereals , oil seeds , short-rotation forestry and hemp .
Biomass also has the added advantage of giving farmers the chance to cultivate set-aside land .
At least ECU 225m are currently being spend in the EU on nuclear research .
It is high time to put real money into supporting renewable energy sources .
This is highlighted by the ongoing concern in relation to the safety of nuclear installations , including Sellafield , to which many people have referred during the earlier debate .
The time has come for the implementation of a positive renewable energy programme , rather than continuing debates , both within governments of Member States and here in this Parliament .
Mr President , like other speakers , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Rothe , for the excellent work she has done , but at the same time to express a certain amount of concern at the broad agreement which is prevailing here in Parliament on this subject .
I am afraid that the same thing will happen with renewable energy sources as with small and medium-sized enterprises .
Everyone talks about them , but no one makes a serious effort when it really counts .
We always end up with systems which support the established order of things .
Here , that means coal , nuclear power , gas and so on .
Just think if we were to make the same effort with renewable energy sources as with fusion power .
Just think if we were to give research and development concerning renewable energy sources the same status that fusion power has had , a form of energy which lies far in the future , whereas the sun and wind , biomass and so on are either just around the corner or with us already .
The Commission 's Green Paper is a starting-point , but now it needs to be followed up , and we must ensure that renewable energy sources do not once again come to grief in practice .
Renewable energy should now be given the same status as traditional energy , if necessary through some kind of treaty commitment .
Mr President , I know it is noon now and I will not speak for long , as that would waste time .
Since we should be able to finish within a few minutes let me ask you a very very urgent question : is it not possible for us to conclude our debate this morning , so that we can vote on it today ?
We have tried very hard to proceed rapidly in the time available so as to be on time for the Council of energy ministers .
I really would ask this quite urgently !
Mr President , I wish to say the same as Mrs Rothe .
I think that there is only one more speaker , and if we could let that speaker have the floor we could vote now and not delay any longer .
We have very little time .
I have tried to move this debate along as quickly as possible .
Unfortunately , it is not true that we have only one speaker left - there are still four Members down to speak , then we have the Commissioner 's reply , followed by a fairly complex set of votes .
I am sorry to do this , but we shall have to suspend the debate at this point and resume at 6 p.m.
VOTES
Mr President , you are to be congratulated on starting the vote at 12 noon .
There are a number of colleagues who are not yet here and there are a number of people who are still listening to the bells that are ringing in the corridor .
I suggest that we become accustomed to the fact of starting votes every day at 12 noon ; Parliament will only get into difficulties if , as yesterday , we do not start voting until 12.20 pm .
Nobody then respects the clock and the start of the procedure .
I suggest that you take this matter up in the Bureau and that we formalize it that we start votes regularly at 12 noon .
Mr President , this was a very long confused report with 178 amendments in committee .
The Socialist Group has felt it necessary to table additional amendments .
As rapporteur , I am dutybound to support the Fisheries Committee resolution , which I do .
However , were I not rapporteur , I wish to make it quite clear that I would be voting for all the Socialist Group 's amendments including Mr Morris ' .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I should like you to listen to the following announcement : I have received from the Green Group various requests for roll-call votes on every amendment and on every paragraph of this report .
This would mean over 100 roll-call votes and the vote would last about one hour .
After consultation with the President , I am therefore going to propose to you that pursuant to Rule 19 ( 1 ) , second sentence and Rule 115 ( 5 ) to group the votes together as follows : One , a single roll-call vote on all parts of the text on which there are no amendments .
Second , a roll-call vote on paragraph 24 in line with another request from the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
Three , a single roll-call vote on all parts of the text on which there are only amendments by the Green Group .
Four , a roll-call vote on each paragraph which is the subject of incompatible amendments .
Five , a roll-call vote on all other parts of the text on which there are amendments by political groups and for the final vote .
Rule 115 allows the President to consult the House .
In order to save time I am going to allow one speaker for my proposal and one speaker against .
I will take no points of order and we shall move directly to the vote .
Mr President , I think your proposal is a very sensible one .
It arose from the fact that this report is of course very controversial and was not prepared jointly .
In the Committee on External Economic Relations we voted by 31 to 30 on whether we should vote at all .
Now , of course , this committee has no proposal on the individual blocks , which has led to a situation where we are confronted with this procedure in plenary .
You have described it in rather dramatic terms .
We also had 100 amendments to Mrs Barthet-Mayer 's report yesterday .
I would now propose further that we consult again in committee and vote in July .
That would save time .
So I move that we refer the report back to committee pursuant to Rule 129 .
That would save us work here .
In other respects I support your proposal .
That was very clear .
I would suggest that if the proposal for referral back to committee is rejected , I shall assume that the House has endorsed my proposal for how we handle the vote .
Mr President , I rise to speak in favour of your proposal on the block voting .
This was a change to the Rules introduced some years ago specifically to deal with this sort of situation .
It caters for the fact that one political group , or indeed a group of Members , deliberately uses the Rules to try , in a sense , to filibuster or , possibly , to abuse the system of requesting roll call votes .
It is entirely justified in this case that the blocking tactics be avoided by use of this rule .
It is a fair rule , it is at the discretion of the President , and you are quite right to use it in that way .
( Applause )
I am always distressed to see Claudia Roth get angry in this House but in particular today because it is her birthday .
Perhaps the House could wish Mrs Roth a happy birthday .
Mr President , I just wish to speak against any suggestion to refer this report back to the committee .
This was debated in the committee .
165 amendments were tabled by the groups .
Many of those amendments were identical , and I regarded that as an unpleasant and unnecessary blocking tactic .
I entirely endorse what has been said by the other speaker in favour of your proposal .
I suggest we adopt your proposal , and I would not be in favour of referring it back to the committee .
I understand that apart from being Claudia Roth 's birthday , it is also Nicole Pery and Mrs Schleicher 's , two of our Vice-Presidents .
( Parliament decided against referral back to committee )
During the vote
Mr President , you say that the political groups know what is being voted upon here .
In my opinion the Members should also know what is being voted upon .
I do not know what is being voted upon here .
Throughout the debate on this report I have not known what was being voted on and you are reading out these points in a way which does not make it clear either .
I declare that I am withdrawing from any vote where I do not know what is being voted upon .
I shall therefore withdraw from any vote in connection with the debate on this report .
Mr Seppänen , I am not going to waste time on this .
I read out the list of the amendments we are voting on and that is how we always vote in this House .
If you want to know the details and contents of the amendment go to the distribution centre , get the documents and read them .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , on a point of order .
You know I normally agree with you in this Chamber , but you answered the speaker before me that this was the normal way we did our voting .
I have to advise that is not the normal way in which we do our voting .
I may have missed something .
We took a number of block votes and then we went to certain paragraphs - paragraph 36 - and then we reverted back to Recital b in one of the votes .
So it is not the normal way we do our voting .
Normally , the way we vote is paragraph by paragraph , recital by recital .
That did not happen on this occasion .
Perhaps you may wish to reconsider your reply to the speaker before me .
Mr Falconer , as a fellow Scot , I always try to agree with you but you obviously missed something .
I explained very clearly that we were going to vote in blocks and I read out the contents of each of the blocks .
If people wanted to put the amendments together within the block to have a look at them they were entitled to do so .
But the block vote is quite clearly provided for within our Rules and we follow the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , there are still different interpretations of the legal basis for this text .
Does this text relate to industrial policy or , as Mr Titley said in his statement , to the CFSP , i.e. , to the new security policy ?
If it relates to that , then - and I asked to speak before the final vote - we in this House are not even competent , prior to the Amsterdam intergovernmental conference , to take the kind of decision we have taken .
Perhaps you could make a statement on this subject , to clear up this misunderstanding and contradiction ?
Mr President , I am sure that you have acted in accordance with Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
I should however like to point out that this is a very significant issue , a major issue of principle and a very important issue .
I myself am quite new here , and it is quite impossible for me to follow what was going on and longer .
You did state that a block vote was being held , but for myself , at least on issues of this nature , I should like to look at each point again separately and be sure that I am voting correctly .
I am not going to vote simply solely according to what is on the voting list .
Unfortunately this has been made impossible by what I can only call the recent farce .
It would be possible to use the Rules of Procedure in a different way , when a significant matter of principle is at issue and I hope that this will happen in future .
I understand the point you make .
I was trying to expedite the business of this House .
I am absolutely certain that I operated within the Rules .
If you read Rule 115 ( 5 ) you will find that the President is entitled to block votes together .
In fact , there is no need to give notice of that but the services through this week have been informing the groups of how they intend to put the votes together .
It was up to the groups to keep their individual Members informed .
We have done our best to keep you advised .
Mr President , I am really sorry but we have made a serious mistake .
That really is true .
In one go we have named four regions in different countries together with one recognized country .
We cannot refer to Macedonia or , if you like , Fyrom , in the same breath as Kosovo and Vojvodina .
I would emphatically ask colleagues not to make this mistake .
It makes us look ridiculous .
It is a mistake , and Mr Cohn-Bendit agreed with me .
Unfortunately we voted first on the PSE motion , although the other went further .
I would ask you to definitely take that into consideration .
We really are making ourselves look ridiculous .
If we want to do so , we can .
But Mr Cohn-Bendit could help me here , as could the PSE .
Mr Johannes Swoboda agreed with me .
I am told that the reference to Macedonia was actually deleted in any case so your concerns are perhaps misplaced .
Mr President , unfortunately that was a misunderstanding .
Macedonia was simply swapped with Fyrom .
But Fyrom should not have been mentioned in this context at all .
I ask you to take that into consideration .
It was a very big , stupid mistake .
I am afraid that the House has voted and the House is always wise once it has voted .
Mr President , I just wanted to say to Mrs Pack that this happens during votes .
We also rejected the amendment by the Greens , which makes a nonsense out of this text .
We will have to live with the nonsense of this sovereign organization .
That is the way things go .
Mr President , there is a translation error in Amendment No 22 .
It says ' repeal of the EURATOM Treaty ' , but it should have read ' amendment ' .
Of course we cannot simply repeal the EURATOM Treaty , we need it as a safeguard and for nuclear waste .
That is why confusion arose throughout this House and I think you can now agree with me , at least those who normally agree with me can do so .
The others over there are being a bit quiet for a change , which is a better thing !
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have too much respect for democracy not to acknowledge a decision by the European Parliament .
However , I would like to say that , as rapporteur , I have followed a certain number of indications .
Since the European Parliament has felt that it had to , in my opinion , alter this report excessively , I therefore recommended voting against it in order not to lose what I believe in .
That is why I voted in this way and I thank the European Parliament for having followed me , since this report has not been adopted .
( Loud applause ) .
Mr President , in my opinion the vote on the Titley report was an offence against democracy .
I should therefore like it minuted that I am pleased that this is not a real parliament .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Following on from the last speaker , I think you will agree , Mr President , that the way we took the last five reports after the Titley report was the way we normally vote in this Chamber .
We could not support the report at the vote .
The adoption of this position is based on principle and should not be taken as any form of disapproval of the rapporteur 's work .
We think that the European Union should call a halt to this type of expensive fishery agreement and instead give aid primarily to fishing operations in developing countries themselves .
Such a solution would better help to develop the importance of fish as a global food supply , to strengthen the economic development of these countries and also avoid the risks that fishery agreements can involve .
This would also mean that the fishing industry in some Member States would be given indirect aid to continue their operations in a situation where the whole of the European fishing industry needs to be severely restricted .
We would also like to stress , in agreement with the rapporteur , the unfortunate fact that the European Parliament is being consulted long after an agreement has come into force .
Crampton report ( A4-149 / 97 )
The question of international fisheries agreements reached by the European Union is a controversial one .
Some people are in favour of a systematic calling into question of the agreements because of their cost , while failing to pose the question of the economic and social cost that their absence would have for the Community .
The Crampton report rightly reminds them that extending the fishery zones to 200 miles , effectively bringing 95 % of fish stocks within the coastal states ' jurisdiction , made it inevitable for the Community to negotiate agreements with the countries concerned in order to ensure the survival of deep-sea fleets , maintain the European share of fishing in worldwide terms and , therefore , its contribution to our food security .
If the European Union had to give up these agreements tomorrow , the place left vacant by the Community fleet would very soon be taken by competing fleets , in particular those from Asia .
This agreement policy is backed by European shipowners which finance it to the tune of 50 % , a balance which ought to be maintained .
Others feel , in the framework of these agreements , that European fisheries compete with local fisheries .
This is not true .
Developing countries have resources if they wish to exploit them , but they do not have boats and knowledge to enable them to do so : this contract is desirable for both parties .
In the framework of the evolution of the system of agreements , we should make a careful distinction between agreements which could also play a real role in terms of helping development , in helping to increase food selfsufficiency thanks to the support given to local fisheries , and those concerning partners which have become competitors for Community fishermen and for which the Commission should ensure that no distortions take place , in particular in terms of prices .
In the first category , we should generalise the second generation agreements , and we should place more emphasis on agreements with ACP countries with abundant high-quality resources , countries which should remain our natural partners , especially those which agree to dedicate an important share of resources which they acquire through these agreements to the development of the local fishery sector - for example Senegal which has decided to retain a 50 % rate .
It is also important to add to the tuna fish agreement network , in order to give us greater access to tuna and similar stocks , which are strategic species for the Community 's seafood sector and which , at the moment , are not particularly over-fished .
Since the Crampton report has set most of these objectives , our group voted in favour of it despite some of the lacks and difficulties inherent in the search for a consensus starting out from widely-divergent positions within the Committee on Fisheries .
Titley report ( A4-76 / 97 )
Every debate on the weapons trade and weapons industry policy must be based on the fact that the export of weapons must be reduced , and aid given to promote disarmament and weapons control .
Weapons can never be treated like other products and must be strictly controlled at international , European and national level .
We can only support this report on condition that the amendment proposals produced by the socialist group ( Nos. 27-35 ) and amendment proposal no .
1 are passed .
We cannot support points 41 and 43 .
Sweden is a non-aligned State and will remain so .
So we cannot support these statements which have a future European defence identity as their aim .
We also object to general statements such as the fact that restructuring the weapons industry would give tax payers better value for their money ( point 24 ) and ' other security measures ' ( point K ) .
We agree totally and utterly with amendment no .
6 .
There is no reason for the EU to develop a common defence policy or a common defence force .
This would turn the EU from a civil co-operation organisation into a defence union with common military and defence policy ambitions .
So there is no reason for the EU to develop a common defence industry as this report proposes .
To refer to some sort of ' European identity ' for security and defence is not credible as the various Member States have different foundations for their security policies .
Non aligned countries such as Sweden neither can nor will subordinate themselves to common Union projects driven by a majority vote in which the views of the larger Member States on security are dominant .
To justify this , as it says in the report , by saying that it would give increased credibility within Nato is not relevant from a nonaligned perspective .
To provide , as the report proposes , the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) with a common market for weapons as an element of military capacity is wrong and could wreck the peaceful aims of European co-operation .
The Titley report with its proposal for a common weapons market is an element in such a policy .
So we have rejected the proposal and voted against the report .
Arms production , which now includes overwhelmingly electronics and new technologies , can potentially be a source of employment .
This is particularly so for small countries which are focusing on the development of these new technologies .
All neutral countries maintain armies and some of the neutral countries are also amongst the major arms producers and exporters in the world .
Serving members of the Irish army have recently highlighted the need for upgrading their equipment if they are to continue to perform their peace-keeping tasks under the various UN mandates .
We have a proud record in Ireland of providing soldiers to serve with the UN , and I wish to see the role continued .
I welcome the news that spending on arms has fallen .
I call once again for the total ban on the production and sale of land mines and , of cource , on all forms of nuclear weapons .
I have to say , with a certain amount of alarm and apprehension , that , in my view , the Titley report will be yet another stone in the building which will turn the EU into a European military super power .
This will be done by recommending a common European weapons market with an efficient , co-ordinated weapons industry ( which will provide the CFSP with its military capacity ) .
For me this is totally unacceptable and cannot in any way form part of the process to promote peace in Europe and the world .
The very opposite is the case !
Although here and there in the Titley report there are some interesting suggestions , such as setting up a legal form of European armaments company , making sure , however , that they do not become a strait-jacket , the overall approach taken in the report and in the Commission 's analysis , both federalist and ultra-liberal , opens no genuine prospects for the future in keeping with the real interests of the Member States of the European Union .
The report takes a strictly economistic approach to the question of armaments policies , as if they were economic goods whose profitability could be appreciated in the same way as all others .
Yet , whereas each Member State must , of course , look for the best value for money , it must first of all measure the value of armaments in terms of whether they are appropriate for the specific needs of its defence in order to preserve its national independence as well as it can .
European states cannot , therefore , define the specifications of their weapons on the basis of the desires of other states which would be their possible acquirers .
In the name of liberalism , the Titley report cultivates , in reality , the cult of asymmetry , which seems to be becoming the official doctrine of the Commission : Europeans should continuously give the example of the purest and most absolute liberalism , even to the detriment of their own interests .
The report does note that the United States ' armament industry is protected in all sorts of ways which prevent full competition , but it in no way recommends a symmetrical attitude on the part of the Community which should , on the contrary , open up to the purchase of off-the-shelf military equipment in third countries and to the transfer of military technology .
We all agree that we need to develop common armaments programmes in order to extend series and reduce the cost of new arms .
But there is no way in which the implementation of that objective , which is a particularly difficult one to achieve , should come under an integrated approach as recommended by the Titley report . Rather , we should apply the method of variable geometry if we want to make real progress .
Armaments are an area where we have lost count of abortive European projects because of the lack of specificity , huge overspending , the failure to pay the planned budgetary amounts , etc .
To try and impose in this sector a rigid Community framework corporation , without taking into account the desires or the real needs of different nations , would be completely artificial and would only lead to disastrous results .
It is neither procedural effervescence nor structuralist activism which is going to lead to effective cooperation but precise correspondence , progressively and pragmatically defined by certain partners , between each country 's needs and equipment produced jointly , in an area which is ill-suited to laissez-faire compromises or approximative specifications .
As for the non-existent and yet very necessary European Armaments Agency , we have seen a whole series of projects mostly aimed at impressing the media , none of which have had time to have concrete results : barely had the Franco-German Armaments Agency been set up in 1995 than the idea was launched in 1996 to extend it to other partners and that its more widespread generalization was proposed in 1997 .
Emphasis should instead have been placed on intra-European rationalization instead of concentrating so much on questions of export and cooperation with external partners .
In any case this rationalization can only be properly completed if the Commission finds a coherent approach to its competition policy and its recommended restructuring policy .
Yet , so far , the Commission has preferred , when it comes to the armaments industry , to favour a transatlantic union rather than a European merger ( in this case an Anglo-French merger ) in the field of aeronautics and electronics .
However , the objective of an armaments Europe should , of course , be one bringing together the Member States who so wish to pool their European interests in order to obtain the best possible use of the European resources .
The motion for a resolution tabled by Mr Titley did not place emphasis on these essential points and therefore I was unable to lend him my support .
A debate on the desirability of a European defence industry shows up the two-fold nature of this issue .
On the one hand we have limited competition as a result of the lack of a single European market .
On the other hand the issue has strong political implications because it is linked to working towards a common European foreign and security policy .
Involvement in the military industry and defence touches the essence of national sovereignty and should not be relinquished lightly .
The Commission communication and the Titley report place the aim of a European defence industry in the framework of a European security policy , which means that unfortunately little attention is paid to the opportunities of transatlantic cooperation with the US within NATO .
Europe should not be aiming at is own defence industry by way of contrast with the US .
The American market is already dominated by the American defence industry and leaves little space for European products .
In military terms European is very dependent on the US .
And so it is very important to keep strong transatlantic connections through NATO , including the field of defence industry .
The concept of the ' Combined Joint Task Forces ' , set up last year at the North Atlantic Council in Berlin , clearly demonstrates that it is not necessary to set up a completely separate military industry outside NATO .
That is why we voted against the report .
That does not detract from the fact that we agree with the Commission and the rapporteur that there is ample justification for encouraging cooperation among European defence companies and strengthening competition in this sector .
We also support the Commission 's proposals to combat the improper use of Article 223 along with standardising and supporting research and technological development .
There should have been more emphasis on the defence industry 's own responsibility in restructuring production .
Finally it should be noted that it is unrealistic to aim for far-reaching liberalisation in the defence market because of the specific nature of this sector .
The European defence industry is dominated by a number of big countries .
In addition , defence projects can only be entrusted to a select number of firms because of the specific requirements involved .
A certain national emphasis is inevitable , so that there can be no question of abolishing Article 223 for the time being .
Cohn-Bendit report ( A4-127 / 97 )
The development of regional cooperation in the Balkans , and particularly with the countries of former Yugoslavia , is a prime means to consolidate peace and security , mutual respect , harmonious coexistence , cultural and economic development , and cooperation between the peoples and countries in the area .
Within that framework , there must be a radical change of the European Union 's essentially negative attitude .
The positions adopted by the European Union so far , and its policies , contributed decisively to the dissolution of former Yugoslavia , the outbreak of war and the preservation of the present abnormal situation determined by the protection of foreign troops not only in Bosnia , but all over the Balkan area , either in the form of multi-national forces as in the case of Albania , or in the form of military bases and facilities .
The agreements between the European Union and the countries in the area , instead of supporting the creation of new zones of influence and the promotion of interests alien to those of the peoples in the area , should contribute towards creating an area of political stability in the Balkans , towards ensuring inviolability of the frontiers established , towards the development and prosperity of peoples in the area , towards securing respect for human rights and the rights of minorities , towards facilitating the resettlement of refugees , and towards re-establishing a healthy society .
The European Union must contribute actively to the recovery of the area by providing all possible political , economic ( trade , technical or financial ) , and scientific contributions .
Besides , it must not forget its responsibilities and the contribution it made to the Yugoslavian tragedy by encouraging and accepting the trends towards autonomy .
We consider , however , that the European Union 's strategy should cover not only the areas previously involved in war , but all the countries in south-east Europe , in other words Albania and FYROM as well , owing to the similarity of their problems and the particular importance for stability in the region of efforts towards regional cooperation .
We disagree radically with the proposal for discriminatory treatment , which aims at nothing else than the perpetuation of a policy of division and discrimination , the fomenting of confrontations , and the preservation of focuses of conflict .
All agreements must distribute any financial , economic or other aid with equality between the respective Republics and peoples , with respect for the now established status quo and the particularities of each country , and must not constitute a means of controlling political developments in those countries , so leaving the Balkan peoples free to make their own choices and decide their own fate .
From that standpoint , we think that the report 's encouragement of new autonomies , such as that relating to Kossovo , are not only unacceptable but particularly dangerous .
Such options may prove disastrous not only for the countries of former Yugoslavia , but more generally for peace in the Balkans and beyond .
The European Union 's contribution must not constitute an alibi for the imposition of measures that deprive the local governments of the possibility of choice and impose regimes of ' savage ' capitalism under the pretext of establishing a new Marshall Plan , to the cost of people in the area .
Neither should conformity with the ' Principles ' of the European Union be a criterion for the future upgrading of cooperation agreements .
The need to contribute to recovery in the area should also not be an excuse for the promotion of the European Union 's military nature or its conversion to an international police force to punish those who do not obey the dictates of the new international order .
To avert new tensions and conflagrations , international conventions and law must be applied , and the principles of frontier inviolability and national sovereignty and independence must be respected .
Militarization options , such as those for the ' European Peace Force ' , will encounter permanent objections from the populations and working people throughout the area and in other European countries , who are aware of what is hiding behind those deceptive names .
Baròn Crespo report ( A4-133 / 97 )
Sweden is a nonaligned State and intends to remain so .
This means that we cannot consider the development of a common European defence force within the framework of the EU or organisational rapprochement between the EU and the WEU .
The introduction of a general rule on the use of the qualified majority vote for the implementation of community measures without allowing the Member States to retain the right of veto on issues of vital security interests contravenes Swedish policy in this sphere .
Nor can we support the statements covering the financing of common measures via the community budget .
So we cannot vote for this report .
Resolution on bananas
It was with some reluctance that we voted for the motion for a resolution in question .
We decided to vote in favour because , at least , it proposed that the Commission and the Council should resort to the decision of the ' Arbitration Committee ' of the WTO ' condemning ' the current and very tricky system of European banana trade .
Approval of the motion for a resolution also blocks the strategy of certain countries - Germany in particular - which support the lobbies of the major European importers and which want the Commission and the Council to accept this ' arbitrary decision ' at once .
However , a lot remains to be done .
For example , it has to be said that the same WTO , in another arbitrary decision , wants to impose on the European Union the free entry of hormone-produced American meat , in spite of the whole history of ' mad cows ' and the negative opinions of European food safety committees .
Something else which remained unsaid was that the Commission had failed to complain to the same WTO against the United States for its clear violation of trade rules and international law as a result of the Helms-Burton Act to strengthen the embargo against Cuba , which has already led to the arrest of a Spanish businessman who committed the ' crime ' of indulging in trade relations with that island republic .
It also remained unsaid that the decision on bananas would only benefit American transnationals linked to the banana dollar and would seriously harm European producers , especially those in Madeira .
All of this ought to be analyzed together because we are not just talking about bananas here .
It is also a question of the way in which the WTO is run , increasingly in keeping with American interests , and is a case of the Commission 's growing subservience to those same interests , to the detriment of European interests .
Finally , we should give up these media-friendly references to the need to impose increasingly globalized trade rules and put the brakes on respective deepening .
From this point of view , a decisive word needs to be addressed to the governments , in particular the Portuguese government , although recent examples when it comes to textiles and trade agreements with Morocco and other countries do not seem to suggest that we have yet switched from rhetoric to action !
Resolution on Zaire
Once again , a European Parliament resolution is out of sync with the reality which it intends to change .
Once again , we are lagging behind developments in a political and a military situation which we were unable to predict , prevent or understand .
Just as the AFDLCZ is getting ready to enter Kinshasa to the ovations of a population liberated from dictatorship , we are beginning to ask for the setting up of a transitional authority which would only be the last manoeuvre by Marshal Mobutu .
Just as 30 years of violence , executions , persecutions and corruption are to be wiped out and replaced by another violence - definitely excessive but unfortunately legitimate because of the violence it is replacing - our priority seems to be to judge the latter violence when we never said anything against the former .
Just as a probable political and military stabilisation of Zaire should finally make it possible for us to assist Rwandan refugees and Zairean civilian populations in the east of the country , the European Union 's priority seems to be to put Laurent Desiré Kabila on trial , whereas the sufferings of the refugees are the responsibility of people whose names are known to us : Habyarimana , for the Rwandan dictatorship in place until 1994 , the FAR and Interamwé , for taking the refugee camps hostage , the French government ( for the execution ) and the Zairian government ( for the rear bases ) launched together in the famous Operation ' Turquoise ' .
These are the people who are really responsible for the sufferings of refugees over the last two and a half years .
For two years the new authorities in Kigali repeated , to deaf ears , that the refugee camps in Eastern Zaire were a threat to the security of their state and a time-bomb for the whole of Central Africa .
No-one ever listened to these warnings which were full of common sense and realism .
We know what happened next .
Today the record of the European Union is quite clear .
Because we entrusted our common diplomacy to two Member States , France and Belgium , the Union was committed to the point of blindness to supporting Mobutu - who was held up as a guarantor of stability and territorial integrity in Zaire .
Despite the realism of the United States ' external policy , European influence is being completely wiped out in a huge area stretching from the Southern Sudan to the Atlantic .
The case of Zaire reveals the complete and utter failure of European diplomacy which has been conspicuous by its absence in this crisis and its probable settlement .
Similarly , European development aid policy has revealed itself to be incapable of imposing as a condition the minimum degree of democracy which might have had some effect on the region 's dictatorships ; nowadays the European Union wants to impose maximalist democratic conditions on the new Zairean authority emerging from a civil war and having to take over a country devastated by dictatorship .
This painful affair calls for a far-reaching review of our diplomacy and our development policy .
I only hope that the crisis of the Great Lakes of Africa will enable us to be aware of this need .
Soulier report ( A4-131 / 97 )
For the first time , the Commission has submitted to the European Parliament this indicative programme on the nuclear industry and we can only welcome this consultation .
I am not about to discuss the rights or wrongs of the nuclear energy industry , which is a matter for the individual states .
Therefore , it is not a question of knowing whether the proportion of energy produced by nuclear reactors should increase or decrease .
My consideration here is the ageing of installations and its consequences , in particular for security .
The rapporteur is right to concentrate his thoughts on the management of nuclear energy .
Nowadays , the main challenges of the nuclear industry come from waste and the ageing of structures .
They call for the implementation of increased safety measures in the operation of power stations and , in particular , an agreement on the management of nuclear waste and the fight against their uncontrolled transport within the European Union .
This safety imperative should not be limited to the frontiers of the European Union since radioactive risks have willingly accepted the principle of ' free circulation ' - of course , important work has to be done in relation to countries of central and eastern Europe .
Finally , and since inevitably the subject tackled does concern the rights or wrongs of nuclear energy , I wish to lend my support to the common principles in favour of nuclear power : national authorities should decide whether or not to use nuclear power , this choice should be respected by the Union as a whole , high levels of security should be guaranteed , Member States take co-responsibility with those running nuclear installations towards European citizens when it comes to nuclear safety .
Other reports will make it possible to look at the rights or wrongs of various different types of energy sources in Europe .
Here we have to accept that 30 % of European energy is produced by nuclear means - we must therefore take any measure necessary to guarantee the future of European citizens and their safety .
I wanted to explain to you why , as a Luxembourger , I shall be voting against the Soulier report .
I come from a country which , in the 1970s , made a choice : the choice not to build a single nuclear power station on the river Moselle .
This choice was broadly the decision of the Luxembourg socialists who were in power at the time .
A few years afterwards our great neighbour , France , whose nuclear options are well known to everyone , decided to build a huge nuclear power station at Cattenom , on the border with Luxembourg and Germany , without asking anyone for their opinion .
It took years and years , top-level state visits and countless diplomatic interventions for the French nuclear industry to agree to supply information , albeit hardly credible , on the emissions of the power station and to install an alarm system .
At present , another nuclear state , Belgium , is mentioning the possibility of storing its nuclear waste in the Belgian Ardennes , only six kilometres away from the Luxembourg border , in a nature reserve and tourism area .
During that time the railway accident at Apache in Lorraine , very close to the Luxembourg border , revealed that convoys of trains crisscross Europe in every direction transporting nuclear waste towards reprocessing plants without anyone 's knowledge , without our knowing what safety measures have been taken and what conditions this transportation takes place in .
Whole communities could be contaminated overnight .
I am , therefore , against nuclear power practised in this way without any nuance .
But I also go along with the attitude of my group on the need for everything to be done , in face of the dangers of nuclear power , to introduce maximum safety and therefore profoundly amend the Euratom Treaty - the relic of a time when everyone was full of admiration for nuclear power - in order to guarantee safety and control every aspect of the nuclear power industry .
I think that this report is inadequate in many respects .
The Commission 's communication is also inadequate , especially there is no proper security analysis .
This is strange since the aim of the Euratom Treaty is to address aspects of security .
The majority of EU Member States either do not have nuclear power or are in the process of dismantling nuclear power stations .
From this point of view it is remarkable that the European Commission should continue to try to foist more nuclear power on the EU and on the world around us .
Instead I think that Euratom should be abolished .
It has promoted nuclear power sufficiently and has during its lifetime given enormous sums in aid to the nuclear power industry .
Instead , Euratom should be revised to form a treaty for the abolition of nuclear power and the promotion of renewable energy sources .
There is a whole list of amendment proposals from the Green group .
I support them all and hope that they will be adopted by the assembly .
In conclusion I would like to quote the words of the opinion from the environment committee which sums up the issue very well : ' In summary it must be said that the Commission has a problem : it really wants to promote nuclear power .
But there is no prospect of success .
The people do not want it ' .
The report wishes to promote the use of nuclear power and co-ordinate the use of nuclear power through research , development and security between the EU Member States .
The Centre Party wishes to see nuclear power abolished and has campaigned for this in Sweden for 25 years .
In 1980 , Sweden held a referendum on nuclear power and it was decided to phase it out of the energy system .
During the Spring of 1997 the Swedish Government and the Centre Party together with others agreed to commence the abolition of nuclear power by taking one reactor at Barsebäck out of commission before the election in 1998 .
Nuclear power is not a sustainable source of energy .
Nor is it cheap as implied in the report .
There is no mention here of the cost of safety , decommissioning and the storage of waste .
Nuclear power is antiquated technology which must be replaced with bio-energy and other renewable sources of energy .
There is no reason for the EU to support this particular energy source .
So the Euratom Treaty should be abolished and replaced with a Treaty for renewable and sustainable energy sources .
The report does include positive proposals for increased nuclear safety .
This is of course good but can never justify nuclear power as an energy source .
I have , therefore , voted against this report .
Since I am convinced that producing energy through nuclear fission and storing the radioactive waste is dangerous on principle and involves disproportionate risks , and since the further promotion of nuclear energy with EURATOM resources will lead to further distortion in relation to research into what are called renewable energy sources and their market introduction , I have voted differently from the majority of my group on the following points : Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 11 , 16 , 17 , 21 , 22 and 24 to the above report .
On one hand , I wish to congratulate Mr Soulier on his report on nuclear industries in the European Union .
On the other hand , I must welcome the decision to convey the European Commission 's communication to the European Parliament on the fourth indicative programme on nuclear industries in the European Union , following those published in 1966 , 1972 and 1984 , pursuant to Article 40 of the Euratom Treaty .
After all , that Treaty only provides for the consultation of the Economic and Social Committee .
Conveying the proposal to the European Parliament is a welcome initiative , which I must emphasize .
I fully approve of our colleague 's report as it is balanced , pragmatic and realistic .
It takes into account nuclear industries as a whole , and raises the problems linked to each stage in the cycle of nuclear fuel , from its extraction to its final storage or elimination .
The political impetus given to this resolution seems to me to be particularly important .
Calling on the Council of Ministers finally to issue its opinion on the principles founding this fourth programme , the European Parliament encourages it to discuss all of the challenges linked to the European nuclear industry .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The first item is the joint debate on the following eight motions for resolutions :
B4-0393 / 97 by Mr De Clercq and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the Helms-Burton Act ; -B4-0398 / 97 by Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Hindley , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on suspension of the WTO dispute settlement procedure concerning the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato-Kennedy Acts ; -B4-0399 / 97 by Mr Azzolini and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the Helms-Burton Act ; -B4-0401 / 97 by Mr Dell 'Alba and Mrs Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on Helms-Burton ( Cuba ) and the EU-US agreement ; -B4-0406 / 97 by Mrs Castellina and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the arrangement concerning the Helms-Burton Act ; -B4-0410 / 97 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the arrest of a businessman in the US ; -B4-0429 / 97 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the agreement concerning the Helms-Burton Act ; -B4-0432 / 97 by Mr Kittelmann and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on suspension of the WTO dispute settlement procedure concerning the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato-Kennedy Acts .
Mr President , today and the rest of this week the subject of the Helms-Burton Act has been discussed in various contexts , in particular in the framework of questions to the Council and the Commission .
Therefore , much of the debate has already taken place . And I think that , at this moment , both the Council and the Commission know the opinion of the members of this Parliament in this respect .
However , today we are going to summarize this subject , to some extent , in a motion for a common resolution which has the support of all political groups and , without entering into the justice or injustice of the measures adopted against the Republic of Cuba , I think that , at this moment , what concerns us most of all is the Commission 's attitude with respect to the exercise of its negotiating capacity .
In other words , we are facing a paradoxical situation in which the US administration can defend itself in the United States Congress in order to refuse the jurisdiction of the World Trade Organisation over a trade subject such as the Helms-Burton Act .
However , on the other hand , we cannot take similar steps , here in the European Parliament , to argue against the United States administration .
If the European Union was intelligent , if the institutions of the Council and the Commission were intelligent , then I would say that , for international negotiations , it would be very convenient for the Commission to be able to say that , on certain questions , it is the European Parliament which is able to have the last word .
At this moment , we believe that the Commission , by refusing to appeal , may have violated Community rules and we are referring here to the decision-taking procedure of Article 113 , Article 228 ( 3 ) 1 and 2 , and Article 235 of the Treaty on European Union .
Fundamentally , what we in all of the political groups are asking , at the moment , is that the Commission should again set out its arguments against United States ' policies for the extraterritorial application of US law affecting Europeans and demand that the Helms-Burton Act and the d 'Amato-Kennedy Act should not stand in the way of Community decisions .
Only if the European Parliament receives a satisfactory response setting out in detail the reasons for which the Commission has not decided to take proceedings , will it be possible for the European Parliament to accept the way in which the system works .
What I believe is that the Commission 's decision , in the case of the Helms-Burton Act , to desist - in violation of Community law , without consulting the Community 's parliamentary institution - has been an act of defeatism and one which will weaken its negotiating capacity in the international field .
Sometimes short-term measures - and , for example , trying to reach a simple political compromise while doing nothing to fight the United States legal decisions - could lead to the defeat of the European Commission itself .
Mr President , Commissioner , on 14 April Parliament had to learn from the Agence Europe that the Union 's procedure against the United States and the Helms-Burton Act was suspended , due to an agreement on an attempt by the United States to amend the unacceptable extra-territorial provisions in that act .
Mr President , my group of course welcomes the fact that the United States and the European Union have reached an agreement which could lead to a change in the Helms-Burton Act .
But this memorandum of understanding has no official legal status , which is also understandable because the United States administration cannot just go and change a law without consulting Congress .
I should like to point out to the Commissioner that the European Parliament ought to have been consulted on this matter , and that did not happen .
I would also like to warn against a situation in which all kinds of bilateral agreements are agreed between multilateral trade systems .
We would have preferred to wait for an opinion from the WTO .
Mr President , Commissioner , there are two points I should like to raise briefly on this subject .
The first is that the United States has undoubtedly recognized the possibility , the risk , of losing the appeal brought by the European Union before the WTO panel .
This , at least , seems to me an encouraging fact , showing that every once in a while the European Union , too , can make its voice heard .
We shall have to wait and see what happens next .
As my second point , though , I should like to point out that , reading between the lines of this business , which has certainly been taken too far , we can see the fundamental problem of human rights policy , which must not be underestimated by , as it were , throwing out the baby with the bathwater , because it seems to me that determining the extent to which our co-operation policy is conditional on human rights is a problem which , partly thanks to this Helms-Burton act , has been deposited on our doorsteps .
Mr President , Mr Medina and Mrs Plooij have already spoken on the subject of methods .
I would now like to add something about content .
First of all , there is the flimsiness of the guarantees offered by the United States regarding the suspension of the effects of its legislation on European operators .
We had blatant confirmation of this just a few days ago over the Internet , and it really is strange that neither the Commission 's nor the Council 's representative told Parliament about this .
I refer to Amendment No 1486 to the so-called ' Libertad ' law adopted by the US Congress 's Committee on Foreign Affairs on 6 May , following the agreement reached between Clinton 's representatives and Leon Brittan .
In the amendment to Section IV of that law , relating to visas , the Secretary of State undertakes to draw up within 30 days a detailed list of all those companies and individuals who would no longer be subject to sanctions , including , in each case , the reasons for which this exemption is to be granted .
Clearly , we are dealing here with the compilation of black lists , an extremely serious matter and one which sheds an alarming light on the actual so-called advantages of the agreement , in that the only purpose of such lists will be to enable direct pressure to be brought to bear on the companies involved to break off all relations with Havana under the threat of a boycott on the American market .
But the question of principle is even more serious .
The European Union 's view , as has incidentally been reasserted in declarations by the Council and by its representative in this House , is that extraterritorial legislation is unacceptable in law and in principle .
This House has itself expressed the same condemnation .
And yet there is no trace in the agreement of these positions adopted by Europe , nor has any mention been made of one of the most serious violations that have occurred in this context : the detention in the United States , for the past six weeks , of a Spanish citizen for whom the prosecution has demanded a 100 year sentence because he has been guilty of trading with Cuba .
Remember that , Mr Dell 'Alba , when you talk about human rights .
And this was on the basis of a law that preceded the Helms-Burton Act , the law on trading with the enemy .
Well , in this situation , what is the significance of suspending the application of the extraterritorial effects of the Helms-Burton Act on Europeans ?
A serious political significance , as I see it , because although the Europeans would no longer be affected everybody else would - the Canadians and Mexicans , for example , and all the weaker States of Central and South America ; and all this will happen because we have used our political influence , somewhat shamefully , to save our own skins , abandoning other , more isolated nations to American retaliation .
Launching a debate on matters of principle was precisely the purpose of the proceedings brought before the World Trade Organization .
Now we have done what we have done , in other words , we have failed to assert those principles ; well , I believe that Europe 's assessment of its own interests cannot be so narrow-minded as to fail to understand that saving our political credibility is more important than a few trade deals !
Mr President , what Sir Leon Brittan said about the Helms-Burton compromise in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights really is breath-taking !
After praising the WTO year after year as the master of law and order , as a rules based system , he suddenly thinks we need not be too particular about the rules .
But surely rules are designed as a weapon for the weak to defend themselves against the unreasonable demands of the mighty !
After all that is why the WTO was necessary , because , as it kept being impressed on us , the USA and let us say Swaziland had to be subject to the same rules .
Now that is all old hat .
The EU has suspended the WTO proceedings because it was afraid of winning .
For even before the WTO was established the USA threatened that it would withdraw if decisions were taken against its interests three times .
Well , where do we actually stand now ?
In the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights Sir Leon Brittan likened the WTO talks to a poker game .
Correct !
But it so happens the Americans are better poker players .
They hold the bank , they were good at bluffing and Sir Leon Brittan has dropped out of the game with a royal flush in his hand .
We in the Green Group in the European Parliament have always opposed this WTO round of poker .
We are for fair play in world trade , for fair chances , not for the right of the strongest , of those who can put most money down !
Europe should have given a sign here that the same rules of play apply to everybody , big or small .
Instead it has gambled away any remaining credibility .
We are in favour of a reform of the WTO .
We called for other rules from the start , such as more transparency , democratic control and social and ecological responsibility .
And as far as China joining the WTO is concerned , we keep hearing it repeated that we have to show the Chinese that membership means abiding by the rules .
Well , do you seriously believe that the Chinese cannot read the papers , or how do you think it looks ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to bring out quite so much heavy artillery here but concentrate my criticism on a technical question , namely Parliament 's disappointment that it was not consulted on a major question .
I do not know how what position we would have taken had Sir Leon Brittan consulted us beforehand and explained the situation ; we might even have agreed .
Anyway , it is too late now to find out .
But on a question such as the Helms-Burton Act , where the European Parliament established the main points while the Council and Commission were still hesitating about whether to take strong action , one cannot begin by embracing Parliament and working closely together but then take a decision that we only learn from the newspapers and say afterwards that it was the only way !
This is a matter of principle and I would cordially ask the Commission not to treat Parliament this way too often .
The responsible committee , the Committee on External Economic Relations , which was involved in all the work , was not told about this either .
We described all this in detail to that committee , Sir Leon , but not until the day before yesterday .
We did not have a chance to do so before .
Surely the main issue is as follows : Congress adopted legislation contrary to international law .
We all jointly decided that this had to be settled via the WTO , that it could not be allowed .
Congress made fun of Europe .
The individual representatives are saying : what weaklings they are over there in Europe !
We will do what we want and if we recognize something as right , then people simply have to do what we want .
After all , this situation requires a definite approach , so that Congress , which is now involved because Clinton is trying to implement the results , does not get the impression that it is the winner , because the main sections of the Act that we regard as contrary to international law remain in place .
Hence my request to the Commission : we want to continue working with you on a basis of trust .
But please ensure that this trust is justified in general and not just selectively , on the basis of : I will consult in this case but not in that one .
In that respect our criticism here is both technical and substantive .
Mr President , first of all we should ask ourselves whether the Helms-Burton problem is really the subject of this emergency debate .
In this respect , the presence of the Council would have been helpful .
Similarly , I regret the absence of Sir Leon Brittan .
He told the Rex Committee that he had been mandated by the Council to negotiate outside the WTO with the United States and that he had obtained not an agreement but an ' arrangement ' .
Will this ' arrangement ' - and this is a word which worries me somewhat - be able to have any impact on the cynical and selfish pragmatism of US policy ?
Do we not run the risk , once again , of putting economic interests in world trade before democracy and the defence of human rights ?
Yet , in the European Parliament we have on many occasions reasserted these demands .
After all , ladies and gentlemen , we must be aware that , through the question of relations with the United States , of which the HelmsBurton problem is only one element , it is the credibility of the European Union itself which is at stake .
Let us therefore be firm and determined , because otherwise it will only be the Eurosceptics who will take advantage of the situation !
Mr President , I think that it is impossible to defend the undefendable .
The truth is that the Cuban regime is an anachronism in the Ibero-American group of nations and in the world .
Democracy , freedom and the respect of human rights are systematically ignored and violated in Cuba .
Of course , this does not mean that instruments such as that enacted by the Helms-Burton Act are admissible , nor will they help to bring about those values .
We do not like the Helms-Burton Act . We do not like it for three fundamental reasons .
First of all , because it will only increase the suffering - already at unbearable levels - of the Cuban people .
Secondly , because it establishes a principle of extraterritoriality which violates the most lax conscience of any sovereign state - given that the Member States of the European Union are sovereign states .
This principle , Mr President , should be a part , an essential condition , of the agreements signed between the European Commission and the Clinton administration , because there is a problem of credibility here and it is a fact that the Clinton administration is one thing and the United States Congress is another .
The third reason why this agreement does not satisfy us is because , after 30 years of policies of this type , we have not made one jot of progress in the promotion of freedom , democracy and the respect of human rights , as the European Parliament demands in the case of Cuba .
Mr President , will you please accept apologies on behalf of Sir Leon who would have liked to be present here himself this afternoon to answer questions ?
He spoke yesterday at length in the Committee on External Economic Relations , but he asked me to represent him here in the Chamber as he has been unavoidably detained elsewhere .
You also know that while awaiting the formal presentation of the text and the Council 's accompanying conclusions the actual text of the agreement has already been sent to the European Parliament through the Committee on External Economic Relations .
In replying to the debate I think it opportune to remind the House that this agreement is not in fact a legally binding agreement , nor is it purporting to be a definitive solution to the dispute between the European Union and the United States on the Helms-Burton Act and the D 'Amato-Kennedy Act , that the Union remains strongly opposed to unilateral secondary embargoes with extra-territorial implications and that only the withdrawal of such legislation or at least of the extra-territorial aspects of the same will be capable of solving our differences definitively .
What has been achieved to date is only an interim or transitional agreement , meaning that we agree to suspend the WTO panel and not , as has been alleged , to remove it in exchange for promises from the United States .
Nor is it the intention , but that was not suggested here this afternoon , that the panel would be dropped as such ; we have specifically maintained the right to convene the panel at any time during the coming year or at the end of a year to begin a procedure for a new panel if the US takes any action which harms the interests of the EU , such action being described in the agreement itself and also in the Council 's conclusions .
Nobody can claim that the Commission has in any way made concessions of policy to the United States .
Our policy implies that solutions to international problems such as issues relating to confiscated property must be sought on the basis of international law or in consultation between countries and that individual countries may not impose their policy on other countries , in other words the rejection of the concept of extra-territoriality .
In exchange for our promise to discuss the problem of confiscated property we received the commitment and assurance from the United States that Title 3 of the Helms-Burton Act would remain suspended and that Title 4 of the same act would be amended ; you know that Title 3 deals with the right of former owners of confiscated property in Cuba to institute a case in the United States against firms or individuals who have invested in these properties or who have received such properties , and that Title 4 relates to the denial of access to the United States of foreigners who deal in confiscated property in Cuba .
I would like to point out that the subject of Title 4 does not contain any provisions on early suspension of the same and that the United States have always maintained that any amendment of that legislation would be impossible , so that the United States ' promise under the agreement to try to make an amendment does make it possible to suspend the application of Title 4 , which must be regarded as an important American concession .
In addition the agreement which has been reached , and I shall come back to this , has prevented a serious confrontation which could have profoundly undermined the WTO , the multilateral trade organisation and its significance .
The agreement was incidentally worked out at the request of the Member States .
I would just remind you at this juncture that the Council of General Affairs on 24 February expressed its dismay that inadequate progress had been made in our contacts with the United States to justify suspension of the WTO procedure and the Council took the opportunity to stress that the Union was willing to continue to seek a general bilateral solution and that in that case the panel would either be dismissed or suspended .
That was the basis on which the Commission finally reached agreement with the US .
A number of resolutions which have been tabled state that the European Parliament was neither informed nor consulted about the progress of negotiations .
That has been referred to again in speeches today .
But I must say that the Commission representatives at all levels , including the director-general and the Commissioner responsible , have taken every opportunity to inform the Members of this House and the relevant committees on the state of affairs .
In addition the European Parliament was properly involved in establishing the Community anti-boycott regulation which was an important instrument in exerting pressure on the United States .
I would also add that neither the American Congress nor the European Parliament is being required to ratify this agreement because it is a political document and not a formal international agreement .
The Commission has negotiated intensively and adopted a regulation which it considers favourable to the European Union .
The Commission and the Member States had to consider the US threat to boycott the panel by appealing to exemption for reasons of national security , a right enjoyed incidentally by all members of the World Trade Organisation .
And if the US had boycotted the panel it would have meant that the WTO procedure for settling disputes would have become involved in an extremely serious and controversial situation where the United States support for the whole multilateral system could have been seriously undermined .
We believe that the US threat of boycott is not justified , let there be no misunderstanding about that .
The Commission had nevertheless to consider carefully all possible consequences of its action .
We had to consider that although the European Community was convinced it was right in this issue and therefore also convinced that the panel was to be saved , one can never be certain beforehand of the outcome of a legal case .
The most important point , however , was that suspending the panel offered the opportunity to continue to exert pressure on the United States ' policy .
If we had refused to budge we would not , irrespective of whether we had won or lost , have made any progress with those sections of the D 'Amato Act which do not come within the jurisdiction of the WTO .
Continuing with the panel would probably have created a political atmosphere in which the US would probably have been more tempted actually to implement the D 'Amato Act and reject suspension .
With that in mind I should now like to go through the main points with you and point out the results achieved to date .
The agreement provides us with greater reassurance about the continued suspension of Title 3 , which it is assumed will remain in force during the whole term of office of President Clinton , which is spelled out in the agreement .
The United States have further agreed to recognise disciplines for future investments in wrongly confiscated property and to develop principles on litigious jurisdictions with extra-territorial consequences , in exchange for which the administration of the United States will consult Congress in order to be in a position to suspend Title 4 in practice .
The new disciplines on investments in confiscated property will not be limited to Cuba but will be restricted in the field of application and consequences .
They will only refer to property to be acquired in the future of states and transactions relating to properties actually to be acquired in the future .
That cannot represent any hindrance to the right to develop or sell existing investments , a right which we do not intend to include in the negotiations .
Although the risk of further measures is not excluded this agreement represents a strong incentive for the US not to take any action against firms or persons from the European Union .
We were also assured that Title 4 would be implemented with the greatest circumspection .
In actual fact the European Union has retained all its rights in the WTO in case measures are taken against firms or persons from the European Union .
And the US agreement to work together with us on a solution to matters of litigious jurisdiction is an important breakthrough which should make it possible to stymie any future US unilateral extra-territorial legislation .
Although the D 'Amato Act as such does not come within the ambit of the WTO panel , the US undertook to work towards realising the aims to meet the provisions of the act to grant EU Member States multilateral exemption in relation to Iran and individual exemption to firms in relation to Libya .
That is an important commitment from the US .
We shall now use our best endeavours to secure the multilateral exemption in relation to Iran when the President submits his report to Congress on 5 August of this year or earlier .
What concessions did we make in exchange for all this ?
We agreed to suspend the panel , and I repeat , suspend and not disband it .
Then we retained all our rights to convene the panel again at the point where it left off in the case that measure were to be taken against firms or persons from the EU under Title 3 or 4 of the Helms-Burton or if exemptions under d 'Amato were not extended or were withdrawn .
Finally , Mr President , I would repeat that this agreement is not a complete settlement .
But the agreement does offer a certain security for protecting EU interests under both Helms-Burton and d 'Amato .
In exchange we have only suspended the panel , thereby agreeing to develop rules for investments in confiscated property and we continue to use the WTO panel as a threat and therefore a means of pressure on the US .
This option of a negotiated settlement has the advantage of using the progress made in matters which do not come within the remit of the panel , as I said particularly d 'Amato .
We shall keep Parliament regularly informed on progress in these negotiations ; our approach also offers the opportunity of a more permanent solution to the general problem of US unilateral extra-territorial measures .
Thank you for that thorough answer , Commissioner , even if it has rather disrupted our timetable .
Two Members have asked to speak , and although we have no time , I will give them 20 seconds each if they so wish .
Mr President , I have followed very carefully the explanations given to us by Mr van den Broek , whom I must thank right away .
However , there is one question which I must put to him and that is why the Commission , which has lost the argument over the Banana Panel at the World Trade Organisation , has lost the argument with the Panel on Hormones , the only panel where it really had any chance of winning , has now sought a consensus-based solution when it is still negotiating questions as important as the principle of laws ' extra-territoriality and the same World Trade Organisation body as an instrument to solve this type of conflict .
Does not Mr van den Broek think that this is a symptom of the Commission 's weakness given that , on a question concerning the only panel where we had real possibilities of winning , the Commission has had to seek a consensus solution instead of actually solving the problem through the WTO bodies ?
Mr President , Commissioner , you described the basis of the agreement .
Our main criticism is that the Act is contrary to international law .
If I understood you correctly , you accept that the Act should remain in force for the time being , provided the terms of the agreement are respected , and nothing will change during that time .
What means and chances do we the European Union have and what means do you intend to use to ensure that this unlawful Act is also repealed by Congress ?
Mr President , as I already said , the most you could talk about is an agreement on a ceasefire ; it is not a peace agreement .
In other words next year will have to be used to see if we can agree together on remaining free from the consequences of this extra-territorial legislation .
As soon as that appears impossible then of course we can resort to convening the panel again .
If you are now asking me why we did not give a promise if we had such a good chance , then I must say that it is simply a matter of weighing up the various interests .
Knowing that the United States was earnestly considering invoking exemption for reasons of security , which incidentally is the right of every member of the WTO , we nonetheless thought that we should use this period to see if this armed peace could be turned into a lasting unarmed peace .
So I would say to Mr Kittelmann that as soon as it appears that we will not get what we want , or not likely to get it within a year , the panel can be re-convened .
There is in any case the opportunity of beginning a new panel procedure after one year 's time .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions :
B4-0358 / 97 by Mr Cars , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Iran ; -B4-0374 / 97 by Mrs García Arias , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Iran ; -B4-0402 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Iran ; -B4-0408 / 97 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on relations between the EU and Iran ; -B4-0430 / 97 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Iran ; -B4-0433 / 97 by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Iran .
Mr President , will they listen ?
A regime such as the one in Iran which does not allow any room for criticism in its own country , which suppresses any attempt at independent thought and action , which tortures , mutilates and kills those of its own citizens who do not rapidly change their way of thinking - they are not going to listen to what the European Parliament has to say !
A regime - and this is now official - which despatches hired murderers on missions abroad and which exhorts its supporters to murder other country 's citizens - they do not care about what we say .
So is our resolution and our debate today meaningless ?
No , far from it !
Our message is a message to those who hope for , who fight for , who suffer and die for their conviction that the darkness can be dispelled .
It is a message that their hope and their efforts are meaningful , and that those who are killed do not die in vain .
So are all those who oppose the regime in Teheran good democrats ?
I doubt it !
No more than the Shah 's police state , the ruins of which have been used by the Ayatollahs to establish their murderous state , was a democracy .
But democratic opposition lives and grows .
More and more Iranians are becoming involved and it is to them which we in the European Parliament give the full support of Europe .
We urge ' Democrats of the world , unite ! against all intellectual persecution , against torture and execution , and against the regime in Iran .
Mr President , if I may make a brief remark on the previous debate , let me say that the Commission will probably also have to consider , if it is afraid of losing or actually does lose everything in the WTO , whether the balance of forces between America and Europe in the framework of the WTO is actually correct .
But that is just a remark on the previous debate .
When we discuss Iran , our sympathy and priority must go first and foremost to the victims of the terrible earthquake - whatever our relations with the state and regime of Iran .
Secondly , our sympathy and support must go not just to the victims of the earthquake but also to the victims of political terrorism and of persecution under the fatwa , and here I am thinking for instance of Salman Rushdie who is certainly the most prominent but not the only victim of that persecution .
In fact we are facing the ruins of a critical dialogue , which I would not totally condemn from the outset or even after the event , but which was either not critical enough or was not enough of a dialogue .
And what was wrong with the critical dialogue , at the beginning at least , was that it was not a joint debate on the part of the European Union , but an individual debate by a few states , which could not succeed because it achieved too little consensus even in the individual state concerned to really affect Iran 's policy .
That is why I think it was right to call a halt to this socalled critical dialogue , because is had no basis , not only because of the Mykonos judgment but because it made no real difference .
That is one reason it was right to put a stop to it .
I am very glad , and Mr Marin said the same this week , that at least we now have solidarity between all the EU states , that we have not reverted to the system of individual ambassadors , for that is something the European Union cannot countenance .
The reason why we now have a common foreign policy in this respect may be a sad one , but at least we do now have it .
Yet I still think we need dialogue , in fact I think we need it even more , and a dialogue with all those forces , of whatever persuasion , that support democracy and are prepared to move Iran along the road towards democracy .
These may be marginal forces within the regime , but they certainly include a great many opposition figures .
However , I would also say , conversely , that not every member of the opposition is automatically also a supporter of democracy in Iran .
In that sense , Commissioner , I hope that the Commission and the Council will do all they can and all that is necessary to bring about change in Iran , in the sense of democracy and broadly based social and economic improvement .
The path pursued in previous years is no longer viable .
We must formulate a common policy of dialogue with the pro-democracy forces in Iran .
Mr President , I agree on the whole with what Mr Swoboda has just said .
Nevertheless , I think that there is a problem of long-term policy at stake .
The European Union reacted positively in recalling its ambassadors .
But I have a question , perhaps , for Mr van den Broek .
It is not absolutely certain that the Italian Ambassador has been recalled with his colleagues .
This is something which remains to be specified .
What new policy should be conducted towards Iran since , as has already been pointed out , we all agree that we have to give up critical dialogue .
What policy should the Union - and not the Member States - pursue in the medium and long-term ?
What aid should be given to Iranian democratic opposition movements to strengthen them ?
Could we contemplate finally setting up a European radio-station , a ' voice of Europe ' for the Iranians , so that they can be informed not only by the official radio station of the regime of the mullahs ?
These are just a few questions and many more could be asked .
Therefore , it would be interesting to know what the Commission really intends to do to develop this new policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe the judgment in the Mykonos case merely sets out in black and white what we already knew , and it should be emphasized here : the Iranian political , institutional and religious authorities are responsible for a policy of state-sponsored terrorism which manifests itself in the physical elimination of dissidents abroad and the repression of any form of political expression at home , not to mention the denial of human rights and the fundamental freedoms of the individual .
Mr Swoboda has already said that the critical dialogue between the European Union and the Iranian Government has not brought the hoped-for results , in the form of a legitimate attempt to support the so-called ' reformist forces ' in Iran against the obscurantism of extremist opinion in that country .
Instead - let us not beat about the bush - this critical dialogue has really looked like an instrument for the international legitimization of this policy of statesponsored terrorism , and I therefore greatly welcome the Council 's decision - very late though it is - to terminate the critical dialogue .
I would also call for something more : that an end should be put to economic and commercial co-operation with Iran until such time as that country has itself put an end to what appears to be one of the most obscurantist regimes ever known .
I would also like to express my personal support , and the support of my entire group , for the forces of democracy , which , in Iran and elsewhere , day in , day out , are fighting to build a democratic and secular Iran .
I believe that in order for us to have an even clearer picture of the situation in that country , the Council and the Commission should engage in a dialogue with those forces also .
Many of the representatives of this resistance abroad have been savagely murdered , even in our own capital cities , by Iranian agents sent by Tehran .
That was what happened to the representative of the Iranian resistance in Italy : he was murdered , and we know the murderer - his surname , his forename and the job he does at the Iranian Embassy .
If nothing else , the European Union owes it to these people to institute an immediate and fundamental political change in its dealings with Iran .
Mr President , first let me draw a distinction of principle in relation to our political decisionmaking : on the one hand we are talking about the conduct of the Iranian head of state in terms of international law and on the other about the measures we want to take to help the victims and sufferers of the earthquake in northeastern Iran .
I believe we must help these people ; it is a humanitarian question , a question of emergency aid .
We want to extend our sympathy to these people and their families and express our solidarity and I hope the emergency aid will be provided as soon as possible under the ECHO programme .
But that must not prevent us from condemning the state terrorism in Iran in our political debates and on a daily basis and from taking the appropriate measures here too .
The Mykonos judgment of 10 April made it clear that top-level Iranian politicians gave the order to murder Iranian dissidents .
The same was clear in April 1989 , when the Kurdish leader Abdul Rahman Ghassemlou was murdered in Vienna .
This cannot be tolerated .
As said earlier , the European Union must take firm action here .
If my information is correct , I wonder why the Italian ambassador is still in Iran .
Perhaps the President of the Commission can say something about this .
At the same time , we must pursue a policy of small steps .
We should grant asylum to the democratic opposition figures in the European Union and we cannot allow this granting of asylum to depend on the political decision of Iran , as happened in the Federal Republic of Germany .
I think that is a contradictory political attitude , which the European Union must put a stop to immediately !
Mr President , I think the debate shows that we agree about one point : we unreservedly condemn the policy of terrorism adopted by the government of Iran .
At the same time , however , I think we agree that the problem we call Iran today cannot be addressed simply by condemning the actions and omissions of the regime .
The second of these points is the more serious .
The policy adopted by the European Union until now , in other words the policy of critical dialogue , however correct as a theoretical concept , has brought no results but rather , the opposite .
Consequently , critical dialogue must cease and rightly so .
However , this does not mean that the Council in particular - because the Commission is both present and working on the matter , but the Council , which is absent from all these debates because they are supposedly unimportant - is not obliged to develop a new political concept concerning how the European Union should address Iran .
We will wait for the Council to deign to bring us a political concept , I hope sometime before the end of the year .
The other matter is that we should start thinking a little with our eyes turned to the future .
In Iran , there are forces which are both democratic and understand international relations .
And we ought to send a message to those forces to continue their fight for Iran 's modernization and democratization .
Mr President , Iran is facing major problems in its financial and economic policy and in human rights , which is in fact a regional problem .
The people want prosperity and social security , but the massive military investment causes the region many problems .
A policy of confrontation has never brought economic success with it but only poverty and despair for the general public and pride for the very few .
Intellectually it is of course rather more difficult to seek consensus and to think in terms of alternatives .
Europe should serve as a model !
Let us begin by analysing the problems , at least until the election , and let us then offer solutions .
Let us give even stronger support than before to those circles that want cooperation .
Mr President , it took a ruling from a Berlin court to force the European ministers to suspend the so-called ' critical dialogue ' which was started in 1992 with Iran .
In fact anyone could have seen much earlier than that that this procedure would hardly produce any results .
The ruling from the Berlin court presents a good opportunity to take another look at relations between Europe and Iran .
The question is what kind of relations the Union wants with a country which is now known to have its political and religious leaders maintaining a secret council which is instructed to liquidate political opponents elsewhere in the world and which is guilty of serious breach of human rights in its own country .
Iran also threatens political stability in the Middle East .
It is no secret that the country is busily building up an extensive arsenal of conventional and chemical and biological weapons .
There are even indications that Iran possesses nuclear weapons .
Furthermore we must remember Iran 's hostile attitude to the peace process in the Middle East .
By supporting the militant shiite Hezbollah in Lebanon and the Hamas in the autonomous Palestinian areas Iran aims to thwart the progress of the peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbours . And all this is going on at a time when the Union and the United States are doing everything in their power to bring peace to the Middle East .
In view of that it is highly unsatisfactory that the Union and the United States are singing from different hymn sheets in matters of policy .
In the meantime Iran is gratefully exploiting the unclear or divided diplomatic action of European countries .
It is by no means certain that the Iranian authorities will change their policy under Western pressure , but they do want to entertain good relations with countries of the Union .
It must be clear that there can be no question of a dialogue with that country until such time as Iran is prepared to stop terrorist activities , change its attitude to the peace process and recognise Israel 's right to existence .
The Union must follow a foreign policy together with the United States which gets this clear message across to Iran .
Mr President , first of all I think that all Member States must demonstrate solidarity in the case of the diplomatic crisis with Iran .
Secondly , as for the earthquake tragedy , we are asking - as all public opinion in Europe and internationally asks - for immediate action , but I want to know whether the Commission is absolutely certain that this aid is meant to be distributed directly .
On this score , we have heard that there is censorship , and that even expressions of distress and protest by the local populations are being repressed .
Therefore , I would ask the European Commission whether this aid is going to be directly distributed so that we can be sure that it really does reach those affected by the earthquake and is not exploited by the regime , which uses its powers in an absolute way .
I wish to thank Mr Van den Broek for his very detailed presentation as regards Iran , but in order that there should be no misunderstanding , I want to make myself clear .
My comment concerning the critical dialogue does not , and should not be construed as meaning that the critical dialogue applied up to now was a misguided policy .
No : it is a policy that did not bring about the desired results .
Secondly , now is the moment , instead of simply ending the critical dialogue , to take advantage of the situation and reconsider a comprehensive global policy as regards Iran .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , to transmit this message as being the consensus of this House .
It is the moment to conceptualize and go a little further ; not necessarily with sanctions , but a comprehensive global policy vis-à-vis Iran in view of what Iran is doing .
You have said most of what there is to say on the matter .
Mr President , Mr Van den Broek answered that the Italian ambassador was in Iran before the Council decision .
But he did not say whether he is willing to come back or whether the other Member States asked him to come back or whether he intends to come back .
My second question is this : are there any other European Union ambassadors over there ?
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Dimitrakoupolos for his point with which I fully agree .
We must certainly develop a more comprehensive policy towards Iran .
In reply to Mr Telkämper I would say that I understand that the Italian government has not yet taken any decisions on recalling its ambassador .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions :
B4-0396 / 97 by Mr Fassa and Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0404 / 97 by Mr Kouchner , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the Sudan ; -B4-0409 / 97 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , and Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0415 / 97 by Mr Telkämper and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the Sudan ; -B4-0434 / 97 by Mr Fernández Martín and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Sudan .
Mr President , the grave situation in Sudan provides us with an opportunity to emphasize one of the fundamental criteria by which the European Union 's relations with all third countries must be governed - there must be an internal system that conforms to the principles of democracy , not in a merely formal sense but also , and more importantly , in substance .
From this we derive the three criteria emphasized in paragraph 1 of the present motion for a resolution : first , separation between Church and State ; secondly , respect for the principle of self-determination of peoples ; and thirdly , the democratization of Sudanese society .
It is no use objecting that we must take account of the specific national features and local idiosyncrasies of Sudan .
A situation such as now prevails in that country cannot possibly be regarded as the Sudanese path to democracy .
Can we tolerate all these things happening without anything ever being said or done ?
I believe that we must strongly support the amendment tabled by Mr Kouchner , which is designed to stress a specific diplomatic initiative by the European Union in Sudan .
Mr President , there is no certainty at all that politics and international relations are based on morality .
But there is no doubt , on the other hand , that the vocation of a parliament like ours is to make sure that a bit of morality is introduced into them on the basis of the values of humanism , which are the very justification of the European Union .
For far too long the Khartoum regime has been violating these values by eliminating basic liberties , introducing intolerable forms of religious discrimination , executing its opponents , terrorising its own people domestically and exporting terror .
This regime should be unanimously and roundly condemned .
I say ' should ' because I know of one government , that of my country , which is able to deal with Sudan in order to obtain the delivery of an ageing former terrorist and to use this as an argument of domestic policy .
I think that we should not give in to this regime at all until it accepts the demands of the international community to respect human rights and the sovereignty of neighbouring states .
I hope that the European Parliament is going to vote unanimously for the resolution before it , and I wish to draw your attention towards an amendment tabled by our colleague , Bernard Kouchner , which is asking for a very useful diplomatic initiative between the European Union and the Organisation of African Unity in order to bring an end , by mediation , to the Sudanese civil war .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe there is serious cause for concern in the increase in the number of war zones in Sudan .
Today , fighting is no longer confined to the south of the country but has also spread to the north and - the most dangerous and alarming aspect - to the border zones with Ethiopia and Uganda .
We are witnessing a radical escalation of the Sudanese conflict , which threatens to engulf the entire Horn of Africa .
I therefore regard it as a matter of urgency for the European Union to intervene politically , because we cannot simply stand by to witness the likely explosion of Africa 's largest country .
In my view , the Council must put pressure on the government in Khartoum to open an immediate dialogue with the combined opposition represented by the National Democratic Alliance , to accept the IGAD peace plan and to comply with international law by applying the United Nations Security Council 's Resolution 1070 .
The Sudanese Government must not be allowed to think that it can continue defying the entire international community , and for that reason I believe it should agree to a visit by a UN delegation with a view to clarifying the human rights situation in the country and verifying the activities of the international terrorist training camps of which we have heard so much , and which the Council and the Commission , too , would do well to investigate more closely .
The Council and the Commission should also demand that the Sudanese Government allows access to international humanitarian organizations , so that aid may really reach the civilian population . I am thinking especially of the relaunching of the programmes that have been discontinued , at the initiative of the United Nations , so that they can reach those groups among the population who are most in need of assistance , having for years been the victims of planned extermination by the Sudanese Government .
Mr President , we are concerned about the 12-year civil war in Sudan , which has grave consequences for the civilian population , including starvation , malnutrition , migration , etc .
We are also concerned about the worsening human rights situation , reflected by arbitrary arrests of opponents of the regime and lamentable prison conditions .
We regret the fact that the Sudanese government is refusing to allow humanitarian organizations to enter the war zones and support the civilian population , which needs a regular supply of humanitarian aid .
We also regret the Sudanese government 's decision to block Operation Lifeline Sudan again and thus prevent humanitarian organizations from assisting those in need in this area too .
Lastly , we are angered by the provocative stance of the Sudanese government vis à vis the repeated warnings by the international community , and in particular Security Council Resolution 1070 of 16 August 1996 .
That is why we call on the government to end the civil war , to promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict , to release the political prisoners and to authorize Operation Lifeline Sudan and we call on the Commission of the European Community to respond to the Security Council 's appeal and grant the requested emergency aid of $ 120 million .
MR President , although I too support this joint resolution at the same time I am not too optimistic that our demands can be implemented .
We note that opposition to the regime has flared up again .
But this is because the so-called opposition in the country has united , that it has managed to bring the disparate ethnic groups that are against the Khartoum regime under one hat , so to speak .
As before , however , the ethnic divisions remain visible .
There is little hope at present of a cease-fire , for a few days ago one of the leading military figures of the SPLA said in the Neue Züricher Zeitung that its objective is to overthrow the regime and that all its military actions are directed at achieving that aim .
At the same time Mr Garang reminded in this interview that conflicts of this kind create civilian victims but added that the SPLA are prepared to keep the numbers of such victims as low as possible .
In the light of that I feel it would be a little more hopeful to negotiate with these forces on access for humanitarian aid rather than with the current regime , which is facing difficulties on many fronts and in particular on very long fronts .
So I would expect a better response to our call for humanitarian aid to be authorized again if we managed to reach agreement with the current opposition , since it has managed to create a kind of political organization .
Madam President , over the last few years we have actually seen some very real beacons of hope in Africa .
We have seen relative peace in the whole of southern Africa .
We have seen the political miracle of Nelson Mandela and his new South Africa .
We have probably seen more democracies in West Africa than there have ever been .
We saw a situation recently in the Horn of Africa where Ethiopia - where we saw terrible scenes of starving children a few years ago - is actually exporting grain to Kenya .
Yet in the midst of all this hope , we have the situation in Sudan .
It is a real problem .
This fundamentalist barbaric regime not only subjects its own citizens to terror , abuse and oppression but exports terrorism to North Africa and the Middle East .
It is a cancer eating away at the whole region and we desperately need to do something as a European Union and we need to punch our weight as part of an international community .
We need to condemn the appalling human rights record of this regime , in particular , in regard to the civilian population and the women and children in Sudan .
We need to express support for the democratic opposition which is working very hard both within and outside Sudan .
We need to continue to maintain sanctions but , at the same time as maintaining sanctions , we need to provide humanitarian aid .
As other people have said , we need to bring pressure to bear to try and bring the parties together to endeavour to reach a peaceful solution .
I was particularly pleased that the new British Labour Foreign Secretary , Robin Cook , when he spoke for the very first time , talked about the abuse of human rights and the need to do something about that .
He also talked about working with others to deal with international terrorism .
There is a window of opportunity there and I very much hope the Council and Commission will use this opportunity to try and do something to alleviate the terrible suffering which is taking place in Sudan .
Madam President , Alleanza Nazionale supports the motion for a resolution condemning Sudan , but points out that one fundamental aspect of the civil war in that country has not been considered in this motion - the fact that the clash between north and south involves issues of religious and racial hatred .
Muslim fundamentalists and fanatics have in fact been massacring part of the Sudanese population simply because it adheres to the Christian religion .
The European Union must take immediate action to eliminate the virus of fundamentalism and prevent it from spreading .
Similar horrors are taking place in Algeria , while other countries in the Middle Eastern area , dominated by religious rather than secular concepts of politics , are financing terrorists and other destabilizing factions .
The crimes committed in Sudan must be stopped , and our Community must do everything it can to achieve that , if only to prevent these fundamentalist viruses from propagating in our own Western societies , giving rise to hatred and irreconcilable divisions .
Madam President , on Sudan the news is not very cheerful .
Away back in 1990 the Commission informed the government of Sudan that the situation was not acceptable for starting productive talks under Lomé IV on the programming of finance earmarked for Sudan .
That opinion has not changed and it also reflects the concern of the European Union at the situation there , the lack of democracy , human rights , the armed conflict particularly in the south and the fact that no real progress has been made towards peace .
The Union 's development aid has also stopped as the government in Khartoum has not made any serious attempt to tackle any of the problems facing the country .
As against that , as various Members have pointed out , humanitarian aid remains important and is also being continued , especially to the people in the south of the country caught up in the civil war .
I can tell you that since 1994 some ECU 61 million in humanitarian aid has been given by our humanitarian office ECHO , in addition to which another 35 million has gone on direct food aid .
The human rights situation , as I said , remains highly unsatisfactory , really bad .
The United Nations Security Council passed a unanimous resolution in January of last year condemning Sudan for its aid to international terrorism and demanding the extradition of Islamic fundamentalists being sought in connection with the attempted murder of President Mubarak of Egypt .
That was in June 1995 .
And since Sudan did not meet the conditions of the resolution sanctions were put into place on 10 May 1996 , now one year ago , which the Security Council announced in Resolution 1054 and which called for a reduction of the staff in Sudanese embassies throughout the whole world .
Following that the Security Council adopted a resolution last August calling on Sudan Airways , after the expiry of a period of 90 days , to be grounded by means of an international embargo if Sudan had not implemented the earlier Security Council resolutions .
The Security Council however decided to await the report of the advisor from the United Nations humanitarian affairs department who was sent to Sudan before the resolution was presented for implementation ; his mission was to investigate the consequences of such a sanction on Sudan Airways , particularly its effect on humanitarian aid .
Mr President , you realise that various attempts have been undertaken , in IGAT as elsewhere , to try to get the peace talks back on to the rails .
Tentative agreements were concluded in 1996 , new agreements in 1997 .
I regret to have to inform you that the Commission cannot detect to date any real progress in the process as such and so is really concentrating on trying to alleviate the most serious needs of the peoples concerned .
Despite this a number of Member States of the European Union regularly discuss , in IGAT as elsewhere , how possible new political incentives can be found for the peace process .
The next item is the joint debate on the following 15 motions for resolution :
B4-0388 / 97 by Mr André-Léonard , on behalf of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the elections in Indonesia ; -B4-0428 / 97 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on human rights violations in Indonesia ; -B4-0436 / 97 by Mr Moorhouse and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on José Ramos Horta in particular and human rights violations in Indonesia in general ; -B4-0364 / 97 by Mr Apolinário , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the human rights situation in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam ; -B4-0395 / 97 by Mr André-Léonard , on behalf of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Group , on Vietnam ; -B4-0397 / 97 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on human rights in Vietnam ; -B4-0435 / 97 by Mr Bernard-Reymond and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on human rights in Vietnam ; -B4-0371 / 97 by Mr Wiersma and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation of children in Central and Eastern Europe ; -B4-0437 / 97 by Mr Oostlander and Mrs Oomen-Ruijter , n behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation of vulnerable people in Central and Eastern Europe ; -B4-0370 / 97 by Mr Karamanou and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the release of Isik Yurtçu ; -B4-0418 / 97 by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the famine in North Korea ; -B4-0363 / 97 by Mr Apolinário and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on workers ' rights to human dignity and the NGOs ' Clean Clothes campaign ; -B4-0414 / 97 by Mrs Sornosa Martínez , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the rights of the children and the ' Clean Clothes ' campaign of European NGOs ; -B4-0421.97 by Mrs Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on practical measures to combat child labour ; -B4-0366 / 97 on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Kenya .
Indonesia :
Madam President , with its 200 million inhabitants , Indonesia is the biggest Muslim country in the world and it plays a leading role in South-East Asia .
Controlled by a despot for more than thirty years now , the Indonesian regime claims to be a democracy but in reality we must doubt this .
Every five years elections are held but only three parties are allowed to take part in them .
Willing to do anything to retain power , the authorities entrusted 189 , 000 soldiers and police officers with ensuring a peaceful campaign and vote .
Any assemblies or marches in public were banned and candidates ' broadcasts on television were subjected to censorship .
Opponents were persecuted for subversive behaviour or incitement to violence , subjected to brutal evictions and condemned to heavy prison sentences throughout the so-called ' electoral campaign ' .
The Indonesian government must understand that democratic elections and credible institutions are vital for guaranteeing the respect of human rights and if its international relations are to be improved .
Madam President , Indonesia is an area of the world that has been criticized many times in this Parliament , particularly because of East Timor .
I just wish to let the House know that an intergroup on East Timor has now been set up , and people who are concerned about the Indonesian occupation of East Timor should get involved in the intergroup .
Apart from that , it is not just the people of East Timor who are persecuted but the Indonesians themselves .
We would like to see the rights of the pro-democracy movement in Indonesia recognized .
The conditions in the prisons have to be addressed ; also access of prisoners to basic human rights , access of NGOs to Indonesia , freedom of the press , freedom of movement of people , and the right of people to live in a society where they are not persecuted by their own government .
The Indonesians have forced the international community to turn a blind eye to what is going on there , and they hold the international community to ransom .
This Parliament also has to ensure that Member State governments stop supplying arms to Indonesia until democracy is established there .
We cannot criticise governments and , at the same time , sell weapons to them when they persecute their own people and territories that they have illegally occupied .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , with sad regularity the European Parliament is obliged to condemn the serious violations of human rights practised by the Indonesian authorities on its own territory and in the illegally occupied territory of East Timor .
This time , in a sham democracy , the Indonesian authorities have organised an electoral farce in which only three pro-government parties were authorized to take part .
However , students and other peaceful opponents to the Jakarta government continue to be held arbitrarily in prison for demonstrating against the holding of elections in such conditions , and violent repression has continued against the people of East Timor .
It is time for the European Union and its Member States to adopt coherent positions in its relationship with Indonesia .
In particular we must make sure that the Union 's trade relations with ASEAN countries should be subjected to the respect of human rights and that Member States stop giving military assistance and selling weapons to Indonesia .
In recent public declarations , the impartial voice of the Bishop of Dili , Ximenes Belo , last year 's Nobel Peace Prizewinner , confirmed the worsening of the violations of human rights in Timor , referring even to cases of torture .
Madam President , although the Indonesian General Election is not due to take place until 29 May , which is a week today , the result is not in doubt .
For the sixth time since President Suharto seized power in 1965 the government-backed Golkar party will win and next year Parliament with other nominees will almost certainly reappoint President Suharto for a seventh five-year term .
The fact that 75 of the 500 members of parliament are appointed by the army shows some of the limits on democracy .
The freedom of the opposition parties contending for the remaining seats was demonstrated last June when Megawati Sukarnoputri , daughter of former President Sukarno was replaced through government action by Mr Suryadi of whom the government approved .
Other leading opposition figures such as Budiman and Bintang Pamungkas and trade union leaders like Dita Sari and Muchtar Pakpahan are serving long jail sentences under the Draconian anti-subversion law .
Some government opponents , like M.P. Sukatnu who recently died , have spent nearly 30 years in prison .
Having seen off the opposition , the government is able to implement policies to crush all dissent , whether in East Timor where a third of the population have died since the unlawful invasion of 1975 or elsewhere .
All this underlines the importance of the Council and Commission expressing the deepest concern about the ruthless means employed to suppress opposition everywhere and seeking to end the export of arms to Indonesia .
As a British Member , I am delighted at the desire voiced by the new British Foreign Secretary to give greater importance to human rights in foreign affairs and I hope we shall now end all deliveries from Europe of arms and the means of repression .
This resolution signals the desire of this Parliament to step up the pressure on the Indonesian authorities and we hope very much that the Council and the Commission will respond to our appeal .
Madam President , Indonesia is a big country with many cultures and a large population of nearly 200 million people , a growing economy and freedom of religion despite the fact that it is a Muslim country .
That is the bright side of the story .
Indonesia is a sad country which is wide open to criticism for its record on democracy and human rights .
That is the other side of the coin .
Democracy , there are soldiers in the government , there are soldiers in the parliament ; the miliary dominates and elections are manipulated .
Look at Mr Pakpahan and Mrs Soekarnoputri .
And as for Timor , Timor is Indonesia ' scandal .
Indonesia should never have allowed the situation in Timor to get out of hand like that .
It is right for us here in this House to draw attention to it .
It is right that we keep Indonesia to its promises on human rights and that we criticise where criticism is due .
There are good sides to Indonesia but it also has its pathetic sides and it is up to us , especially when considering human rights and the lack of democracy , to put our finger on this very sore spot .
That is what we are doing with this resolution and our group will vote in favour of it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has already , on many occasions , condemned the violation of human rights in Indonesia and , in particular , the situation in East Timor , and yet Indonesia has failed to alter its conduct , in clear disregard for the resolutions passed by the United Nations or the feelings of the international community .
The award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Bishop Ximenes Belo and Mr Ramos Horta sent out another alarm signal over violations of human rights in that territory .
Having the opportunity to look at photographic documents shown by Ramos Horta in the European Parliament during his official visit three weeks ago , I was able to see for myself that , apart from thousands of deaths , arbitrary imprisonment and the already recognised persecutions , vicious torture is also carried out , sometimes resulting in death , using medieval methods , on Timorese citizens who only want to defend their culture , identity and autonomy .
Therefore , we feel it is urgent that the European Union should become aware of this reality and put an end to its action , which at the very least is ambiguous .
How can we understand that when it comes to Vietnam , for example , European cooperation is linked to the respect of human rights and yet the same requisite is ignored when we deal with the bigger ASEAN countries ?
How can we understand that , in the case of small countries , such as Togo or Equatorial Guinea we have ( rightly ) suspended aid and cooperation because of alleged violations of human rights and yet we pass over the same sacred principle when dealing with major countries where larger trade and economic interests are at stake ?
Where is the coherence in this ?
In approving this motion for a resolution , the European Parliament can lend dignity to the values which are part and parcel of our cultural and political heritage .
Vietnam :
Madam President , the Republic of Vietnam is in the process of transition , as we all know .
This is a painful process and involves significant economic restructuring .
It is crucial that , in the process , human rights are respected .
We are very concerned about the reports we have received in relation to imprisonment of religious leaders of the United Buddhist Church , despite constitutional guarantees of religious freedom .
I also note with deep regret that just yesterday a Vietnamese court sentenced eight people to death for drug offences ; eleven people have already been sentenced to death this year .
I call on the Vietnamese authorities to release all political and religious prisoners and I am asking the government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the elections which will take place in July are free and fair .
In Parliament , as you probably know , we are currently considering a protocol to extend the EU-ASEAN Agreement to Vietnam .
I am involved in that for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
Some people will say that Vietnam is being singled out on its human rights record and that the other ASEAN members are free from this kind of human rights conditionality .
However , we must be committed to an end to human rights abuses in the whole region and should not lessen our criticisms of one country because of our approach to others .
On the contrary , I believe that this differential treatment should be a spur to the Council to renegotiate our cooperation agreement with ASEAN .
This is the only way to ensure that the fulfilment of basic human rights becomes an indispensable aspect of our cooperation , not only with the Republic of Vietnam but with all the countries of the region .
I am very pleased that the Commission has raised the human rights question with the Vietnamese authorities and I should like an assurance today from Commissioner Van den Broek that , on behalf of the Commission , he will maintain this approach .
Madam President , eager for foreign investment Vietnam has signed a cooperation agreement with Europe and did so last year .
Since then we have noted that human rights and democratic principles underlying that agreement are being cheerfully violated .
Against a background of general corruption affecting every level of power , the Vietnamese government continues to restrict civil liberties and to violate human rights .
The press is totally controlled by the authorities , hundreds of journalists have been sacked , banned from writing or arrested and imprisoned in camps .
To crown this , a huge campaign has been launched to control information coming from abroad , on the pretext of fighting negative foreign influence .
This wave of harassment continued last month when it was directed against dissident writers and defenders of human rights .
There is a systematic policy of religious repression .
This is an intolerable situation .
Vietnam must honour the commitments it undertook and the Council and the Commission are called upon to remind it that the defence of human rights is a priority in our relations as well as in the context of the review of the agreements between the European Union and ASEAN .
Situation of children in central and eastern Europe :
Madam President , anyone looking at the situation in central and eastern Europe is struck by the particularly sad fate of the most vulnerable sections of the population .
Through the activities of our own people and their organisations we know the fate of abandoned children who are taken to orphanages and the like , often in appalling conditions and we can only be glad that church and NGO organisations in particular are doing so much to adopt that kind of refuge .
In the resolution we are tabling we want to stress that it is good for the Commission in its own policy to encourage appropriate organisations to do that work .
We have added the fate of the elderly to the resolution .
Children catch everyone 's imagination , but the fate of the elderly , the old and infirm , the old and mentally ill , does not so easily catch public attention .
Yet that is precisely the kind of group we must care for , the elderly who are often locked away with the mentally ill with hardly a soul to take care of them .
In supporting this resolution I want to say that the European Community will do excellent work not merely in the economic and legal field but will also have a very encouraging social policy in that organisations which take pity on the defenceless people over there , children , the elderly , psychiatric patients , will also get the necessary back-up from the European Commission , particularly through a possible PHARE programme and services that we have over there .
I regret I shall be unable to hear the Commissioner 's reply , for which I apologise ; I shall be very interested to read it in the verbatim report .
Madam President , the present situation of children in central and eastern Europe demands our urgent attention .
I myself was recently in Rumania where I saw with my own eyes the appalling conditions in which the street children of Bucharest live , for example .
The recent UNICEF report also paints a serious picture .
The changes in central and eastern Europe have not brought any great improvement to the dreadful conditions in which some children had lived under the communist system .
The UNICEF report indicates that in many cases the situation has even got worse .
There are statistics in the report on a rise in crime , alcohol addiction and suicides among young people .
That is one of the results of the high social and economic costs paid for the transition , weak groups in society such as children are always the ones to suffer here .
On the other hand it is also the result of this problem admittedly being recognised by the governments on the spot but in practice being put low down on the agenda .
That must change and change quickly .
The European Union must together with the governments in central and eastern Europe give priority to improving the living conditions of these children .
To bring about such an improvement money must be made available in the short term .
Government attempts to tackle the situation must be supported by all sides , such as the measures taken recently by the Rumanian government to give better protection to children 's rights in Rumania , for example .
This must be followed up in practice .
In a word , everything must be done to improve the fate of children in central and eastern Europe .
Let us never forget that they are the future of Europe , not only of their Europe but of our Europe .
Investing in them is also investing in the future of Europe .
I hope that the Commission and other responsible bodies in Europe will undertake something on the basis of this present resolution and that we in this House will continue to follow developments concerning children in central and eastern Europe .
Isik Yurtça :
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of respect for human rights , respect for freedom of the Press and the free movement of ideas in Turkey , has now become pressing and dramatic .
According to information from the Union of European Journalists , and from the Turkish Union of Journalists , 78 of their colleagues are still held in Turkish prisons while new arrests take place every day , with confiscations of newspapers , closure of television and radio stations , assaults on journalists , and police raids and arson attacks against newspaper offices .
A very characteristic instance is the case of the journalist Isik Yurçu , who from his prison has made a dramatic appeal for his release : ' Why are you behaving ' , he asks us , ' as if I did not exist ? For 26 years I have exercised no profession other than journalism ' .
Isik Yurçu is 52 years old , a Turkish citizen who was unlucky enough to be the Chief Editor of the pro-Kurdish paper Özgür Günden whose publication was banned in January 1994 .
For his articles in that paper he was sentenced to imprisonment for 14 years and 10 months . He has already spent 28 months in prison under very unpleasant conditions , with serious consequences for his physical and mental health .
His colleagues describe him as a journalist with integrity , who never exploited his profession for personal gain .
From time to time he has been awarded many professional prizes by the Turkish Press Council , by the Union of Turkish Journalists , by the Association of Journalists in Ankara , while Journalists Without Frontiers have begun a campaign for his immediate release .
In 1996 , with three other colleagues , he was proclaimed ' Journalist of the Year ' .
The Union of European Journalists declared 3 May 1997 as a day of action for his release .
Granted its sensitivity towards issues related to human rights and democratic liberties , the European Parliament must today call for the immediate release of Isik Yurçu and all imprisoned Turkish journalists .
It should also make it clear once more to the Turkish government that persecution against the Press and violations of human rights create very serious obstacles to its accession to the European Union .
Madam President , we have been discussing violations of human rights in Turkey nearly every month , although we had hoped the situation might improve .
In this context let me refer you in particular to the resolution of 13 December 1995 on the situation of human rights in Turkey that we adopted here , because at that time we had expected that the customs union might lead to improvements in the political situation .
This did not happen .
I think we have to draw the appropriate political conclusions .
I was in Turkey early last week .
A conference was being held there on organized crime and just as it was taking place a television transmitter was attacked by police or paramilitary forces .
This created a great stir in Turkey and was further evidence that there is no media freedom there .
The background to this story was a report on drugs and on a drugs deal involving the name of Mrs Ciller , which suggests close contacts here with organized crime in Turkey ; so we have to ask what policy the European Union is pursuing here .
The reason for today 's discussion is the award of the prize for journalism to Isik Yurtøu , who was condemned to 15 years in prison , and I think the way human rights are being violated there should really spur us on to fight for the release of this journalist , for he has committed no crime .
Famine in North Korea :
Madam President , it is simply intolerable for the whole world to stand by and watch the people of North Korea starve to death while UNICEF keeps appealing for aid .
It is a matter of hundreds of people a day !
Soon it will be thousands and tens of thousands .
We have just given money for the victims of the earthquake in Iran without further discussion even though it is a richer country .
Here we do nothing !
It is not the fault of the children , the old and the infirm that they are ruled by a communist regime , without much democracy .
Normally , under similar circumstances , we give money to other countries that are not ruled democratically .
We must remember that we , the EU , are in fact involved in a project in North Korea .
We are supporting the construction of 2000 megawatt nuclear reactors to the tune of ECU 75 million .
The money is going to a country where the people are eating grass , are starving , to a country that has refused to sign the ban on chemical weapons , which is ruled by a military dictatorship , which has no infrastructure , no industry at all .
And we spend ECU 75 million on that !
We have a reserve of ECU 10 million .
I would like us to use that money to give immediate help to the people there , especially the children .
It really is a scandal for any civilized country just to stand by and watch even though it knows the extent of the misery in that country .
The FAO says that we need another $ 14.5 million to establish programmes to help North Korea to grow seed crops that will produce some kind of harvest for them again .
So I ask you to endorse my group 's motion , for we owe this to the people there , especially to the children !
Madam President , I must say that the famine in Korea referred to in the motion for a resolution is nothing new and that we have been hearing about the floods out there again and again .
I support the calls that we should mobilize more aid .
But on behalf of my group I would say that we should not confuse the issues here , for I believe that the question of industrial policy , of establishing industrial plant , including the construction of a nuclear power station , belongs under a different heading .
What I miss in this urgency is a reference to the responsibility of the North Korean government .
We believe that good government is always a factor of development , which we must take into account , given that we also call for democratization and suchlike in other contexts .
So we will endorse the motion for a resolution subject to the appropriate amendments .
Madam President , three very brief points .
Of course , we approve of humanitarian action and the urgent need for it .
But I think we should also insist on the visibility of the European Union in this humanitarian action .
This aid must not be used later on by the North Korean government for propaganda purposes as has been the case in the past .
At the same time , the European Union must ask the North Korean government what type of reforms it intends to enact and when .
Finally , we must turn towards a central actor in this part of the world .
I think that the Commission and the Council should put pressure on China , which is able to exert considerable influence on the North Korean regime , to unblock the situation so that finally this country , which is the most backward communist country in the world , should undertake reforms .
Action must be taken and urgently .
Madam President , the motion for a resolution on the famine in North Korea tabled by the Green Group of the European Parliament is a bizarre document .
Bizarre because the only accurate thing in it is the description of the famine which is hitting about half of the nearly 23 million people there .
I fear that this resolution has gone off in the totally wrong direction .
All in all the Green Group limits itself to criticising America -although America is prepared to send in dozens of tons of food aid .
Furthermore the motion for a resolution respectfully talks about the ' government of North Korea which reports about starving children ' .
Not one single word in the motion on those who are really responsible for the famine , namely the stalinist regime of Kim Jong-il that apparently still curries favour with the Green Group .
Kim Jong-il himself is not suffering from starvation , still less his brother who is ambassador to Finland , or his sister the vice-director of the central committee of the CP , or his nieces and nephews and the whole family who all hold positions of power in the regime .
Not one single word either on the two hundred thousand political prisoners who are literally rotting at this very moment in North Korea .
Not a word on the fact that the devastating floods were not the real reason for the famine but the real reasons is solely the dominant suffering caused by 52 years of stalinist dictatorship .
Not a word on the fact that the financial involvement of the United States and perhaps of Europe in building two light water reactors - financial involvement that was strongly criticised by the Greens - was aimed at replacing two old unsafe nuclear power stations that were only used in practice to provide the regime with plutonium for military purposes .
In a word , I fear that the Green Group is proving somewhat late in the day that is an uncritical defender of a monstrous regime .
Madam President , I totally reject the suggestion that I defer to or in any other way sympathize with a communist system .
I think it is outrageous .
I and my family suffered serious persecution by the communist system .
I totally reject that !
It is quite impudent !
Just because I did not list all the crimes that were perpetrated there .
They would have filled a whole book .
In a moment I will be telling you about all the other Western-oriented countries where similar things happen .
If you would only read our motion for a resolution more carefully , you would not make such outrageous insinuations , if I may make myself quite clear !
Let it be quite clear to everybody here : I have nothing to do either with dictatorships or with communist systems !
You are insinuating this just because I am a member of the Greens .
Madam President , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz is apparently accusing me of being unable to read , but I can indeed read very well .
I am reading the text of the motion for a resolution which does not contain the slightest criticism of a government , she does not even call it a dictatorship , but the government of North Korea which does not attract the least censure in the Greens ' resolution and which in my view is at the root of what is unfortunately happening in North Korea .
Madam President , the Commission keeps referring to its social and ecological responsibilities and giving top priority to respect for human rights in its international agreements .
But when it comes to practical support , sadly there is little evidence of this .
One example is the rugmark label , supposedly a model of social regulation in rug production . Rugmark could be a real means of eliminating child labour , and in particular of offering the children concerned alternatives .
Germany supports this initiative yet the Commission is refusing to finance it , producing rather threadbare arguments .
Too many lobbyists from certain countries and certain undertakings probably visit the Commission offices rather too often .
What we want is quite simple : throw the lobbyists out of the Commission offices !
Initiatives such as the Rugmark and the Clean Clothes campaigns must be given adequate support !
The Commission should grant additional tariff preferences to countries which comply with the fundamental ILO conventions .
It should support existing efforts to eliminate child labour and set up its own aid programmes .
So we firmly support the motion for a resolution .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen . Time and time again the European Parliament has called for social clauses to be included in international trade agreements .
Not because we want to protect the economies of Europe at all costs , but because we are convinced that liberalising world trade needs some basic rules of decency , both in the social and ecological field as well as in the fiscal field .
But unfortunately once again we see that absolutely nothing happened at the Singapore summit about including social clauses in trade agreements .
The ILO was packed off home with a pat on the back and permission to deal with this issue .
We must continue to protect against this kind of attitude and I think that we should give our full support to the new initiative developed by the International Labour Organisation which called for a code of behaviour for all countries to stick to basic social rules on banning child labour , forced labour , the right to association , the right to organisation and a ban on discrimination .
I think that the European Union must also act to support consumer actions .
There are already various organisations in all our countries , third world organisations that are not sitting back waiting for social clauses to appear one fine day from the world trade organisation .
I believe that these organisation deserve all our support .
We could , for example , start drawing up our own European code of behaviour , giving a label to those firms that are prepared to stick to basic rules of decency and organise monitoring them .
We should be giving much more support to these campaigns to show that the public is quite convinced it is possible to consume and remain moral at the same time .
And some firms should be confronted with their responsibility for the trade they organise in our countries .
That is why I welcome this motion for a resolution and I hope that it will be taken on board by Europe .
Madam President , my group was happy to be involved in tabling this motion for a resolution .
In my capacity as rapporteur I myself was responsible for introducing the social clause into the preferential system and it was on that basis that we were able to tackle Burma about lifting the system .
You can indeed force changes .
Despite that we must admit that these social clauses are often ineffective and that is why the proposal from a number of NGOs to introduce fair trade labels is really very interesting .
It would appear that a fair number of consumers are also in favour , as are sales organisations .
It would seem to be a useful idea .
It looks as if we will be seeing more of this kind of fair trade label and that is why I would call on the Commission not merely to aid the NGOs but perhaps even to take the initiative to introduce a European regulation for this kind of label .
Madam President , Mr Van den Broek , on lobby organisations , it might be a good idea to take the resolutions passed this week by this Parliament on regulating lobby organisations as an example which could be followed in the Commission , thereby helping and protecting the Commission services as we ourselves are currently doing .
Madam President , this subject - a subject on which , of course , our group supported and endorsed the urgent motion for a resolution - is an underestimated problem , a tragic problem to which the commercial aspect of clothing and footwear alone is closely linked .
The problem of the exploitation of children 's and women 's labour cannot , clearly , be exclusively associated with clothes , clothing textiles and footwear .
There are countless other sectors - mention has already been made of carpets and food - in which , sadly , there is massive exploitation of women 's and , I again stress , children 's labour .
This is why our group has supported this motion and attaches special importance to it .
We ask that this social labelling should be given real status to enable it to tackle a problem which is underestimated but whose present and future scale may , in the course of the social development of third countries , result in a disruption of the global equilibrium .
A child who , today , is allowed neither the time nor the circumstances to be a child - to play , study and grow up with other children and his own family - will sooner or later become a dissatisfied adult , perhaps a violent one , one who robs and kills ...
We cannot allow this situation to exist : we must do everything in our power to prevent it .
So let us say yes to social labelling , but let us also encourage the development of fair and balanced trade , extending to all other economic and social sectors .
These are subjects on which are group will always be willing to offer maximum support .
Madam President , the world-wide fight against child labour is showing its first signs of success . The work of the Rugmark Foundation in India and Nepal , which we in the SARC delegation of the European Parliament are following with particular interest , is a successful initiative .
But let me tell the European Commission that it and the Clean Clothes campaign need more than words of support , they need special aid .
As before , there is still a great need for action .
Measures to prevent the exploitation of women and children are in no way interference in the affairs of sovereign states and they certainly do not reflect what is called a Western perspective .
On the contrary , we need a worldwide internal policy to help establish human rights .
The world-wide ban on child labour needs to be supplemented by further practical measures to ensure that families are prepared to help support the fight against child labour .
Education and training for young people , the appointment of qualified teachers and adequate pay , village cooperation , the creation of trade and craft networks , active local awareness-raising measures and support for the NGOs ' work .
That is how to help families to secure themselves and their children a life of dignity .
Kenya :
Madam President , this is a good time for us to debate this issue because there is a serious escalation in human rights problems in Kenya and there will be an election there in December .
So it is very timely that we should now lay down a marker in this Parliament , because there is no point in doing this in November , or indeed December , when everybody will be aware of the very serious situation .
We must use our influence how and when we can .
Most people here will be aware of the increasing criticism , both nationally and internationally .
In January , an Irish Christian Brother , Father Larry Timmons , was killed by the police , having attempted to speak out against the corruption and irregularities associated with the distribution of ID cards for the forthcoming election .
This was not an isolated incident .
In fact , the pattern of harassment of human rights activists and opposition figures and church personnel has reached alarming levels .
There are a number of church-based groups which are under serious threat because of their work in support for justice and peace .
Many Irish missionaries are involved in this work .
In the light of recent reports , there is great fear for the safety of these people and the people with whom they work .
The local bishop , who is the chairman of the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission , recently said , and it is very telling : ' what we are experiencing at the moment is a reign of tyranny and oppression that surpasses anything that we have encountered in the days of oneparty rule . '
So we in this Parliament must use every means at our disposal to highlight this situation and put pressure on the Kenyan authorities to see whether they will respect basic human rights .
In particular , I would appeal for a guarantee for the safety of church personnel .
I just wish to finish by saying that I understand that the GUE Group has tabled an amendment to paragraph 5 .
I am wondering whether this is entirely necessary , because all we are looking for there is for aid to the government to be suspended , not aid to NGOs , for humanitarian reasons .
This was very effective in the past - in 1992 , for instance , because of the threat of aid cuts the President agreed to a multiparty system - so perhaps we could add the GUE Group amendment as an addendum .
Madam President , this motion for a resolution calls on the government to take stronger action against gangs and other criminal elements .
This certainly needs stressing , but we must also consider the extent to which a government is capable of doing so .
Without wanting to qualify that information , however , we have also heard it said that the government definitely wants to make efforts in that direction .
And we should not forget that Kenya was the point of departure and logistical basis for many measures , including EU ones , in the Great Lakes area .
I would therefore ask the Commission perhaps not to freeze everything across the board , but to take a selective approach and to start up a few projects so that we then still have a chance to go further .
Nor should we forget that without Nairobi airport , we would have faced very very great difficulties in carrying out certain measures .
Madam President , I would like to thank Members of the House for their contribution to what always seems to be an indictment of the widespread infringement of human rights in the world .
Indictments in an area where this European Parliament also has a reputation and the Commission will certainly continue to encourage Parliament to follow closely the situation of human rights just as the Commission itself tries to do .
To begin with Indonesia , where there have been regular and repeated statements , demarches and protests that the human rights situation is far from satisfactory .
The case highlighted here this afternoon of the arrest of trades union leader Pakpahan and his state of health is yet another example which justifies our concern about human rights in Indonesia , and the condemnation of Mr Pakpahan and the fact that he was arrested as a member of the International Labour Organisation shows clearly the disrespect for trades union rights in Indonesia .
East Timor has long been on the European agenda where the European Union has on various occasions been , and still is , highly critical , even although we also have the duty to try to support attempts at a peaceful political solution .
The Commission closely followed recent political developments in Indonesia and will take further demarches with the Indonesian government with a view to the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The Commission can certainly agree with what has been said about the pending elections and the organisation of the same .
In our talks with the Indonesian authorities we also stressed the need for free and fair elections .
Much has been made about relations with Vietnam and undoubtedly the human rights situation there leaves much to be desired ; many reports indicate that we still have the phenomenon of political prisoners in Vietnam .
The Commission agrees with this House that the conditions of detention for political prisoners and prisoners of conscience are severe and must be improved .
We also wonder whether such an improvement could not be stimulated for example by the human rights work group of the United Nations and the human rights working groups or delegations of the European Union visiting the prisoners there , although the Vietnamese authorities will have to be asked for their cooperation .
That could be a specific move to improve the situation .
With reference to Vietnam and other countries mentioned today , the question arises as to whether more effective , perhaps economic pressures could be used to improve the situation .
In general terms I want to say that I fully understand , as does the Commission , that such a request is often made to the Commission in cases such as Vietnam .
I remember signing myself the trade and cooperation agreement with Vietnam which in itself was a new beginning in our relations with Vietnam and which included human rights clauses ; these clauses were indeed used to justify the human rights dialogue with the governments .
I myself believe , although you cannot automatically transplant one human rights situation to another country and each situation must reflect national differences , that even when improvements are very slow to come one must show a certain circumspection when considering breaking off economic relations which have been built up slowly and which are aimed first and foremost at improving the social and economic development of the people in a country such as Vietnam .
That aspect must also be borne in mind .
I now move on to children and vulnerable groups in central and eastern Europe , an equally important subject , and the Commission is very aware of the position of the most defenceless groups there .
Under PHARE we have the LEAN programme which since its instigation has financed about 107 projects with a budget of ECU 35 million for aid to invalids , the elderly , children , victims of Aids , minority groups and the unemployed , all groups to which Mr Oostlander drew specific attention .
And then there is the consensus programme which aids the reform of social protection systems , including social and family benefit .
Then there are other instruments more specifically aimed at the national situation , such as the child protection programme in Rumania which has been in operation since 1992 , the programme for social emergency aid in Bulgaria which Parliament already debated and which offers income support to poor families and direct financial aid to some psychiatric institutions , and we are familiar with the situation in those institutions in that country .
At the same time we are making preparations for countries applying for membership of the European Union to have access to community programmes dealing with promoting family care , combatting cancer , drug addiction , programmes for equal opportunities for men and women .
The new PHARE guidelines , on which the Commission made a communication to the Parliament , offer us a framework to continue actions in these spheres , particularly reinforcing government services on this point and reinforcing the social security systems .
In this way the European Union naturally intends to create the conditions for a smoother integration of these countries into the European Union .
We are very familiar with the fate of the Turkish journalist Mr Yurtçu whom the Turkish courts have condemned several times since 1995 under the anti-terrorism law and the Penal Code .
We should take the time needed for an exchange of views on the human rights situation in Turkey and then together conclude , I believe , that despite our best endeavours , the pressure we have exerted and the signals we have sent out to Ankara , the situation gives cause for concern to both Parliament and the Commission and Council , and that in any event we must remain on the alert .
That is the critical side of the matter .
Perhaps the encouraging side is that the famous Article 8 of the anti-terrorism law has been applied , under pressure from this House among others , which led to the release of a very large number of journalists , writers and other people , more than 150 if I am not mistaken , who had been imprisoned for infringing the provisions of freedom of expression .
You know that we have very regular contact with Ankara on a number of matters , be they the customs union , Cyprus , bilateral relations with Greece or the Kurdish problem , and we always talk about the human rights situation ; we continue to encourage new legislation , improvement of the situation especially in prisons , to put an end to torture in police stations and the like .
I would just like to reassure the House , Madam President , that as far as the Commission is concerned we shall continue to encourage improvements on the spot .
Madam President , over the last two years the European Commission has contributed ECU ten million to humanitarian aid to North Korea .
In March 1997 , a few months ago , a well prepared assessment team made an inventory of essential needs of the people .
The results of that assessment team will enable the Commission to make the most of its strategy for humanitarian intervention in North Korea .
We are currently preparing a coordinated aid programme for both food aid and public health assistance .
We should like to take this opportunity of pointing out that not only is the UN willing to organise aid to North Korea but that a large number of European NGOs have also shown interest in contributing to that aid .
But there can be no doubt that the North Korean authorities must show greater flexibility so that the delivery of humanitarian aid can proceed more smoothly .
For as it now stands that aid is subject to a number of both practical and administrative restrictions .
At any rate the Commission will do everything in its power , despite the many problems , to provide the people of North Korea with humanitarian assistance .
I do not intend to take up what Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz said , but since I know that the nuclear power stations are often the subject of debate the European Parliament I must say that the Union 's contribution is primarily aimed at making nuclear power stations safe , which would otherwise not happen , and also tackling the problem of proliferation .
I think that the combined efforts with Japan and the United States is justified .
The ' Clean Clothes ' campaign which is currently under way in various European countries is not strange in itself .
Over the last few months more of this kind of initiative have been started to make consumers aware of the social conditions under which the clothes they are buying are made .
As you know the Commission totally and unequivocally supports the promotion of basic social rights .
In the Commission communication on the link between trade system and international labour standards , as it is called , the Commission underlines the need to promote basic labour standards , such as the ban on forced labour and the abolition of child labour .
This objective is included in the European Union 's system of general preferences which stipulates that additional advantages may be granted to countries that actually apply the specific ILO agreements in the form of positive action to encourage respect of those rules .
The Commission will soon - and this also answers a question put this afternoon - be submitting a draft directive laying down the implementation modalities , especially procedures for monitoring and cooperating with government authorities of the favoured countries .
On the particular initiatives on social labelling the Commission acknowledges an increase in initiatives in the above-mentioned communication and stresses the importance of the rules of the World Trade Organisation which can , however , be misused for protectionist purposes .
Furthermore these initiatives , if they are to be credible , must also have built-in guarantees on monitoring to prevent fraud with this labelling .
We consider it essential for international trade that these regulations are respected and monitoring procedures are strict and effective , but the Commission does not yet have sufficient information on them .
I am incidentally aware of the discussion on labelling or the Rugmark label and the like .
I think that the situation is far less clear than today 's debate in the House would suggest and I know that there are also reservations about the strictness , reliability and protection against fraud of the system .
And finally Kenya .
There too the European Commission is keeping a close eye on the political situation and the human rights situation under the framework of general cooperation with that country .
We are totally ad idem with Parliament that everything should be done to avoid the human rights situation deteriorating further .
The Commission is seizing every opportunity in close cooperation with the Member States of the Union to make the Kenyan government realise the importance the Commission attaches to the fact that development policy and cooperation are closely linked to respect for basic human rights .
Commissioner Pinheiro took this message to the Kenyan authorities during his visit to Kenya at the beginning of this year .
The Commission , like Parliament , regrets the recent brutal action from the police against members of the opposition and human right activists .
The Commission calls on all Kenyans to strive towards peace and conciliation in their country so that the 1997 elections can be prepared and held in freedom and fairness and we do not witness a re-run of the wave of violence during the 1992 elections .
I do not need to say that we shall closely follow both the preparations and the holding of the elections .
The Commission appreciates that in a closer investigation of one of the attacks on the clergy - to which Mrs Malone referred - where the Irish Franciscan Timmons was killed , a suspect has been brought to the Kenyan court and accused of murder .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the motion for a resolution ( B4-0359 / 97 ) by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on discriminatory measures taken by China against Denmark and the Netherlands for tabling a resolution denouncing human rights violations in China during the 53rd session of the UN Human Rights Commission .
Madam President , democracy and respect for human rights are extremely important to the Liberal Group .
My group regrets the attitude of some EU Member States which prevented a motion for a resolution being tabled on behalf of the Union .
That detracts from the Union 's credibility and plays right into China 's hand .
The countries that did support a resolution against China , Denmark and the Netherlands , have been punished with economic sanctions .
The Netherlands acted as President of the Union .
Whoever speaks on behalf of the Union apparently is also punished on behalf of the Union .
The French President Chirac said last month that the unity of Europe can make Europe the strongest power in the world .
Unity ?
Did Chirac mean by that the opportunistic attitude of France in Geneva ?
I saw on this morning 's television that Chirac was welcomed in China as a friend .
The Dutch minister was not welcome last week and China was laughing up its sleeve .
Madam President , trade and politics are two separate matters according to China .
In that light the economic sanctions meted out by China are unacceptable and obstruct China 's prompt accession to the WTO .
I urge the Commission to make this clear in its relations with China .
Madam President , I welcome what the previous speaker , our colleague from the Netherlands , has just said .
I think that the motion for a resolution before us today needs no words of explanation .
Everyone believes it important to continue to raise the issue of infringements of human rights in China .
Everyone is in favour of European cooperation on that score .
But then when a country that has the Presidency and is supported by other countries tries to do something , the first problem is to get it through the Council , and if that does not happen then as in this case you find these two countries that stuck out their neck are punished by the country that ought to have been penalised by the European Union .
A truly ridiculous situation .
So quite apart from the fact that we must regret that the European Union has once again failed to speak with one voice on an important issue , it is even more ridiculous that two countries have to pay the price and that the European Union has to date given no indication of protesting strongly against that .
That is highly regrettable .
The whole Union must be asked to show solidarity with Denmark and the Netherlands who on this point at least have had the courage to stand up and be counted .
Madam President , I have no criticism to make of the Presidency or indeed the Commission in their attempt to try and get a resolution through the sub-committee in Geneva recently .
Clearly criticism can however be levelled at a number of Member States which did not stand by the concept of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
And there is a deeper problem : I have been given to understand that if the European Union did not press the United Nations sub-committee resolution in April , the Chinese would resume the human rights dialogue with the European Union which began on a bilateral basis in 1995 .
Only one meeting took place in 1996 .
Those meetings have now been suspended by the Chinese .
Therefore one can accuse the Chinese of bad faith .
I hope the Commission and the Council will put pressure on the Chinese - so far as they are able to do so - to resume the human rights dialogue , which will be a determinant of the EU 's overall attitude towards the Chinese People 's Republic .
Madam President , I must say that I was very surprised at the attitude of certain colleagues who mentioned a violation of human rights , over the policy pursued by the French , in particular by the French President .
These colleagues might have taken an interest in what was going on in France .
I must say , of course , that it is not possible to take an interest in everything , but President Chirac received at the Elysée Palace , before his departure for Beijing , a delegation of NGOs active in China , including Amnesty International and the International Human Rights Federation .
He stressed that he hoped to talk to his Chinese hosts about the question of human rights , and in particular asked for explanations about the case of prisoners of conscience and signing a political declaration including this vital aspect of France 's relations with China .
I think that the attitude of the colleagues in question is verging on hypocrisy and bad faith , and our group is extremely astonished by that .
I should like simply to recall the political determination and action by the French President on behalf of human rights , faithful to France 's tradition .
They are recognised by everyone and it is certainly not a few unfounded remarks - made by colleagues in order to help some of their French partners in difficulties in the election campaign - that will change the desire for an open and frank dialogue with China in France and several other European countries - or even countries elsewhere in the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , the EU has a common commercial policy .
We must therefore insist that China 's discrimination against Denmark and the Netherlands is regarded as an attack on the EU as a whole , and is replied to as such .
It is after all the basic principle of the EU that both large and small nations should be able to speak freely here about tyranny and injustice , even when this involves a large and powerful country such as China .
If China succeeds in bullying and intimidating the European countries one by one so that they bow their heads in silence , then that will be a step backwards for human rights in the world .
When Denmark tabled the resolution in Geneva , our country only did what common decency dictates .
We expressed criticism , at the right time and in the right place , of the notorious injustices which are taking place , as the EU countries have done together year after year since 1990 , and it was not our fault that there were some who did not wish to join in this time .
The greatest enemy of peace and freedom is the policy of intimidation , which buys short-term peace at the expense of truth and justice .
Thank you Mr President . As long as trade policy still takes precedence over human rights , then you can say in general terms that this kind of conflict will keep on arising ; in this case a few countries reacted firmly and the Netherlands tried on behalf of the whole Union to tackle China on human rights ; some countries were very conspicuous by their absence thus ensuring that Europe was divided .
Now in all honesty we must admit that when the Netherlands did not yet have the Presidency of the European Union , Minister Van Mierlo once visited China to get landing rights for KLM at Peking airport and on that occasion Mr Van Mierlo said that the European Union must champion human rights and that we would take care of trade policy ourselves .
Now we do indeed have a common trade policy and I think it therefore logical that both human rights and trade should be taken together in the European Union and Member States not be allowed to be played off against each other .
But we surely cannot allow Mr Pompidou to gloss over the French government 's behaviour and claim that they did consult the NGOs .
That does not service the purpose of human rights in China , we need more than that , we need to use our trade policy as well .
Mr President , nor do I believe , Mr Pompidou , that it is in receiving a handful of NGOs that France will wash itself of the double shame of Geneva .
What it did in Geneva was to comfort the policy defended by the Chinese government to prove that it is possible to develop without democracy .
The other shame was to undermine the beginning of a common policy on foreign affairs which the European Union has had such difficulty in trying to set up .
This is serious , and President Chirac 's trip to China today does nothing to reverse that .
It is not referring to one or two dissidents that the situation is going to be changed .
He has put a spanner in the European works .
He has given comfort to the shameful Chinese government which imprisons hundreds of thousands of people every day .
Mr President , it would be a very serious matter if the European Union were to fail to demonstrate solidarity and support in the political and commercial dispute which has sprung up between the People 's Republic of China on the one hand and certain Member States - Denmark , Ireland and the Netherlands - on the other .
Indeed , if that were to happen it would be further proof that there is no such thing as a political Europe , and that Europe is incapable of co-ordinating its actions at international level .
It is already serious enough that , at the United Nations , only those few Member States have voted in favour of a resolution condemning the human rights violations in China , while other Member States , such as France , Germany , Spain , Greece and leftist Italy , in a further demonstration that Europe is an economic and commercial entity rather than a political one , cynically decided that they could not support that motion .
Alleanza Nazionale believes that in the circumstances the European Union must reply with a single voice to the blackmail by the Leninist nomenklatura that governs China and that it must not only express total solidarity with those Member States threatened with trade reprisals but also reconsider the various arrangements for trade with China .
This would be an extremely important precedent , protecting Europe as a whole against threats and blackmail and enabling it to project itself as a unified international political entity .
Mr President , I can certainly support what most of my colleagues have said .
I am convinced that any President of the Council could have been proud to receive any NGO if the European Union had acted in unison here and that the NGOs would have been just as happy to visit any national president if they had known that the European Union had spoken with one voice .
We cannot repeat that often enough .
How else are we to show our citizens that a common foreign policy is something that really has to be fought for ?
We as the European Parliament can only point to the weaknesses that have become apparent .
I said the other day that I would rather be a Member of Parliament than a diplomat , for last year in Geneva I saw how hard European diplomacy struggled to get precisely this human rights resolution on the agenda , which of course it has not managed this year because of its lack of unity .
So in future we really should think of the citizens and be united and then we will also achieve more in China .
Mr President , the resolution supporting Denmark and the Netherlands against China 's blackmail actually tallies well with the stance of Parliament , which has constantly underlined that we cannot use two yardsticks in human rights questions .
So let me point out that during the last plenary partsession our Parliament condemned China for its serious human rights violations in East Turkestan and thus set an example of honesty and genuine representation of the people , which sadly neither the United Nations nor the EU as a whole , given that it is represented only by government representatives , has managed to do .
Denmark in particular deserves our strong solidarity , for we must never forget that by recognizing the Baltic states against all opposition that country made an enormous contribution to the decolonization of the former Soviet Union .
Today Jacques Chirac is going to China and in the run-up to that visit he spoke of a global partnership with China .
I can only hope that not just China but Denmark , the Netherlands and Ireland will also be given their due place in that partnership .
Mr President , the Commission agrees with much of what has been said this afternoon on the situation as a result of the failure of the resolution in the UN human rights commission in Geneva .
Let there be no misunderstanding on the need to make China understand that there is no question of discriminating against Member States of the European Community on human rights policy .
I hope that President Chirac will use his visit to China to convey this message in a manner which is in keeping with the respect of the Chinese people , as they like to say in Peking .
But , Mr President , the European Union and its Member States must at the same time understand that the best guarantee for preventing this kind of situation and for countering this discrimination is a unity of decision-making within the European Union itself .
The other countries will not be given the opportunity to look for ' victims ' in this way .
It is also a lack of unity that prevents us from implementing an effective human rights policy .
Mr President , in conclusion I believe that we can certainly learn the lesson here that the time has come for the European Union to review its policy towards China in the area of human rights and to seek the most effective instrument for Europe .
But to keep on year in year out , for seven or eight years at a stretch , tabling the same motion for a resolution which in many cases is not even adopted , threatens to prove counterproductive .
Mr President , while the resolution is correct and proper , it has omitted to include Ireland .
Ireland was also a party to the resolution and I think we would need to put in an oral amendment , if this is agreeable , to include Ireland also .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
VOTES
Ladies and gentlemen , the next item is the vote on the report ( A4-0168 / 97 ) by Mrs Rothe , on behalf of the Committee on research , Technological development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission : Energy for the future : renewable sources of energy - Green paper for a Community strategy ( COM ( 96 ) 0576 - C4-0623 / 96 )
You have the floor , Mr Papoutsis .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur Mrs Rothe for the excellent report she has presented , and also to thank the rapporteurs Mr Schierhuber on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Mr Kronberger on behalf of the Committee on the Environment .


Ladies and gentlemen , I think we all agree with the report by Mrs Rothe , that new impetus should be given to the sector of renewable energy sources .
With the report Parliament is to vote on today , we are providing a range of measures which - taken together - merit particular and careful consideration , and I must say that while I would really like to deal analytically with each of those proposals , unfortunately because of the very limited time and the special procedure we are following today - and I thank the Bureau for this - , I must limit myself only to very brief comments .
First of all , on behalf of the European Commission , I would like to make a commitment to you concerning the following aim : to face the great challenge of producing a White Paper on renewable energy sources and a programme of action for renewable forces , which I hope to be in a position to present to Parliament at the end of this year .
Within the scope of the White Paper on renewable sources , we will include all the proposals heard today during this morning 's debate , as well as all those that emerged during the civil dialogue still in progress today at European level on the basis of the Green Paper on renewable energy sources .
Let me , however , make three very brief comments :
First , I am particularly glad that the rapporteur Mrs Rothe agrees with the idea of establishing a quantitative target , a target , however , which must be both ambitious and realistic .
Secondly , I am especially glad to note that the rapporteur and very many of the honourable Members who spoke today agree with the European Commission that so far as the operation of the internal market is concerned , renewable sources of energy should be fully respected .
The internal energy market is now a reality .
In that context , then , there are many and various ways and means that can be used to promote renewable energy sources without distorting competition .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to another important point in the report : the subject of the future legal basis for the promotion of renewable energy sources .
I want to repeat , then , that I fully agree with your view concerning the need for a legal basis covering energy policy .
The proposal for a related order should in my opinion clearly stress the importance of renewable energy sources .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would once more like to thank the rapporteur warmly , as well as all Members of the European Parliament who contributed to the preparation of the draft report .
I also want to assure you that I will do all I can to ensure that the coming stages of this important procedure will lead to a positive change , to significant progress where renewable energy sources are concerned .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I give the floor to Mr Falconer .
Mr President , I just wish to rise because I spoke twice to Mr Martin this morning on the way he conducted the vote .
I can fully understand the way he conducted the business this morning given that the Greens had called for a roll-call vote on every paragraph and on every single amendment that was tabled .
I can understand his method of expediting the business of the Chamber .
However that is not the normal way we carry out our business .
Thank you , Mr Falconer , but I must tell you that although I am not all that good at conducting the vote , the part that I do well I learned from Mr Martin .

Mr President , thanks to the very flexible stance of one or your fellow vice-presidents my contribution to the debate has now had to become an explanation of vote .
You could call it a renewable contribution .
I fully supported the Rothe report for we must have a coordinated approach in Europe to renewable energy , not to do the work of the Member States but to ensure that their work can be applied most effectively .
Fossil fuels and uranium have seen their day .
We must change over quickly to sustainable sources so that the generations to come will not be faced with a crisis .
The prices of fossil fuels do not adequately take dwindling supplies into consideration .
External effects are equally inadequately incorporated into the prices . That is scandalous .
After the Commission 's Green Paper we should see a White Paper and an action plan to increase the share of sustainable sources in our energy supply .
Costs are an important aspect in the introduction of these sources .
Some form of subsidy will be needed .
That is why the existing community programmes for renewable energy should incorporate a financial statement .
Horizontal measures are also important .
The idea of tradeable green energy certificates is an attractive one .
This shows a commitment on the part of electricity producers voluntarily to generate a larger part of their production from renewable sources .
The Rothe report includes a large number of important ideas for the White Paper .
Renewable sources must form a substantial part of our energy supply .
They must become economically viable as quickly as possible in comparison with other sources .
That is why support measures for specific promising projects to be paid for by general funds must be temporary .
Renewable sources , more than fossil fuels , depend on regional circumstances .
This is valid not only for hydroelectric power stations but also tidal , solar and wind energy .
That must also be taken into consideration when dividing the costs of conversion .
De-centralised generation is perfectly possible in thinly populated localities such as the rural areas but incentives will have to be given .
My advice is to opt for a kind of burden sharing when Member States convert to renewable sources .
Countries with the best opportunities must be ' hit ' with the highest percentages for the renewable part of energy supply .
Common sense is not necessarily the most commonplace quality in the world .
An obvious fact : our society needs a lot of energy to meet all of its needs .
Another fact : the sources of energy used are either potentially hazardous or perishable .
At the same time , our energy needs will not diminish and alternatives must be found to existing energy sources .
The prospect : research has enabled us to find certain renewable sources of energy .
These now meet 6 % of current energy requirements in Europe .
If we apply common sense , these energy sources which can be used at will and do not pollute should be strongly developed .
That is the ambition of the Rothe report , and I wish to congratulate the rapporteur .
The European Parliament should therefore support the spirit of this report as defended by our colleague .
We should encourage research on renewable energies and call on the Council to set a minimum of 15 % towards renewable energy in the total energy budget .
We should also encourage industry and public investors to develop their production using these methods .
Once again , as in all areas , let us put people and safety at the centre of our priorities .
Let us develop energies which will ensure our security and protect the environment .
The French delegation of the EPP Group voted in favour of the Rothe report on the Commission Green Paper on renewable energy sources .
It is vital for the European Union to guarantee its energy independence by continuing to develop clean and renewable energy sources .
It is , therefore , regrettable that the adopted resolution should include paragraph 3 and recital C. Building a development strategy is not tantamount to a crusade against nuclear energy which nowadays supplies 35 % of the European Union 's energy needs while the Commission Green Paper considers on the basis of serious studies that the technical potential for developing renewable energies will not supply more than 15 % of our needs in the year 2020 .
The European Parliament would be fighting the wrong fight if it continued to pursue an ideological crusade disconnected from the real needs of European citizens .
It is possible to be in favour of nuclear energy and renewable energy at the same time : the Soulier and Rothe reports were complementary .
It is regrettable that the European Parliament , consulted for the first time , could not have shown more maturity on these capital subjects .
I think it is of great importance for the EU ( to the extent that it is able ) to actively promote increased use of renewable energy sources .
Unfortunately I have to say that I am not impressed by the work of the EU so far .
Instead of investing in environmentally sound areas , they do the opposite , and it is research into the nuclear energy sector , for example , which receives the most aid .
We must demand that nuclear power pays its own way .
The environment should itself be given an economic value .
This would further show the amount of money wasted on nuclear power and , in this way , renewable energy sources would become more important .
The promotion of renewable energy sources is important not just from an environmental point of view but also because it will lead to the creation of numerous jobs particularly in small companies and in rural areas .
It would also mean that society would be less vulnerable to catastrophes and errors as we would no longer be dependent on one source of energy .
I personally think that the EU must set an ambitious goal .
At the very least , we must increase the use of renewable energy sources as a proportion of total energy use by at least 30-35 percent before the year 2010 .
I think that the 15 percent level proposed in the report is too cautious .
If we are to live up to the goals of the Rio conference and create an ecologically sustainable society we must act decisively and vigorously .
A substantial investment in renewable energy sources is essential for a long term sustainable society .
This report is a first , but all too small , step towards this .
We also need a draft treaty in which non-sustainable energy sources such as nuclear power and fossil fuels are replaced with bio-energy and other renewable energy sources .
Research and development resources must be transferred from nuclear power and fossil fuels to bio energy and other renewable energy sources .
The EU can contribute to this development by abolishing the Euratom Treaty and introducing a new treaty on renewable energy resources .
The report hardly mentions the large renewable energy sources in the Scandinavian Countries , for example various forms of bio-energy , the forest , woodchips , pellets , peat and so on .
But the report is move in the right direction so I have voted in favour of it .
Having had to choose one of the reports on energy policy for my contribution , I opted for the Soulier report .
But I have to mention , in passing , the importance that I attach to the Rothe report , too , given its global view and the pragmatism of the measures contained in it .
I should like to pick out : tax breaks for developing these energies , the use of the structural funds , the importance attached to the harmonization of statistics on consumption trends , the internationalization of secondary costs of non-renewable energy sources and the quantification of an objective defined for the year 2000 .
In Finland renewable forms of energy now represent 32.5 % of total energy consumption .
However , the objective of the report to increase the proportion generally throughout the EU is justified .
This requires an enormous investment in research , which is something that should be taken account of in the EU 's research programmes .
In the review of regional policy , too , support should be given to the production of renewable energy .
In spite of its achievements , the report has one shortcoming .
It fails to refer to peat as a renewable source of energy .
In Finland , for example , the proportion of peat in energy consumption as a whole is already 5.4 % , though the proportion of peat bogs in production is only 0.5 % .
Peat bogs grow peat at the same rate annually as forests grow wood .
After the peat has been lifted the peat bog becomes green again and begins to produce new peat .
I hope that the Commission will include peat as a renewable natural resource in the White Paper it is to prepare .
Community energy objectives
The next item is the report ( A4-0142 / 97 ) by Mr Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the organization of cooperation around agreed Community energy objectives ( COM ( 96 ) 0431 - C4-0046 / 97-96 / 0218 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , cooperation around agreed Community energy objectives is a controversial subject in this House , in the Council and probably also in the Commission .
The Commission chose Article 130 ( 3 ) as the legal basis , i.e. , the ' industry ' title of the Treaty .
Since there is not or not yet a chapter on energy in the Treaty , even though energy policy is in the common interest of us all , the legal basis must be the one that relates most closely to the subject concerned .
In Article 1 the Commission proposal lists as objectives of the decision : protecting the environment , promoting the rational and efficient use of energy resources and new and renewable energy and promoting international energy cooperation .
The first of these objectives come under the Community 's environmental policy .
That is why the legal basis should be Article 130s .
It defines rational utilization of natural resources , protection of the environment and the promotion of international measures to protect the environment as the objective of European policy .
We have called for this amendment of the Treaty basis and had it checked by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
After hesitating , that committee agreed with us .
Of course energy policy has effects both on industry and on the environment .
But I think one thing is clear : in the matter of cooperation to achieve agreed energy objectives we also need a cooperation procedure between the legislative institutions .
In relation to the energy policy objectives we should formulate a policy that anticipates the future .
In future , however , we will make no progress without an energy chapter in the Treaty .
I hope the participants in the intergovernmental conference will agree and finally set out definite rules .
The Commission proposal we are debating today restricts the Commission 's role to information and supervisory rights and to a coordinating function .
It gives it no powers for energy policy actions .
This makes me suspect that this is the first stage in the abandonment of a common energy policy .
It all fits together .
In recent budgetary procedures the Council sought considerable cuts in energy policy sectors .
THERMIE II has been frozen for years , SAVE II was reduced to one third .
But to revert to national energy policies is quite simply wrong .
On the one hand we create transeuropean networks for energy .
We create an internal market for gas and electricity .
Yet we cannot agree on a basic energy policy !
Why , for instance , as Mrs McNally said earlier during the debate on Mrs Rothe 's good report , can we not conclude a separate Treaty to promote renewable energy sources ?
What was possible 40 years ago to promote nuclear energy should also be possible today for renewable energy !
We need to make a leap , we need a leap forward .
Our words must finally be followed by deeds !
In this context let me also point out that I think it is important to take up a proposal made by Rolf Linkohr , calling for a world climate agency to monitor the results of the world climate summit .
To return to the Commission 's proposal , the annex to it contains the agreed energy policy objectives .
As they stand they are contradictory .
First it calls for ' undistorted ' energy prices and then proposes supportive measures for renewable energy resources .
Untrammelled competition and market deregulation are not , however , a universal panacea .
The Commission should show courage and acknowledge openly measures which affect competition between energy sources .
Only then will it be able to achieve the objective of sustainable development in the framework of integration of energy policy and environmental protection objectives .
Otherwise it will only be paying it lip service .
What we need is an integrated energy harmonization programme with a timescale and not least , as I keep pointing out , we must finally agree on an EC-wide energy consumption tax .
These are just a few of the aspects on which we must cooperate closely for the sake of the future .
I look forward to the debate , despite the poor attendance today .
Mr President , the European Parliament has already dealt quite often in the past , as it is doing today in particular , with the question of how the European Union can assume its responsibilities in energy policy in the long term and take the appropriate measures , which are of course urgently necessary to create the framework conditions in a liberalized internal market .
In that respect , there are no differences of view between the EPP Group and the other groups regarding the basic structure and the line to be followed .
At the same time we have to consider even at this point what we really want to achieve in terms of a common energy policy and a shopping list like the one the Commission has proposed and which Parliament will probably extend tomorrow does nobody any service .
Of course our objective is to reduce CO2 emissions in the EU .
We have all just been discussing that in relation to the Rothe report and also adopted it .
But the freedom to decide which energy sources will be used to achieve this objective remains with the Member States so long as we have no other legal basis .
That question also arose this morning and at noon when we voted on the Soulier report .
We come now to the crucial point .
It may indeed be possible to change the legal basis - I would not exclude it , but I am an engineer and not a lawyer - and that may also give Parliament more influence because there will be cooperation and we can work with the chosen legal basis .
But we would achieve nothing at the final count because this is more likely to lead the Council to withdraw the existing legal bases from us again when it notices that other things can be done via the back door instead of us obtaining the new legal bases we want and have just decided on .
The EPP Group will therefore reject any amendment of the legal basis and the report as a whole if this amendment is adopted by a majority .
Moreover , we must of course ask ourselves what the Union 's priority tasks are in the field of energy .
We consider it crucial to harmonize the framework conditions , an aspect for which the Commission made no provision at all in its proposal but which the EPP Group proposed in committee and which was fortunately incorporated .
That is the crucial point .
Here the Commission already has competences and Parliament supports this because it can be done through the internal market legislation .
The last point I want to raise is that we really ought to have a basic debate on this whole question of taxes one day .
There is no point in Parliament starting to bring in fiscal law questions again .
In any case we would then be moving towards another legal basis again , Article 130 would not apply .
We should leave things where they belong .
I do not want to go into this further today .
But we should not put too much strain on the Council here if we really want to achieve anything .
That is the line the EPP takes ; otherwise we will support most of the amendments .
Mr President , some things are repeated again and again .
For instance , it is said again here that nuclear energy is safe and that safe final storage sites do exists .
Whenever we hear such statements , we have to contradict them , and let me say in advance that there are no safe final storage sites .
I think the rapporteur has managed something very difficult .
An energy programme that is unsure of itself from the outset , that is very weak from the outset , that tries to ignore very concrete statistics and findings , is incredibly difficult to correct .
The rapporteur has tried in all honesty to do so .
We have long known that we will make much more headway in the medium term with CO2 -free renewable energy technology than with nuclear technology .
What are you saying ?
( Interjection : nuclear energy is CO-free ! )
That is disputable nor is it scientifically tenable as it stands , but we discussed that this morning .
In the proposal before us now it looks as though nobody had considered what we discussed here this morning and what we voted on a short while ago .
Of course the question of an energy tax concerns future technological development and it is also significant that the anthropogenic greenhouse effect was excluded .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that this Council decision is very timely because , if we go down the way that we are going down , I have serious doubts that there can be a common energy policy , perhaps it is very difficult because there are fifteen countries with very different energy systems - and the countries which are going to be incorporated into the Union have different ones again .
But it is possible to make considerable progress with common objectives and you have very well planned this brief communication which contains the decision .
Furthermore , I am pleased that the main priority is supply security .
In both the Green Paper and the White Paper on Energy you spoke first of all of competitiveness , of prices , but I think it is more important to concentrate on supply security , which is beginning to be not so clear , Commissioner .
Then , of course , we should look at competitiveness , environmental protection , coordination , the possibility of having a presence in other markets .
However , it seems to me that you tend to insist on having better statistics , that we have the statistics beforehand - Eurostat statistics arrive very late because of the means we have or because countries fail to give information .
Every year the Commission should carry out a far-reaching examination of the energy policy of three countries , so that in five years we will have an analysis of all fifteen .
That is what the OECD does and , without a treaty and without more complications , this is extremely efficient . I think that is what is missing in the European Union .
Reference is made to imposing taxes .
More than those on petrol .
Now there is a new communication on tariffs and duties on energy .
I am sure that they are going to be raised .
Even electricity is going to have new taxes .
These taxes are already before Parliament but have come out of the Commission ( not from Commissioner Papoutsis or from Commissioner Monti ) with an objective which seems to me to be laudable : we must create jobs , which is a major problem for the Union , and we must reduce the burdens on businessmen in terms of energy .
This is a considerable task and I congratulate you , Commissioner .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this important report .
We have heard already today how important it is to have a legal base in energy with reference to renewable energies .
But we have run into difficulties on the THERMIE project and indeed , on SYNERGIE as well because of the lack of a legal base ; and because - as has been said here today - we really do not have a common energy policy or even a working energy policy that we are harmonizing .
I refer you particularly to the importance of the SAVE programme .
Saving energy is like motherhood : it is always admired but seldom supported .
If we cannot agree a common energy policy , a common legal base , then we will be doing the same .
We will be paying lip service to renewables and saving energy but we will not actually be doing anything concrete to support it .
I would also like to stress the importance of the EURATOM Treaty and a review or replacement of that Treaty as part of a common energy policy .
Mr President , the proposal we are considering is particularly important because it aims to improve cooperation between the Member States in matters related to energy policy .
First of all , however , let me thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Stockmann , for his excellent work on the report we are debating today .
This proposal is based on the three fundamental aims defined by the White Paper on energy policy , in other words to increase competitiveness , secure reliability of supply , and of course protect the environment .
The continually increasing dependence on imported energy , climate change , but at the same time world-wide competition , are challenges that we will be called upon to address today and in the future , challenges which make it urgently necessary to adopt a more coordinated energy policy .
On this opportunity , let me turn your attention to the recent statement by the Commission concerning an overall review of energy policy : that statement points out the serious challenges faced by the European Union in the energy sector and we await the European Parliament 's opinion with interest .
Now , let me comment one by one on the amendments proposed .
Amendment No 1 concerns the legal basis of the proposal .
Following the recommendations of the European Commission 's Legal Service , the Commission proposes Article 130 ( 3 ) , while Parliament 's Legal Committee recommends that Article 130 ( 1 ) should be used .
Acceptance of this amendment would mean in practice that cooperation in matters related to energy policy would be subject to environmental policy and to the legal basis on which the latter is founded .
Of course , I agree completely with the aim of protecting the environment and believe that this aim and environmental protection should be an important aspiration in the energy sector .
In the Commission 's view , however , it is an exaggerated approach to base energy policy entirely on the legal basis provided for environmental protection , because in that way appropriate importance is not attributed to other equally important aims of energy policy , such as the securing of reliable supplies , the increase of competitiveness , and international cooperation .
For those reasons , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 1 .
I now come to Amendment No 2 , which proposes to focus research and technological development on energy efficiency and renewable energy sources .
It also proposes that research and technological development should be focused on the objective of nuclear energy with safe technologies for the final storage of nuclear waste .
I do not oppose that amendment , mainly because it does not restrict the provision of credits for research and technological development in those sectors .
However , exact priorities will be defined during the debates we have on the fifth framework programme .
Now , as for Amendment No 3 , Article 1 , I think its first part concerning the additional aim of avoiding surplus capacity is unnecessary .
I do not object to that amendment , but I do not think it really necessary .
The second part of Amendment 3 can be accepted in principle .
However , I would like to point out that there seems to be a small problem with that amendment because it refers in particular to initiatives taken at national level , while the beginning of the Article already covers that point with its reference to actions taken in the Member States .
However , I agree that it is important to include the promotion of sustainable energy technologies in this list of aims .
I also unreservedly accept the last part of Amendment 3 under Article 1 .
The rapporteur Mr Stockmann proposes two amendments under Article 2 .
The rapporteur correctly points out in Amendment No 4 the very serious issue of climate change .
This is a subject which very greatly influences our energy policy , and one to which I too attribute great importance .
Indeed , I would like to tell Parliament that just yesterday afternoon , the Commission adopted a related statement and the Council on Energy will debate the subject in detail at the end of May .
I think you will agree with me that decisions concerning this important subject must be taken within a framework broader than that of energy .
Moreover , the geographical coverage should be broader than the European Union .
The amendment proposed has far-reaching political and legal consequences since , in fact , it constitutes a decision to found an organization for climate change .
If that is our purpose , I do not think this is the right way to achieve it .
The foundation of such a body , which may not be a bad idea , in my opinion merits more careful study and consequently , I am not disposed to accept Amendment No 4 , at least at the present stage .
I can accept Amendment No 12 , which concerns the study and imposition of taxation or subsidy systems .
Indeed , the Commission recently submitted for discussion a new proposed directive for the taxation of all energy products , which is already a step in that direction .
I can also accept Amendment No 5 concerning the Commission 's ability to propose actions or projects for the achievement of these aims .
Indeed , I think that amendment clarifies the existing text even more .
Mr President , I now come to Amendment No 6 , which concerns Article 3 .
In my opinion , its first part is too restrictive and does not permit the necessary flexibility .
I could indeed propose a new wording .
For example , I could certainly propose the compromise wording : ' The Commission will prepare a report whenever this is deemed appropriate , but at least every two years ' .
The second part gives a picture of the content of that report , and I can of course accept it .
Those were my comments on the amendments proposed for the Articles .
I will now go on to the amendments proposed for the Annex .
With Amendment No 7 , the rapporteur proposes a substantial change to the first paragraph of the Annex .
The Commission 's proposal is based on the aim defined by the Green and White Papers , which were ratified both by the European Parliament and by the Council .
This amendment lists the three basic aims , and the energy-related ones are ranked first among them .
However , the basic aims constitute an organic whole . For that reason , I cannot accept the specific amendment , though that of course does not mean that protection of the environment is not of fundamental importance and is not a basic aim of the organic whole we have all agreed about .
Amendments Nos 8 and 9 concern energy prices .
In Amendment No 8 , the rapporteur proposes to delete the words ' and undistorted ' and to add a reference to fair competition .
After this , the rapporteur introduces the internalization of external costs .
This amendment is acceptable .
The Commission holds firmly to its position favouring the principle of cost internalization , but I consider it premature to refer , as in Amendment No 9 , to a standardized calculation method .
Granted that the principle of cost internalization is already mentioned in the text of the Commission 's proposal , with regret I cannot accept Amendment No 9 .
I agree absolutely with Amendment No 10 .
Concerning Amendment No 11 , which relates to the means proposed , I consider that the list provided is not complete , something which is in any case indicated by the wording itself and more specifically the word ' especially ' used .
I am aware that not all the means available to us are listed and that others can be added .
I see the harmonization of a framework of prerequisites more as a secondary aim that affects competitive markets , but am willing to accept that addition .
I think the request to propose an energy consumption tax requires a great deal more thought , it needs more preparation , and of course , it will entail many and I am afraid to say difficult internal deliberations .
As you know , a short while ago the Commission tabled a related proposal .
However , I think that we should await the Council 's reactions , and of course , we also await your reactions - the reactions of the European Parliament - before asking for yet another proposal on energy tax .
Consequently , this amendment is too specialized and certainly premature .
I have no problem at all with the third part of Amendment No 11 , which concerns the addition of environmental means .
And I now come to the last part of Amendment No 11 concerning the incorporation into the Treaty of a chapter devoted to energy , in any case something which as you know I warmly support .
With a chapter on energy we will have at our disposal a clear , transparent and consistent legal basis for the implementation of energy policy .
A policy which in today 's situation is more than necessary .
For that reason , I am particularly glad that Parliament continues to support the incorporation of a chapter on energy into the Treaty .
Now , as for Amendments Nos 13 to 17 , the Commission cannot accept them , since they go beyond the present scope of the proposal and I am afraid that they disturb its balance .
Mr President , I think that I have answered in detail all the proposed amendments , and as you see , we can accept some of them , which I believe are the more important ones .
In the other cases , we have no intense objections about the amendments , but I believe that we should preserve the appropriate balance in our energy policy and aims , at least at the present stage and under the present conditions .
I thank you very much , and would like once more to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Stockmann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Europe-Asia co-operation strategy for energy
The next item is the report ( A4-0134 / 97 ) by Mr Holm , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on a communication from the Commission : ' Europe-Asia co-operation strategy for energy ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0308 - C4-0495 / 96 ) .
Mr President , the background to the Commission 's strategy document is that the Council of Ministers has on several occasions stated the EU 's intention to strengthen co-operation with the countries and organisations in this region .
The Council has also urged the Commission to put forward concrete proposals in this sphere .
Together with my committee , I naturally support this document and see this as a very important initiative .
We also place great weight on the fact that this dialogue should benefit both EU Member States and Asian states .
This is why it is also important that the EU produce a basic analysis and strategy .
Unfortunately there appear to be a number of shortcomings in the Commission 's communication which I have been forced to comment upon .
For example , the communication does not include many concrete initiatives despite the fact that this was what the Council asked for .
I assume that the Commission will come back to this issue a little later on .
Furthermore , the Commission must co-ordinate its policy between the various Directorates-General .
Responsibility is currently split across several which makes it difficult to gain a concise view of EU opportunities and resources .
The analysis which the Commission has made contains shortcomings in the section covering the current energy situation in the Asian States .
When drawing up a strategy we need to start from conditions as they are today otherwise it is very difficult to develop a strategy for tomorrow .
In order to include the Asian point of view the various existing conditions need to be studied .
Asia is very different from Europe in terms of climate , gross national product , democratic aspects , the level of industrialisation and particularly in terms of the current conditions in the energy sector .
It is also very difficult to establish a common strategy for the whole region .
Different solutions are required for different countries .
Whereas solar energy could be a solution in one region it is less viable in another , where perhaps water power or bio- energy would be more appropriate .
The Commission 's communication instead is almost entirely written from a European point of view , i.e. from the opportunities which we might have on the Asian market .
Regional aspects in Asia are only touched upon .
But we must be conscious of the fact that if we are to succeed with a strategy in an area such as this it is important to gain the support of local and regional actors and to ensure that they are involved in the planning process from the start .
We have chosen to highlight two points in this report . These are environmental issues with the emphasis on well known dam projects in Asia and the sphere of nuclear energy .
There are currently several large energy programmes underway in Asia which are having an acknowledged negative impact on the environment . These include the building of large dams which are causing significant environmental and social problems .
The European Parliament has , in several urgent resolutions , adopted a position that these large dams projects including those in India , China and Malaysia risk damaging valuable environments and contributing to the disappearance of the native people 's culture and way of life .
It is therefore extremely important that we adopt a very cautious position on these issues .
The Commission also acknowledges in its strategy document that these large dam projects have not been very successful and proposes in the document that smaller dam projects should be given priority which is something which we in committee have also pointed out .
Let me add that there is an amendment proposal , No. 4 , which takes up this point and where the Commission is urged among other things to advise firms against investing in the building of the Bakun dam in Malaysia .
I intend to add an oral amendment proposal during the vote tomorrow when I will remove this last phrase in Bakun , Malaysia , as I believe it is foolish to highlight a particular project in a resolution .
Instead it is important to point out that it is the large dam projects which we are criticising as there are unfortunately many large dam projects underway in Asia .
I hope that this assembly can support this even with such an amendment .
The other point concerned the fact that the EU has started to involve itself in nuclear energy in Asia .
This concerns the now infamous KEDO project in Korea .
KEDO , I have been told , should be viewed as a political project to gain an insight into nuclear energy issues in an area which was until recently closed .
But the Commission has not informed either the European Parliament or the committee responsible of these plans .
I do not think that I exaggerate when I say that everyone in the committee is critical of the Commission 's handling of this matter since even the committee itself has not been informed .
I would take this opportunity to ask the Commission why there has been so much secrecy surrounding this plan and why Parliament was not informed .
Personally I am of the opinion that the EU should not participate in this project .
The project is based on the building of two new nuclear power stations which are to be financed by the EU to the tune of 75 million ECUs .
As KEDO is concerned with energy development work , it would have been better to have invested in the introduction of renewable energy sources .
Finally I would like to point out that I am in favour of all the amendment proposals , particularly no 7 which takes up an important section which is missing from this document .
It is about supporting the development of railways and goods traffic to prevent the use of more and more cars in the region which is also an energy problem in view of the increased carbon dioxide emissions .
For this reason I also hope that amendment No. 7 is passed .
Mr President , we are going to vote in favour of this report because , as it was drafted in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , it is perfectly in order .
We are tabling a good many amendments - fifteen - and most of them were approved in committee and incorporated into the report .
The result is a sensible document clearly focusing the priority on environmental protection , the security of energy supplies and participation in Asian energy industry markets .
It includes the peaceful use of nuclear energy in respect of maximum security standards .
On this score , I should like to take this opportunity to inform the Commission of the need to take management initiatives in order to gauge the level of that security in the southern part of the Asian continent .
We were also especially satisfied by the approval of our proposal to call on the Commission to bring out a Green Paper on Energy Cooperation in Asia , extending it to the Central Asian countries , namely Kazakhstan , Kyrghyzstan , Uzbekhistan , Tazhikhistan , Turkmenistan and Mongolia .
We have just paid an official visit to some of those countries and had an opportunity to examine the importance of this Green Paper on the spot .
We should not forget that this is a geographical area with considerable energy resources , especially natural gas and petroleum , but that it also needs Western technology and business experience .
The United States , Japan and other world trading powers have already realised the mutual benefit , for the European Union and Central Asia , that could come from cooperation such as we are proposing .
We hope that the institutions of the European Union will also realise the need for such cooperation .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate Mr Holm on his report .
The recommendations in Mr Holm 's report are indeed very topical .
With your report and with what I hope will be the Council for Energy 's positive attitude on 27 May concerning this statement , the Commission will be in a strong position to implement the first initiative of policy in the sector with countries in Asia .
To facilitate the implementation of this policy , I am due to meet the Ministers for Energy of the ASEAN states in Manila at the beginning of July , to whom I will explain our priorities .
On this visit to the ASEAN countries I will be accompanied by representatives of Europe 's energy industry .
This will give us a special opportunity to examine new initiatives concerning professional training , research and the export of energy technologies to that area .
In the statement which the European Commission issued last year , it proposed the three main aims of this cooperation .
And I remind you of those aims : first , to improve security of supply in Asia and Europe , secondly , participation in Asian energy markets , and thirdly , protection of the environment on our planet .
And I am particularly glad that in his report Mr Holm applauds the dialogue on energy policy that the Commission intends to establish with the countries in Asia , a dialogue which we not only seek , but wish to make continual efforts to broaden .
The European energy market has essentially become saturated , since for the next 15 years its development is expected to fluctuate between approximately 1 % and 2 % per year .
For energy agencies and European industrial enterprises , greater penetration into Asian markets is very important .
However , we should not forget that the sector employs more than 2 million people and possesses appreciable surplus capacity in both personnel and production units .
The Commission will try to make things easier for the private sector in Europe , and at this time we are considering how we could contribute towards a closer approach to the private energy sector in Asia and Europe .
I cannot , however , agree with criticisms relating to inadequate analysis of the situation in the energy sector in Asian countries .
The statement you are aware of , does not in itself constitute a document for outlining policy .
Analyses have been prepared for countries or groups of states , which take account of all the economic and energy indexes .
The European Commission also uses analyses by international bodies .
And all these data build a healthy basis for the development of our strategy on cooperation between Europe and Asia .
I would also like to point out that this strategy mainly concerns both the European Union as a whole , and its Member States .
Yet , the overall approach takes into account countries that are likely to become members of the European Union in coming years . It also takes account of other neighbouring countries , which will be affected environmentally and in terms of security of supply .
The report by Mr Holm also mentions that for energy cooperation with Asia to succeed , it must be developed in a mutually beneficial way .
From a strategic standpoint , both Asia and Europe are increasingly becoming energy importers .
The establishment of closer dialogue in the area of energy policy should therefore constitute a priority , and at the same time , it will have to be shown in practice to be mutually beneficial .
One of the main points raised by Mr Holm 's report concerns the relation between the various aspects of the energy sector and the environment .
I believe we are in full agreement with the priority given to the support of rational environmental alternative energy possibilities .
It is commonly accepted that development of the energy sector in Asia has so far had negative effects on the environment , at national and regional level and for the planet as a whole .
For example , it is difficult to understand how a huge increase in the use of coal planned for the foreseeable future in those countries can be compatible with the positions adopted at Conferences and in international agreements concerning climate change .
Unless serious efforts are made , the increase of carbon dioxide , acid rain and pollution by suspended particles threatens to eliminate or put at serious risk efforts to restrict pollutant emissions on our planet .
In parallel , large-scale deforestation exacerbates pressures on the environment of certain countries .
That aspect often reflects to the cost of the poorer population levels , especially children and women who are forced to traverse large distances in order to cover their basic energy needs .
We also agree that increased use of new and renewable energy sources for the production of energy in agricultural regions must be a priority .
The Community will continue encouraging the development of small hydroelectric stations within the scope of rural development projects .
Besides , other priorities for cooperation in the energy sector are the modernization of electrical power supply , the promotion of natural gas , and of course , the improvement of energy efficiency .
We will also back international activity to ensure nuclear safety .
And as for nuclear energy , concerning the reservations and fears that exist about the way that technology is moving , I should like to say that the European Union gives it backing to all international efforts to ensure the greatest possible safety in the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
The Commission 's position in this respect is firm , and our actions in the sector always strive towards the same objectives , in other words to ensure first the spread of peaceful uses for nuclear energy , and secondly substantial and great stringency in relation to restrictions and conditions for nuclear safety .
Now , as for the particular question raised by Mr Holm concerning the Korean Energy Development Organization ( KEDO ) , I would like to remind you that the European Parliament has already adopted a positive position on participation by EURATOM in that , granted that the related budgetary items for 1996 and 1997 have been approved .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like once more to thank the rapporteur and the speakers who addressed us today and on the Committee on Energy , during the debate on the substance of the issue , for their comments , ones which we will take seriously into account when developing our policy .
I would also like to assure you that we will continue to cooperate with you and keep you informed , so that we may continue our joint action for the achievement of our aims .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Social legislation on road transport
The next item is the report ( A4-0106 / 97 ) by Mr Schlechter , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the report from the Commission on the implementation in 1991-1992 of Regulation ( EEC ) No 3820 / 85 on the harmonization of certain social legislation relating to road transport ( 17th report by the Commission on the implementation of the social legislation relating to road transport ) ( COM ( 95 ) 0713 - C4-0065 / 96 ) .
Mr President , this report appears to be quite technical but , in essence , it can be summed up in three words : safety , safety and safety .
I need to stress the importance of resolving the issue of working time in excluded sectors like road transport .
In other transport sectors , agreements between the social partners at European level on working time have largely been reached .
Indeed , in the road transport sector , agreement has been reached for the inclusion of all non-mobile workers .
So far , however , the employers ' organizations have consistently refused to discuss the inclusion of drivers .
This situation has now persisted for over five years and , despite Commission promises for action on the excluded sectors , we actually have nothing .
Regulations on driving time and rest periods are important , because of the number of serious coach and lorry accidents caused by driver fatigue .
If these regulations are properly implemented they could also prevent distortion of the rules of competition between the various modes of transport .
I hope that this report will not only be approved but that the Commission will act on its contents .
As I have tried to stress , the overriding issue is safety , and not only the safety of the drivers of the lorries and coaches but of the people carried in those coaches and of all other road users .
I urge the Commission to listen and to implement everything in this report .
Mr President , on behalf of the European People 's Party I must first congratulate Mr Schlechter on his report and say that we will vote for it , even though we are not in full agreement with some of the resolution 's orders .
I should say that there is a regulation dating from 1985 , Regulation No 3820 .
To show you how the Community has addressed the issue essentially of safety on Europe 's roads , and as the last speaker also commented , the Commission is now , in 1997 , submitting for the first time a report on the implementation of that regulation only for the years 1991-1992 .
The subject of working and rest hours for drivers of lorries , buses , and coaches , which are nowadays inundating Europe , does not seem to have been taken seriously .
We are now talking of the loss of 50 , 000 people per year in Europe .
As all of us here know , 50 , 000 people are killed in road accidents , and a significant cause of those accidents is that the drivers of lorries and buses have to work exhaustingly long shifts , to bring down transport costs .
I say all this because in that respect as well there is unfair competition in road transport , to the cost of rail transport and transport by sea .
It is unacceptable that the Community has still not intervened and the Council of Ministers has done nothing about specifying working hours for drivers .
It is time to realise that there are countries like Germany and France , which are at the centre of Europe and are full of lorries .
The lorries have to serve large ports such as Rotterdam or Antwerp in small countries , but then have to cover hundreds of kilometers to get to the Community 's large , central countries , and we have not yet reacted to that situation .
I say all this because both the time devoted to debating this report , and the time when we are to vote on it , namely tomorrow , Friday , when only 150 members will be here , indicate the level of interest we attribute to it .
We have not grasped the size of the problem .
But there must come a time when we think what to do with the dead , whose numbers far exceed the casualties of the battles we see on television every evening .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's report , although the reasons behind it are highly topical , as we are all aware comes before this House rather late in the day - when I say ' rather late ' I am talking about five or six years - and is therefore at some risk of obsolescence , in its efficacy as well as in its reference data .
The premises are still valid , in that the safety of those working on the roads relies on the existence of and compliance with clear social legislation ; it is to be regretted , however , that the problem is considered virtually exclusively in terms of one of its most obvious manifestations , such as observance of driving times , without taking account of a huge range of other risk factors which are ever-present in all the collateral forms of this activity .
The problem is widespread , most of all because of the size of the workforce - some 3 million people throughout Europe .
To arrive at a social as well as economic dimension , this workforce should be multiplied by three or four to give a global framework for the sector .
Hence the need to consider carefully the measures to be taken in the event of violations , in the hope that these can be harmonized as quickly as possible and , in particular , that this harmonization will bring a similar harmonization of penalties .
Furthermore , swift and realistic action needs to be taken to check the tendency to make the carriers bear the full weight of new social and political trends - apart from the sacrosanct safety regulations for the employees and for other road users , the carriers are now being expected to bear the environmental cost , together with the external costs that are being internalized .
The danger is overburdening the carriers with economic charges which would result in the destruction of smaller businesses - a phenomenon that already and clearly exists throughout Europe - with an immediate knock-on effect on employment levels , especially since the danger of social dumping by countries with lower labour costs , lower overheads and more relaxed safety standards , is becoming more and more real as the taxes for the adhesion of the CEECs are finalized .
Finally , there is the intermodal aspect : we are all agreed that there is an urgent need to switch from road to rail - but where are the rails ?
From the Brenner to Fréjus there are plenty of good intentions , but there is a serious financial crisis which means that such projects are still a long way from fruition .
Mr President , may I first of all congratulate the former minister of transport , Mr Schlechter , on his excellent report .
But , Mr President , I must say that in fact I am terribly disappointed in the Commission .
I think that what is happening here mars the Commission 's image .
Here we are in 1997 , as Mr Sarlis has already said , getting figures from 1991 and 1992 .
We were originally promised that the 1993 and 1994 figures could be taken at the same time .
But halfway through 1997 they are still not available .
We were told that we would meet the Commissioner of Social Affairs on the maintenance of driving and rest times .
Then we were told that no , it was not necessary because Commissioner Kinnock is responsible for that .
And what do we have here ?
Here we have the commissioner responsible for the self-employed , Mr Papoutsis , and Mr Kinnock again is not present to defend himself against the criticism which , Mr President , is far from gentle .
Now what has the Commission done ?
New proposals have been tabled in the meantime on monitoring , whereas certain countries , including yours , Mr President , and Mr Santini 's , have not implemented the present regulation .
They are not doing anything .
They are not producing any figures .
They are not producing anything .
Everyone is just saying : oh well , let us just come up with new proposals and then we will move one step farther instead of implementing what we now have .
The Commission promised us new proposals on driving and rest times .
The Commission has done nothing .
The Commission would be well advised to go home .
Mr President , we are far from the harmonised implementation of the driving and rest times prescribed in regulation 3820 / 85 .
That is the clear message from the Commission report on the period 199192 .
If I correctly understand the figures in this report , one out of six vehicles checked did not satisfy the regulations .
This confirms the conclusions reached by the group of experts who reported in 1994 that failure to respect the regulations was one of the major problems facing road transport .
The report also indicates that there serious differences between Member States in the frequency and implementation of checks and in penalties imposed .
All this not merely distorts competition between Member States but is particularly dangerous to road safety .
It is quite scandalous that in May 1997 we must discuss the situation of five to six years ago , apparently because some Member States are negligent or incomplete in their reporting and refuse to take the problems of neglect seriously .
Mr President , I wish to ask the Commissioner if he can confirm Mr Wijsenbeek 's question that the statistics on 1993 and 1994 , which ought to have been available by 30 September 1995 under the regulation , are still not to hand .
Mr President , on behalf of everyone concerned about the unacceptably high level of coach and lorry accidents throughout Europe , I welcome the report by the Commission and , indeed , the work of the rapporteur .
However , all of this must be looked at in the context of a recent publication by the Commission into its action for road safety proposals .
Obviously there is some inconsistency here : the Commission quite rightly is planning to tackle the appalling toll of road accidents across our continent - 50 , 000 lives are lost each year - and yet at the same time the powers we already have to prevent accidents involving coaches , lorries and buses are clearly not being enforced throughout the European Union .
We are also concerned about the fact that this is a rapidly expanding sector so we are likely to see the number of people killed and injured on our roads increase year upon year because the basic rules are being ignored and not being enforced .
We learn from the Commission document of poor compliance and in some cases the total lack of compliance by Member States , the widespread flouting of legislation which is the cause , as we all know , of all too many accidents .
There is no such thing as fair competition in the single market , while Member States refuse to comply properly with our rules and regulations .
The industry is a big one .
As mentioned earlier , three million people work in the industry .
It is vital to the competitiveness of Europe as a whole that this industry should be a success .
Therefore , we welcome the Commission proposals : doubling the checks , coordinating the calculations , improving driver training and modernizing the tachograph .
But we need to see more safeguards for drivers and working time .
I hope the Commissioner can today comment on how many prosecutions there have been so far of Member States which are refusing to comply with these rules and regulation and how many are planned .
Until we take Member States to court , they will continue to ignore our rules .
Mr President , I too believe that the social provisions in question relate first and foremost to driving times and rest periods , and if we remember the two figures that were just cited , three million drivers and about 50 000 lives lost , we realise that this is not a minor report that could perhaps be briefly discussed on a Friday morning but a report that needs to be considered by the Committee on Transport , the Committee on Social Affairs and by all the MEPS and people who really are seriously concerned about safety on the roads of Europe and elsewhere .
We also know that this regulation is more than necessary given the pressure of competition and also of the trend towards ' just-in-time ' deliveries and that if it is not respected , competition will be pursued at the cost of safety and of elementary working conditions .
If Parliament is now evaluating the situation , I would simply summarize it under three headings which , in my view , are also the cornerstones of efficient implementation : uniform application , uniform checks , uniform fines .
If we deviate from these principles at all , then we will continue to have competition at the cost of safety , even at the cost of deaths in Europe .
In my view these are important points , which can also be supported by technological development .
I believe that we must call for the rapid introduction of inviolable electronic chronotachographs and Parliament would welcome initiatives of this kind .
Of course we also regret the late consideration of this report , although we know that the statistics it quotes have worsened rather than improved in the meantime .
We congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work and hope the Commission will pay it the attention it deserves .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Schlechter on his report .
The report very rightly points out that the statistics provided by the Member States are still incomplete and have not been submitted in a form which enables comparison .
It is also a sad fact that the Commission 's reports have been delayed because figures were submitted late and in some cases not at all .
The Commission therefore decided to go ahead and publish the report for 1993-1994 without waiting any longer .
I would also like to point out that in Mr Schlechter 's report it was possible to draw conclusions on the various levels of checks carried out in the Member States concerning differences in the sanctions imposed , and also concerning their impact on competition .
The increased importance of the road transport branch within the Union , which was indeed enhanced by the internal market but also by changes in the general practice of labour relations , stresses - and I think this is clear - the need to achieve balance in freedom of movement .
It also underlines the need to increase competition by means of social safeguards .
Hence , the regulation on the restriction of driving times .
Mr Schlechter very rightly points out that the branch involves a large number of working people , whose working conditions depend on the rational implementation of the regulation 's orders .
For that reason , we will examine the conclusion expressed in the report , in depth .
I refer more specifically to the need to increase the minimum level of checks to 2 % , granted that most Member States have already achieved the present level of 1 % .
The recommendation to create a framework allowing better coordination of the activity of the authority responsible for implementing this regulation , will also be examined .
The report also recommends that other aspects of drivers ' work should be included in the field covered by the existing regulation .
However , as my colleague Mr Kinnock told the Committee on Transport in March , he has already asked the Commission 's services to examine ways of extending Regulation 3820 / 85 , to include in its field of application other activities that are also relevant to the safety of the public .
That possibility will be examined in even greater detail during the consultations on the forthcoming White Paper on working hours , which is being prepared by my colleague Mr Flynn .
It will also form part of the continuing dialogue between the Commission and the Member States to clarify the different interpretations placed by the Member States on the meaning of working time in that branch .
The report also recommends further review of Regulation 3820 / 85 with the aim of reducing upper limits for driving time , and supports the need to investigate alternative control and sanction measures .
The idea of replacing fines by introducing the practice of immobilizing the vehicle was in fact proposed by the European Commission 's Committee on the Monitoring of Road Transport . It was also given due attention within the scope of the procedure for reviewing the regulation .
But that review will relate to all aspects of the regulation .
I am particularly pleased that in its last paragraph , the report recommends the rapid introduction of fully electronic tachographs .
The Commission considers that this is a basic method to improve the uniform implementation of the regulation , and that it will also make it more easy for the responsible authorities in each Member State to carry out a larger number of checks .
Granted the restrictions that nowadays characterize the budgets of the Member States , we consider that this innovation is essential to maintain and improve the appropriate checks in coming years .
Finally , Mr President , I would once more like to thank Parliament for this report and assure you that my colleague Mr Kinnock and the Commission as a whole will take serious note of your views and comments .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I was almost sure that Mr Wijsenbeek had asked for the floor , but I am also almost sure that it was not for a point of order !
No , Mr President , I put a number of specific questions to the Commission and have not received any reply to them .
I asked the Commission : when are we going to get the 1993-1994 figures ?
I asked : when are we going to get the proposals on the amendment to driving and rest times ?
And what does the Commissioner say to us : words , words , words .
We are keeping a careful watch , we shall have to do something .
When oh when are we going ...
( The speaker is interrupted by the President )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.02 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , on reviewing the Minutes I note that under Item 7 ' Defence-related industries ' it is stated under Amendment No 1 that Mr Provan , Mr Spencer and Mr Cassidy voted in favour of integrating the WEU into the European Union .


I would like confirmation that this was accurate or has Conservative policy on that changed ?
I invited Members to comment on the Minutes , not to conduct a debate .
Mr President , I should like to say a word about a question raised by Mr Provan on Wednesday at the beginning of the sitting .
It concerns the dates of our next mission to Israel ; Mr Provan seemed to be worrying about a slight modification which had been made .
I can assure you , Mr Provan , that there is no cause for concern , since the only change is that the mission is to begin twenty hours later .
I hardly think a delay of twenty hours warrants a question to the House .
In fact we still have the same date .
The programme has not changed . It has been negotiated with our Israeli partners .
The point is , Mr Provan that the date of 1 June coincides with the organization of elections in France , which was not known when the programme was settled .
I suppose you have not , for your part , chosen the date of 1 May for a mission and been absent ...
( General commotion )
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , yesterday we welcomed a number of unemployed people into the Parliament who were walking from Switzerland to Amsterdam .
Next week we have a very prestigious meeting in Brussels where we anticipate between 800 and 1 , 000 unemployed people attending our Parliament in Brussels .
They will have at their disposal two interpreters in one room for 15 languages .
Can I appeal to the President that especially since ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Morris , this problem has already been discussed by the Bureau , on the basis of an official request submitted by a number of Members , and there has already been an official reply from the Bureau .
Mr President , yesterday morning at the beginning of business - I was not here at the time - Mr Titley made reference to me and criticized me for my statement on the Titley report .
I would just like to point out that Mr Titley himself has a lot of questions to answer .
For example , last year he went to the Farnborough air show in the UK , paid for by British Aerospace .
British Aerospace is responsible for arming the Indonesians ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mrs McKenna , I must ask Members to be calm and patient .
The debate on the Titley report has already taken place , and so has the vote .
Mr President , I have the feeling that I am the first with a genuine point to raise on yesterday 's Minutes .
In connection with the topical and urgent debate on Turkey , yesterday 's Minutes state that McMillan-Scott , Habsburg-Lothringen and Lenz withdrew their signatures from the amendments on behalf of the PPE Group .
I am anxious to point out that I never signed those amendments .
I had nothing to do with the motion .
I did not sign it .
I signed another motion , and my signature must somehow have found its way onto this motion .
I consider it important to have that recorded in the Minutes .
You are the first speaker to confine your remarks to the Minutes , and I am most grateful .
Mr President , we hear that Spanish lorry drivers , particularly those delivering vegetables , are still being attacked in the south of France .
We must again condemn these acts and ask the Presidency and the House to insist that the French authorities take appropriate measures to ensure freedom of movement ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Thank you , Mr Camisón Asensio , but once again that has nothing to do with the Minutes .
Mr President , I would just like to thank Mr Caudron for his clarification of the situation because it was difficult for members of the Israeli delegation to find out what was actually happening .
The dates have been confirmed since I raised the matter in the House this week .
I am delighted that the situation is now settled .
It is unfortunate , perhaps , that in certain circumstances the president of a delegation has to change the dates of the delegation to suit himself rather than the delegation as a whole , when there are vice-presidents and the Bureau who could have stood in for the 24 hours that was necessary .
( Parliament approved the Minutes . )
Votes
Mr President , I am sorry to interrupt the debate , but twice now the voting has been changed by just one vote .
My button is clearly not working .
Twice I voted in favour and twice it registered against .
Mr Castagnède , these were not roll-call votes but electronic votes .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
As I stated in the debate yesterday I would like to make an oral amendment proposal by removing the end of amendment proposal no .
4 , that is the words Bakun , Malaysia , so that we do not pinpoint one particular project .
Instead this should apply to all large hydroelectric power projects .
The text now reads ' ... from investing in large hydroelectric power projects ' .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
The Danish social democrats have voted in favour of the report by Mr Stockmann .
We are sympathetic towards energy policy cooperation , and we are also very pleased with the environmental approach which Mr Stockmann takes in his report .
We wish to make it clear that nuclear power is not a sustainable energy source , and that nuclear energy does not form part of the Community 's policy .
The Danish social democrats are in favour of the EU playing an active role with a view to reducing pollution .
The EU should also be actively involved in environment and energy policy issues .
However , it should not concern itself with fiscal policy .
That is and should remain a national matter .
The International Energy Agency and other international organizations are currently carrying out a number of valuable studies of their member countries ' energy policy .
It is important that the Commission is not given or does not take on any tasks which are already being performed by others .
It is also important that the Commission - should it have to be given new areas of work - does not embark on extensive inquiries which create bureaucracy for national authorities .
Schlechter report ( A4-106 / 97 )
I welcome my colleague Schlechter 's report calling for new legislation to reduce the maximum limits on driving time .
Despite legislation covering road transport used for both commercial and private use , Europe still has a frighteningly high rate of road mortality - resulting in horrendous suffering for the victims and families of those involved .
The disturbing number of serious coach and lorry accidents and the ensuing loss of life , are all too often caused by human error , which is frequently the consequence of extreme tiredness and unhealthy working conditions .
Data from across Europe have demonstrated the obvious link between road safety and compliance with legislation concerning driving times and rest periods for commercial drivers .
I would like to offer my full support for the conclusions of this report which call on the Commission to work towards :
reducing the maximum limits of driving time-creating uniform competitive standards for drivers across the Member Statesand , most importantly , making Europe 's roads safer for us all .
Provision of information for technical standards and regulations
The next item is the report ( A4-0147 / 97 ) by Mr Hendrick , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending for the third time Directive 83 / 189 / EEC laying down the procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations ( COM ( 96 ) 0392 - C4-0466 / 96-96 / 0220 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the development of the information society services promises profound changes socially , culturally and economically in Europe .
Distance ceases to be a factor .
A new economic sector comes into being and there is a powerful driving force to handle the development of information networks and technologies within the European Union .
The frontier-free area of the internal market is critical to the success of these services .
It is essential that this be safeguarded and developed with a mechanism which will coordinate future action by Member States in regulated information society services .
Society is now reaching the point where opportunities are available for consumers to obtain goods and services electronically .
These opportunities for cross-border trade must be realized to draw out the benefits of stronger productivity , growth and competitiveness which are the driving forces behind the creation of jobs in Europe .
At the same time we must ensure that new forms of social exclusion are not encouraged by the increased importance of new information and communication technologies .
The regulatory environment is an important factor in that sense and innovation and technological progress are priorities in this sector .
They must be allowed to develop under a flexible and consistent regulatory framework .
The introduction of contradictory or inconsistent regulations by Member States presents very real problems and a danger that competitors in Europe will possibly damage the internal market by restricting the free movement of goods and services .
Mr President , our opinion is favourable because extending the rules of the product society to cover the information society , as proposed by the directive , is indeed important .
Of course , we cannot stop there .
That is why the Committee on Legal Affairs calls upon the Commission to consider the advisability of extending the rules , and hence also extending the procedure whereby the Member States inform and notify the European Union - the co-operation procedure - with a view to eliminating any obstacles to the freedom of the internal market , in a field as difficult as information technology and the advent of a whole new society , like the Internet , with the primary objective of safeguarding the central importance of the human individual .
That is why , in our view , there are a number of particularly significant recitals : precisely because of the pressure to extend not only the administrative rules but the technical rules , too , in other words all the standardization produced so far , to include bodies which , though in the private sector , have a strong impact on the market .
Another aspect which the Legal Affairs Committee wanted to bring out was the matter of access - freedom of access , and non-discrimination with regard to access by the consumer .
One of the features of this proposal is that it relates not only to services provided electronically and at a distance but also to consumer interactivity .
This is a service provided on demand , and the most innovative feature of this proposal is that , for the first time , it takes into account direct participation by the consumer - the subscriber , the citizen . Hence , it is very important that there should be real freedom of access and , at the same time , the possibility of controls .
One final , brief comment : an important point was introduced as a new amendment and proposed once again in this House relating to the case law of the Court of Justice , an essential guide in this sector to the interpretation of certain rules relating to services .
We know that Community law is strongly rooted in precedent , and I therefore feel it is important for this amendment to be adopted .
Mr President , procedures for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations have an enormous impact on the competitiveness of European industry .
Now that we have decided to develop common strategies in the domains covered by the trans-European networks , namely energy , transport and telecommunications , the aim of which is to promote prosperity and job security in Europe , I believe that this regulatory mechanism will give us a distinct advantage in international competition .
The consequences are not only social and cultural ; they also directly affect economic activity .
This technology itself can create entirely new jobs .
We need only consider the example of electronically controlled online shopping , which enables the customer to order goods and services personally at a distance .
In other words , the customer obtains direct access to a wide range of providers and can avail himself of their services .
That is why it is important that we in the countries of Europe should seek to make all our developments in this domain as transparent as possible , so that we can ensure that the advantages offered by one country will be of benefit to others .
It is also a matter of enumerating the precise areas in the domains of hardware , software and ' manware ' in which we are making progress , in other words where training and technical harmonization have been improved .
These three domains are often intertwined .
Our success in making this field transparent will be of enormous importance to the European Community .
Broad freedom of access to these new opportunities is quite simply a fundamental right of our citizens and constitutes another step towards full implementation of the Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission must congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Hendrick , and the Committee draftsmen - Mr Ferri for the Legal Affairs Committee and Mr Whitehead for the Culture Committee - for their excellent work .

The rapid adoption of this proposal for a directive is , in the Commission 's view , one of the basic prerequisites for guaranteeing the balanced development of information society services in Europe .
The new services represent a genuinely unique opportunity for the competitiveness of the European economy and the diffusion of European culture , and an opportunity to take full advantage of the diversity of European society .
These services open up wide-ranging prospects for the growth of our industry and for innovation , investment , the creation of new jobs in Europe and consumer choice .
In order for these benefits to come about , though , it is necessary that the new services - which , by their very nature , are designed to cross geographical boundaries - can benefit to the full from the dimensions of a Europe without frontiers .
In other words , we must avoid the risk of refragmentation at national level of the unified regulatory framework provided by the internal market .
The proposal for a directive defining a transparency mechanism for the information society services is specifically intended to eliminate this risk by establishing a preventive legislative information procedure and a system of administrative co-operation between the national and Community authorities .
Such a mechanism will enable us to prevent the formation of new barriers to freedom of movement and , at the same time , to study and agree upon appropriate ways of providing more effective protection , at European level , for those fundamental interests that deserve to be safeguarded , such as the protection of consumers and minors , or the objectives of cultural policy in Europe .
The Commission particularly welcomes the fact that the parliamentary debate that has taken place so far has fully recognized the importance of this proposal for a directive and given unambiguous support to what it contains .
Indeed , I note with satisfaction that the majority of the amendments are specifically designed to strengthen the proposal or clarify the detail of its content , so that the Commission is highly favourable to them .
I refer to Amendments Nos 2 , subject to rewording , 3 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 in the Italian version , 14 in part , 15 , 17 , 19 and 20 .
On the other hand , though not challenging the intention behind them , the Commission is unable to endorse those amendments which are not really intrinsic to the context of the proposal or which would have the effect of impairing the present functioning of Directive 83 / 189 .
The point is that the purpose of the present initiative is that the procedure which currently applies to goods should be extended to include the new services sector , but with no changes of any kind , since this is a procedure of proven value .
For these reasons , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 16 and 18 .
Finally , Mr President , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 21 , believing as it does that transparency must be applicable to all the services provided on the information highway , without exception .
After all , this directive - which , I would remind you , considers procedural regulations only , not only refrains from prejudging the problems specific to any individual sector , and especially in the cultural sphere , but will also be able to make a valuable contribution to thoughts on the future action necessary in that sphere .
Essentially , we felt that this was such a new and evolutionary field that no one is yet in a position to lay down a complete and definitive regulatory framework .
It seems better , then , to implement a flexible but effective procedure .
In conclusion , I must express my sincere thanks to the European Parliament for the way it has so far supported the rapid progress of this initiative , which is so important for the development of the information society in Europe .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
After the vote on Amendments Nos 17 and 18 :
Mr President , you must ask for votes against .
You are asking only for votes in favour and not against .
I am sorry ...
I am not doing the translation .
This is not a problem of interpretation !
The fact is that when I see such a large number of hands raised after asking for those in favour , since this is not a roll-call vote there is no point in wasting time on asking how many are against .
It is the case , Mr President , that even if we are in the minority sometimes , we still want to register the fact that we have voted against something .
So you must also ask the question , who is against , so that we who are against can register our opposition , even if there are only a few of us .
Otherwise we cannot do this .
Mr Cars , you are undoubtedly right .
I would do the same , even if - I say again - it is only apparent at the time a hand is raised .
Nothing appears in the Minutes !
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Regional policy in Austria , Finland and Sweden
The next item is the report ( A4-0114 / 97 ) by Mr Rack , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the communication from the Commission on the implementation of European Union regional policies in Austria , Finland and Sweden ( COM ( 96 ) 0316 - C4-0533 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the implementation of EU regional policies in the three new member countries of Austria , Sweden and Finland is largely uncontroversial .
That , however , does not make it unimportant .
It is not unimportant to the countries concerned , it is not unimportant to the European Union as a whole , and to a certain extent it is also of interest and importance to future candidates for accession to the Union .
The report itself relates primarily to the first year and a half from the date of accession .
In several oral contributions in committee , the Commission kept providing us with updates and in that respect has ensured that the report actually reflects the current state of play .
The subject of the report is the Commission Communication , which deals with the implementation of programmes worth more than seven billion ECU , with 1.6bn for Austria , 1.7bn for Finland and 1.4bn for Sweden .
The report focuses on Objectives 1 , 2 , 5b and 6 , but it also contains a number of cross-references with statements relating to the other objectives , which is something we pursued in some detail in committee .
In its communication the Commission certainly awards very high marks to the three new Member States , in terms of both the extent to which the programmes have been implemented and the extent to which the relevant funds have been used .
All three countries have made more or less equal progress .
They are spending their money as planned and are also achieving quite a lot with it .
From that point of view , the report shows that even economically advanced countries - all three are net contributors - can derive additional benefits from participation in the system of European regional policy .
Some aspects of this added value are referred to explicitly .
The main point , really , is that all three countries were quick to signal their willingness to become involved in regional policy and have proved astute in implementing it , having prepared the ground effectively before allocating the available funds on the basis of their planned programmes .
It is also quite possible to identify a learning curve , which is beginning to bear fruit at the present time .
The Commission has rightly called for an evaluation of the extent to which the allocated funds actually achieve their purposes .
Here we all have a lot to learn .
This also applies to the domain of transparency .
In this respect some countries , among them Sweden and Finland , have an exemplary track record on the basis of their own traditions .
The others can learn from these two countries .
Lessons for the Member States - the old just as much as the new ones -are also observable in relation to the concept of partnership and the ' bottom-up ' principle .
This is an approach to regional policy which creates genuine popular involvement .
For this very reason we expressly included in our committee 's discussions a factfinding session with regional representatives from the three new Member States , who certainly found it to be a useful exercise .
What continues to be important about the implementation of regional policy in the three new Member States is that it really has broken new ground , not only in form but in substance too .
Especially in the domains of environmental policy , the pursuit of equal treatment and programmes for the promotion of women , but also with regard to the use of new information technology , the three States , practising the values which underlie their own political systems , have undoubtedly lent welcome new momentum not only to their own regional policies but also to European regional policy as a whole .
Another important lesson referred to in this report , as well as in parallel reports , has been the fact that the three new Member States , particularly Austria and Finland in their external border position , have been demonstrating a great many good practices , especially in the field of interregional and cross-border cooperation , and this sort of development is also of interest to prospective members of the European Union .
Some useful work is being done here in terms of establishing a conceptual basis for a preaccession strategy .
Finally , explicit reference should be made to one more lesson , because it is also very important .
We can learn from mistakes as well as from good example .
Mistakes have been and are still being made .
The implementation of regional policy as a whole , both at European and national levels , is still plagued by too much bureaucracy and too little information .
We should endeavour to reverse that situation .
Let me conclude by thanking the Commission for the very cooperative manner in which they invariably agreed to provide us with the various updated figures , and may I finally thank everyone who helped with this report , including Members of this House .
I hope that we shall obtain the broadest possible consensus behind this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the rapporteur has said , this report is a document that we can all endorse .
I should also like to congratulate him on this inventory of structural policy in the three new Member States .
Our group will surely vote for this report .
This inventory will undoubtedly be of importance to the three new Member States , since they will shortly be sitting round the table for the first time at discussions on the reform of structural policy .
That is why it is also very important for the Union to allow precisely these fresh experiences , these unspent experiences , if you like , of the new Member States to play a significant part in its deliberations on the reform of structural policy .
At the same time , these three new Member States - and I am partly qualified to speak here on the basis of my experience of the internal political discussion in my own country of Austria - must also prepare very thoroughly for this debate .
There must be no more of the assertions we have occasionally heard in the debate on structural policy that two and two can make five .
We have the Freedom Party of Austria , for example , trying on the one hand to have our membership contributions reduced but on the other hand to obtain Objective 1 status for each of our federal states .
I therefore believe that such a report is a very important means of encouraging a realistic debate on the potential of the structural-policy regime and structural funds of the Union .
It will also be important to conduct the debate on the future of the structural funds in the light of the evidence which suggests that neither the older Member States nor the new Member States - net contributors , as the rapporteur indicated - are prepared to end up paying more into the European budget .
That means we shall have to begin with very detailed discussions in each Member State , including the new ones , on where the real priorities should lie .
I see them very clearly in the need to create more employment again in the European Union .
Mr President , the Commission 's communication and Mr Rackin 's excellent report on the implementation of the EU 's regional policy in the new Member States brings out very clearly the good sides and critical points .
In the initial stages of implementation in the Member States there are time lags , problems with information and inefficiencies of management .
The reports , like the Member States and assessments , quite rightly points out the need for simplifying administration .
The structure of funding , which is fragmented and concentrated on central government , should be decentralized to local authorities .
The special problems of Finland partly also Sweden which distinguish them from the other EU countries are long distances , low population density and exceptionally cold climatic conditions .
The areas needing to be developed by the structural funds are situated in these countries thousands of kilometres from the Central European market areas , near the Russian border .
The main livelihood in these areas , agriculture , has undergone a rapid structural upheaval with EU membership , Open markets have led to a situation in which , because of the short growing season , it is impossible to compete without continual production costs subsidies .
I may say in this connection , ladies and gentlemen , that there is still about a metre of snow lying in Northern Finland .
Finland is Europe 's most rural country , in which stresses the need for a rural policy which supports the wide variety of businesses .
Finland is currently suffering from the second highest unemployment rate in the Union .
The development of regional economies in the 1990s has been weak as a result of the record slump .
Now that economic growth is beginning the remote areas are losing out , because young people are moving out of them to the more densely populated centres of southern Finland .
In other words , irrespective of support and investment , the regional differences are growing , although the objective is quite rightly the independent and varied development of the regions .
In my opinion the experience obtained so far in the objective programmes shows very clearly that the responsibility for putting the programmes into practice should be transferred to the Member States and their local authorities , to the regions themselves .
We must move away from the single structure of a programme as a bundle of measures , it must be made continually more flexible .
The programmes are , however , absolutely essential for these areas .
They have clearly brought with them useful projects , new types of cooperation and targeted planning .
Thus in the review of the EU structural funds the continuing support for the EU 's northern regions must be protected .
( FI ) Mr President , both the Commission communication and Mr Rack 's report constitute a very interesting record of the experiences obtained with the implementation of regional policy in the three new Member States .
Thanks and congratulations to Mr Rack and the Commission .
These documents have highlighted many important points .
For example , they state that the implementation of EU regional policy has taken an unreasonably long time .
In Finland , and as far as I know , in Sweden too , the regional and local authorities have strongly criticized the fact that it has taken and is still taking far too much time to put the administrative procedures in place - time which should have been used implementing the policy itself and in the discussion of its objectives and means .
Reference is also quite rightly made to the problems which have arisen in view of the administrative bureaucracy and lack of internal coordination among the Commission 's units .
In order to simplify and promote the activities of the structural funds it is absolutely essential to simplify the administrative procedure and develop the internal coordination of the Commission 's units .
The Commission 's relevant directorate general should interpret and apply the rules in the same way .
In applying regional policy stress has been placed on the participation of regional and local authorities and interest groups in the planning and realization of regional policy .
Experience so far shows , however , that the role of those involved at local level has not been anything like sufficient .
For example in Finland the EU funding is being channelled through the state budget .
This practice has increased the bureaucracy involved in distributing the resources and resulted in the central government 's own objectives being given priority over regional objectives .
In Finland the regional and local authorities in fact hope that the decision-making power on EU funds will be transferred to local authorities .
In future the Commission should ensure that regional and local authorities are given full decision-making power in the adoption and implementation of programmes .
In spite of the problems it must be stressed that the activities of the structural funds have clearly brought new energy and enthusiasm into regional activities .
Accordingly , the international outlook and the level of awareness about the European Union have also increased .
Mr President , as a Swede I welcome both the Commission 's communication and Mr Rack 's report .
Both are largely in agreement with the conclusions which the Regional Committee came to at their meeting on 15 January 1997 .
I would like to emphasise strongly the great paucity of information made available to those concerned , particularly to small and medium sized companies in Sweden .
The extensive administration and bureaucracy both in the EU and nationally and the lack of standardised rules have actively contributed to making implementation of regional policy difficult .
The criticism levelled against centralised government , particularly in Sweden , is also quite justified .
As all three countries are net contributors to the EU it is important psychologically that there is a proper and quantitative return to these countries in the form of regional aid and that this can be used simply , quickly and effectively .
So maintaining and developing the Objective 6-region is extremely important .
The Commission in its Report on Cohesion and Environment pointed especially to the fact that non governmental organisations must be more involved in regional politics .
The committee also agreed with this and adopted our amendment proposal .
To my great disappointment I now see that Mr Rack in amendment proposal no .
4 wants to go against both the Commission and the committee by removing the NGO 's participation .
It ought to be generally accepted that non-governmental organisations , NGOs , are an asset .
They have the local knowledge and acceptance which public authorities unfortunately often lack .
What is more important is that they are not driven by profit or the need for power .
So I urge Parliament to vote against amendment proposal no 4 in favour of the original text .
In all other respects we will be voting for the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , anyone who is familiar , within his own country or elsewhere , with the administration of EU projects will no doubt recognize the criticisms made in this report .
These criticisms can be summed up under two headings - too much bureaucracy and not enough transparency in regional promotion measures .
As long as these defects are not remedied , many a citizen of our highly developed member countries will regard this as further grounds for Euroscepticism .
As an Austrian Member , however , I find it extremely important that EU assistance should henceforth be used primarily to fight unemployment and indeed that the creation of jobs be made our foremost priority .
Jobs , however , are not created by supporting a few multinational giants , which will often strike sail at the first signs of an economic headwind , leaving their massive redundant crews to take to the lifeboats ; on the contrary , jobs are created by promoting small and medium-sized businesses , which , after all , are the largest overall employers of manpower , not only in Austria .
What I should like to see being avoided in future might best be defined by means of an example .
Burgenland has been granted Objective 1 status and is to receive a total of 160m ECU from 1995 to 1999 .
This money is to lead to the creation of 7 , 300 new jobs .
If we consider , however , the way in which this assistance has been administered , it emerges that only 70 out of 9 , 000 businesses are receiving support .
The largest slice of the cake , ECU 10m , has gone to the Lenzing company ; this represents 30 % of a year 's promotion funds .
This company has used the money to create only 120 jobs , which are already under threat because the parent group is reporting nine-figure losses .
I believe it is essential to prevent any such effects in future .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Rack for his thorough and effective work in assessing regional policy in the three new Member States .
It is of course the central principle of the EU 's regional policy to narrow the differences between the regions .
However , this has not as yet been successful .
Even in the new Member States it is noticeable that the differences between the regions are growing rather than shrinking .
The EU 's newest Member states are different in many ways from the ' old Member States ' .
Finland and Sweden , for example , have an entirely new objective area , the Objective 6 area , and we have no Objective 1 areas at all .
In the Objective 6 area account is taken of the distinctive features typical of the Nordic countries such as low population density and long distances .
In shaping the EU 's regional policy in future these factors must be included either by continuing with the Objective 6 programme or by including these features typical of the Nordic countries in other programmes .
The problem with the present Objective 6 programme is however that the regional development funds include support for agriculture .
There are some areas in which two-thirds of the resources are directed towards farms and only one third remains for the structural development of the region .
However , the most important structural policy objective for Finland and for the EU as a whole , apart from the cohesion objective , is to focus on employment and on overcoming the unemployment problem .
Mr Rack has also described very well the problems relating to the situation in the new Member States .
We have a reasonably good administrative culture and the EU 's structural programmes have involved increased bureaucracy .
This problem is described very well and it is to be hoped that we will get over this problem in the review of the regional policy programmes .
One positive aspect from Finland 's point of view , as has been stated , is that many new things have been happening and there has been enthusiastic cooperation .
Mr President , I think that the report we are discussing is , for the most part , a good one and it describes the situation accurately .
There are also parts of the EU 's regional aid which have worked quite well in practice .
This applies in particular to Objective 4 and Objective 3 .
But there is a lot which , if we are to be honest about it , does not work particularly well .
One problem which crops up continually when you are out looking at real projects is the enormous amount of bureaucracy you come up against when you make an application for funds and when you submit a report on these projects ; all this creates immense difficulties .
There are also several problems which are particularly connected with the Objective 6-Region in Sweden which deals with aid to sparsely populated areas .
One of the problems is that there is very little participation on the part of private businesses , which is almost certainly due to the bureaucracy involved .
Another problem is that only a small part of the aid has been paid ; in Sweden less than 10 percent of funds have been paid out and actually used .
It is also true to say that many municipalities are currently in such a bad state financially that they do not have the means to use EU aid , they quite simply do not have the means to get hold of it .
What is currently happening is that municipalities and regional authorities are closing down perfectly healthy businesses in order to take on temporary EU projects , which is not a particularly positive development .
This is why Objective 6 aid must be changed in the future to make it more effective and work better as it is in the sparsely populated regions that the big regional political problems can be found .
Taking an overall view , I am prepared to say that it would have been considerably better to keep the money in Sweden and never allow it to go via the EU but to allow Sweden themselves to determine how the funds should be used .
This is the truth about this aid .
It is also important to view regional policy as a whole and to look at the effect EU membership has had .
The fact is that the key to the regional balance which has existed in Sweden , where there has been a very even regional standard , is a strong public sector and public transfer system .
As part of the EMU process there are currently large cutbacks in these which is having a considerable effect on the regional balance .
In addition , most of the funds returned to Sweden go into agriculture , particularly agriculture in Southern Sweden , and this has a significant negative impact from a regional political point of view .
The EU is also moving towards serious intervention in national regional policy , for example in our transport aid , which is a very effective form of regional political aid .
So , unfortunately , I must state that on the whole membership of the EU has had a negative effect on the regional balance in Sweden .
Mr President , to create equal conditions for all people , no matter where they live , is one of our most important tasks as elected representatives and to ensure that everyone has access to work , education , care and communication regardless of whether they live in a city , a small town or a rural area .
The regions in the North of Sweden and Finland are extremely sparsely populated with as few as two inhabitants per square kilometre .
An active regional policy which allows the whole of Sweden to prosper is therefore an important component of Swedish domestic policy , for which Objective 6 is absolutely crucial and must naturally be maintained .
That the whole of Europe should prosper ought to be the aim of the EU 's regional policy .
It is a good heading for regional policy which we ought to introduce into the Union .
Sweden pays 20 billion kronor per year in Membership dues to the EU .
Out of this 5 billion goes back into agriculture , 4 billion to regional politics .
In order to use this 4 billion we must also contribute the same amount of money ourselves from the Swedish purse .
This may seem in order but my question is whether this merry-go-round of money which flies off to Brussels and then comes back round again is a good model .
The money which is returned is also loaded with a mass of rules and administration .
We cannot resolve this huge issue now but it must be included when we evaluate the Structural Funds after 1999 .
This report also takes up the issue of existing bureaucracy and delays , particularly the length of time from a decision being made to when the money is finally paid out .
This must be made more efficient .
Mr President , fewer Objectives , fewer funds and community initiatives , better co-ordination between the EU 's regional policy and that of the Member State 's , increased regional and local influence in decision making , planning , implementation and supervision of EU projects , putting all our efforts into doing something about the high unemployment in Northern Sweden and in Northern Finland along with some proposals for a better environment and a border region co-operation are some of the proposals which could further improve regional policy both for the Member States and for the EU .
These are proposals which could make regional policy more effective .
Approve Mr Rack 's report , Mr President .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission and in particular on behalf of Mrs Wulf-Mathies , the Commissioner responsible for one of the main sectors of regional policy , I should like to thank Mr Rack for his report and for the motion for a resolution .
The report arrives at - and I quote - a ' definitely positive verdict regarding the implementation to date of the Structural Fund programmes in the three Member States ' .
This result is not solely , or even primarily , a credit to the Commission but is attributable to the professionalism with which the three Member States in question have approached their task .
We can certainly feel well satisfied at the progress made , but satisfaction must never be allowed to slide into complacency .
The report makes a number of constructive criticisms , many of which will appear on the agenda during the discussions on the reform of the Structural Funds launched by the recent forum on cohesion .
Before replying to these points , I should like to highlight a number of passages in the report which express certain principles of regional development policy which should always be taken as reference parameters for the debate on reform .
First , a relatively advanced level of national economic development does not exclude the existence of specific regional development problems and disparities which call for intervention by the Structural Funds .
I would also remind Honourable Members , in particular , that the per capita gross domestic product in Sweden and Finland is still below the Community mean .
Secondly , the principles of multi-annual planning , partnership , subsidiarity , additionality and concentration have proved to be essential components of the Union 's regional policy .
Partnership between the Commission and the Member States , and within the Member States , is confronted by the challenge posed by excessive complexity .
But it is a principle that we mean to defend , trying at the same time to reduce bureaucracy so far as is compatible with the sound and efficient administration of the Funds .
Thirdly , the promotion of employment , technological modernization , equality of opportunity and the environment must remain priorities of the new Structural Funds .
Cross-border and inter-regional co-operation is another sector that enhances the value of the Union 's structural interventions and must be promoted .
Local initiatives , especially those to promote employment , are another field that holds out encouraging prospects for the future .
On this point , I would refer you to the current programme of territorial pacts for employment - the Commission strongly supports this programme and agrees with its approach .
It takes the principle of partnership back to basics , involving the public , private and voluntary sectors in joint action to boost employment .
The Leader II programme has already achieved good results in this area .
Moving onto the criticisms , I believe that our administration and distribution mechanisms can , and therefore must , be improved .
As the report rightly emphasizes , excessive bureaucracy is particularly unpopular in the three new Member States .
Within the Commission there is a broad consensus on many of the proposed improvements : reducing the number of Community-initiative programmes and the administrative burden they involve , improving co-ordination and harmonization of rules between the various Funds and the Directorates-General , and so on .
The Commission is taking an active stance , as demonstrated by the SEM 2000 project .
Many of these improvements , though , will have to await the major reform of the Structural Funds for the new programming period .
Among the reforms , there will have to be better use made of modern financing mechanisms , including start-up and risk capital .
Regarding the recent reprogramming exercise for the Objective 2 regions in Finland , that was indeed a protracted and laborious procedure .
I would however call your attention to the secondary advantages , especially the possibility of simplifying and redefining the programme and bringing forward the intermediate assessment .
With regard to the other objectives , the intermediate assessment has not yet been completed and , despite our efforts , progress is slow .
The report reproaches us for having neglected the rural areas and Objective 5B .
That does not mean that the Commission underestimates the problems of rural areas : indeed , as emphasized in Mr Rack 's report , a very significant proportion of the available resources has been used specifically for schemes to benefit the rural areas and to benefit farmers in the Nordic and Alpine regions .
Finally , Mr President , Mr Rack , ladies and gentlemen , I extend my congratulations and those of the Commission on this report , and thank you for the critical and constructive comments you have put forward .
I see this as another outstanding example of collaboration between our institutions .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I should just like to raise a point of order , for which I apologize .
There were two roll-call votes yesterday , namely on the Titley report and the WTO bananas , in which I wanted to abstain rather than voting in favour .
I asked for that to be minuted .
However , it was not mentioned in the Minutes of these roll-call votes .
I should just like you to establish the reason for that , if you please .
It is pointless for us to make corrections if they are not recorded .
Thank you Mrs Mann , but the discussion of the Minutes ended over an hour ago .
However , we shall take account of your request .
Cross-border and inter-regional co-operation
The next item is the report ( A4-0161 / 97 ) by Mrs Myller , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on cross-border and inter-regional co-operation .
Mr President , cross-border and inter-regional cooperation is a fundamental part of the work of the European Union .
Europe 's present boundaries were created by a series of wars which sapped Europe 's energies and resources , at enormous human cost .
The European Union was founded partly as a means of resolving conflicts through negotiation and with the aid of common legislation .
Nations are still divided by borders .
The creation of the internal market has reduced internal border problems but not , unfortunately , eliminated them altogether .
One function of cross-border cooperation across the EU 's internal borders is to implement fully freedom of movement for persons , goods and services .
The aim should be to ensure that citizens ' everyday affairs run more smoothly .
Borders must not impede the provision or use of services of an acceptable standard , for example .
Local authorities in border areas may also save substantial amounts of the taxpayers ' money by setting up joint services and common infrastructure in border areas .
In places , considerable progress has of course already been made in this direction .
Good examples are to be found in Germany , Holland , Luxembourg and France .
Another noteworthy example comes from the border between Finland and Sweden , where the towns of Haaparanta and Tornio are cooperating .
It must be said that the cooperation between these two neighbouring towns is much closer and more significant in terms of results than that elsewhere .
However , there are very few problems with regard to cooperation at the internal borders if one compares the situation with that between EU Member States and third countries .
Despite all the difficulties , though , strong foundations exist for the development of such cooperation .
The end of the division of the continent into two camps has created new opportunities for the development of the whole of Europe .
In order to exploit them , however , care must be taken to avoid new walls being erected which divide peoples within Europe .
Cross-border and interregional cooperation strengthens neighbourliness and solidarity between the regions of Europe , creating and renewing arrangements for cooperation in the best possible way .
Europe is characterized by a stress on regionalization .
The Interreg II C programme was developed to promote regional cooperation .
By means of this and other programmes , the EU must improve exploitation of the regions ' own resources through joint activity .
At the EU level , Mediterranean cooperation has already been institutionalized .
The development of the Mediterranean programme and the stepping up of measures in that region is important from the point of view of the whole Union .
However , in the north of the Union - in the Baltic and Barents Sea regions - regional cooperation is also developing .
Two of the EU 's new Member States and Norway , which rejected EU membership in its referendum , meet there , together with Russia , which has enormous social problems .
Environmental concerns and efforts to increase regional stability are , in particular , key issues which should be stressed in cooperation between the EU and third countries , whether in the south , east or north .
A third important aspect of cross-border and inter-regional cooperation is the development of effective and practical cooperation between associated countries and EU Member States .
Cross-border cooperation , in particular , should be seen as part of associated countries ' pre-accession strategy , by means of which practical measures can be taken , to the benefit of both sides , to improve the conditions in which people in border areas live .
However , there are still many problems with regard to cooperation between EU Member States and third countries which hamper the development of genuine cross-border projects .
A particular problem lies in the fact that cooperation programmes between EU Member States and third countries are based on separate , differing legislation .
Programmes in the Member States are administered by the Directorate-General responsible for regional policy , while programmes in third countries are administered by that responsible for external relations .
Third country programmes are not sufficiently long-term and systematic in their planning .
In my opinion a possible solution to these differences in the length of programmes and in how they are regulated might be to set up a single common fund for cross-border cooperation with third countries , which could be used to fund and administer joint projects .
I believe that the Commission should consider this recommendation very carefully , because it could reduce bureaucracy , improve the implementation of these programmes and enable genuine cross-border cooperation to be achieved with third countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin by congratulating my colleague Riitta Myller on a truly outstanding report .
It analyses the present situation very well , shows where reforms are needed and makes proposals for the future .
Cross-border and interregional cooperation in Europe , I believe , is one the kernels , one of the centrepieces and one of the flagship activities of this European Union , because it puts into practice our ideal of an increasingly integrated Europe , our belief that integration is far more than a mere catchword and that economic and social cohesion must be pursued in earnest .
Interregional and cross-border cooperation means looking beyond our own four walls , taking advantage of the spinoffs from such cooperation and , where frontiers previously created obstacles and made the joint use of facilities difficult , whether for infrastructural , social or simply interpersonal reasons , dismantling such frontiers .
This phenomenon can already be experienced in many parts of the European Union .
Anyone who , like me , comes from a region in which four European countries meet - Belgium , France , Luxembourg and Germany - can see that this is a highly desirable development .
But you can also see that its organizational implementation , especially in the administrative domain , still poses problems , even today .
Everyone knows that four different administrative structures come into contact there , with different levels of government having to act together .
That does not make it easy , but the people on the spot , the administrative bodies , are trying to find answers , some of them on the basis of structural assistance from the European Union .
I believe that is important .
However , I must also say that future interregional and cross-border cooperation should entail no moves to create , or to demand the creation of , any additional tiers of administration .
Political responsibility for this work , within the bounds we have set , must be entrusted to the bodies with the democratic mandate to shoulder that responsibility .
It is their task to carry it out .
But we in the European Union do not only have internal borders to dismantle ; we also have external borders .
My colleague Riitta Myller stated that very clearly .
I refer you to her report , which I fully endorse .
As far as we in the European Union are concerned , our external borders currently touch on the regions where the greatest upheavals have been occurring .
It is at those borders that the widest prosperity gaps are to be found , and it is there that the bulk of our work will have to be done .
The third aspect , which we introduced in the past within the INTERREG framework and which I regard as very important , is that Europe should be seen from the perspective of regional planning in the wider sense .
It should no longer be considered as a collection of nation States or individual regions within those States ; we must focus on entire geographical areas and their problems - by which I mean the Baltic region , the Mediterranean Basin , etc. and act accordingly .
Ladies and gentlemen , structural reform is on the agenda for the coming weeks and months .
Personally speaking , I believe that interregional cooperation and the structural funds of the European Union dedicated to that purpose , in other words INTERREG , are one of the main assets that must be preserved , even after a reform , because this is the most European of all the work we can undertake .
Cooperation is an important point .
When we talk about concentrating the structural funds and improving their efficiency , that means concentrating especially on the things that are very good and very important and reinforcing them .
My appeal is that due prominence be accorded to the INTERREG resource in the forthcoming structural reform .
Cross-border and interregional cooperation form one of the main pillars of the European edifice .
I sincerely congratulate my colleague Riitta Myller on her outstanding report , to which I pledge my support .
Mr President , on behalf of the PPE Group I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur for her report and to express my thanks for the constructive cooperation that marked the deliberations in committee , where we were able to add what we regard as essential points , which are now included in the report .
In our eyes too , cross-border and interregional cooperation is one of the pillars of the European integration process .
As the rapporteur said , there are two aspects involved : cooperation within Europe and cooperation with third countries , where this type of cooperation can pay important dividends both now and in the future .
At the same time , these efforts should not be entirely focused on social and economic cohesion but must also take account of the security dimension .
By comparison with other projects , I too would say that interregional and cross-border cooperation has a greater impact on people 's daily lives , one reason being that the projects involved are often born of popular initiatives .
They merit greater attention , because these projects highlight the obstacles and difficulties that hinder cooperation , problems of which people become more keenly aware in this context .
Interregional cooperation must take more account of economic aspects , of social , environmental and planning policies , because people in border areas find it hard to understand why good health care is available on their side of the border but not on the other side , why the planners , for example , have designated their side of the border as an economic development area , whereas on the other side , perhaps little more than half a mile away , the land may be designated as a green belt with strict measures to protect the natural environment .
These are European integration problems , and that is why such projects deserve special attention .
This report must serve first and foremost as the basis for future projects , for the next programme .
Secondly , interregional and cross-border cooperation must be better coordinated with the other structural funds and the other forms of structural assistance .
Thirdly , procedures should be simplified .
If we want individual citizens or even citizens ' initiatives to become involved in this domain , we cannot confront them with time-consuming and cumbersome administrative procedures that result in their having to wait up to a year and a half before receiving a definitive response to their applications .
Moreover , these programmes are a means of taking account of the specific nature of the individual regions of Europe .
As someone who lives in a border region , I can assure you that you will find convinced but critical Europeans in these regions .
We should not squander the opportunity to make greater use of the impetus for European integration that is generated in frontier areas .
I certainly hope that this highly significant report will also send the right signal to the Commission .
Madam President , while I fully endorse the praise Mrs Myller has received for this report , with its extensive coverage of Europe as a whole , I would like to take a closer look at one particular facet .
We are concerned with major borders , new borders , external borders , but the INTERREG 1 and INTERREG 2 programmes have hitherto financed borders which are now being defined as internal but which have become internal precisely because of the effect of those programmes .
I refer to the thirty or so Euroregions , as they are called in the Treaty , which are still operative and whose problems have not been fully covered simply because we are now dealing with other regions with a greater eastward exposure .
I agree with a number of points , especially in the motion for a resolution , which do to some extent refer to the root of this kind of attention cultivated by the European Union - especially where reference is made , in paragraph 2 , to clear guidelines for co-operation policy .
In this type of activity , there is such a range , such a free interpretation , that at times there seems to be a danger of wandering away from the point , diverging from the lines laid down in the Treaty and elsewhere .
Clear guidelines , then , spring from three fundamental activities .
The first is the activity that favours the exchange of information : understanding each other in order to know each other .
The second is the activity that derives full value from affinities and smooths over any aspects that are not common to all sides .
And the third is the activity that focuses on joint programmes directed towards what is the main objective of this type of intervention , which is to eliminate or at any rate reduce regional disparities .
Paragraph 6 of the motion mentions the role of the regions situated on the internal borders , and this is where my main interest lies , since other Members have concerned themselves with the new borders .
The main objective - as also stated in paragraph 11 of the motion for a resolution - is to enhance economic and social development .
Significantly , the two sides of industry are expressly called upon to participate .
So we are not talking about a European Union mandate to regional or national political organizations or institutions - the social partners are to participate .
Not only that , but paragraph 23 explicitly refers to the involvement and specific participation of the private sector : the public are to be the proposers of the activities , the interpreters of the regulations and hence , clearly , the beneficiaries of the activities .
I say all this because we are seeing the birth of other , foreign Euroregions , unfortunately supported by Community funds .
I refer specifically to them not just because they represent an internal policy problem but because we are talking about forms of Community financing - and this is the recommendation I would like to put to this House - which in my opinion should also be a matter of interest to the European Commission .
I refer to a Euroregion which goes by the name of the ' Tyrolese Euregio ' , which is still progressing despite the widespread opposition that followed its creation , both within Italy and within Austria .
The two governments concerned , those of Italy and Austria , have clearly denied the logical justification for this Euroregion , which is outside those envisaged by the Treaty .
And yet this ' Euregio of Trentino and Tyrol ' is still progressing , proposing programmes , using Community funds , with an objective very different from that proposed by the Euroregions as we understand them , which tend to weaken if not actually eliminate the internal borders .
This Euroregion is eliminating the previous borders , true , but with the objective of creating an unacceptable political institution , defining a new border , a thick red line chalked around what is now being defined as ' the Union of Tyrol ' - North Tyrol , South Tyrol and a hypothetical and historically unjustifiable Trentino Tyrol .
I ask you , Commissioner , to be on your guard against allowing any such distortions to occur and , above all , to ensure that they are not financed from Community funds .
Madam President , in the context of eastward enlargement , this report has a very special significance .
It is an expression of the urgency of change in the funding of both cross-border and interregional cooperation in the Baltic and Mediterranean regions .
The situation in the Euroregions , the fact that money earmarked for cross-border cooperation can practically only be spent on assistance to immediate frontier zones on our side of the border , is intolerable .
Trust that has been painstakingly built up and successes that have been wrung from a vast number of joint talks on the development of projects are all in vain if the projects cannot be financed from one fund .
That is why the jewel in the crown of this report is that it provides for the possibility of financing from a common fund not only joint interregional cooperation projects but also those in the domain of cross-border cooperation .
We have agreed that the Greens will withdraw their amendment , because point 4 is an adequate means of presenting this request to the Commission .
Speed is now of the essence if the hopes of the regions are not to be dashed .
The Commission acts and implements these things .
It could already be promoting pilot schemes during the current programming period to test a joint financing and evaluation system .
The 1994 Schroedter report gives it scope to do that , and I hope the Commission will respond very rapidly .
Our perennial problem is that money flows indirectly into the coffers of the central authorities .
This call for a common fund offers a means of ensuring that the money can really be administered in the Euroregions from now on .
Clear steps are being taken here to foil and preclude attempts by central administrations to misappropriate funds for their own purposes .
The Commission is also called upon to ensure that this abuse is not continued in the current programmes .
It is truly a matter of creating cross-border links between villages and towns , overcoming divisive factors and restoring bridges destroyed during the wars .
Nowhere is the idea of a ' fortress Europe ' so tangible as at the external borders .
The Schengen rules are a huge obstacle to cooperation in the Euroregions .
It is down to the courage of local authorities that projects are nevertheless possible .
The theatre island in Guben , on the River Neisse , had not been used for 50 years until a concrete bridge enabled the inhabitants of Guben and Gubin to hold a Festival of Europe there together .
These are opportunities for Europe .
Above all , an open Europe requires political will at all levels .
Mr President , there are some exciting new developments in the whole idea of cross-border and interregional cooperation , in particular for people like myself who live in a coastal community in Scotland .
We tend to think we are out on the periphery , that we do not have borders to the east .
But , in fact , we do because the North Sea provides a common border and historically Scotland was very closely linked to the Netherlands , to Flanders , to the Baltic countries , to Germany and so on .
These links are now being re-established and I very much welcome the extension of the concept explicitly to the North Sea and the idea that the coastal people also form part of an interregion .
As president of the North Sea Intergroup , I am involved in some very exciting developments which are being proposed for the whole of the North Sea region .
In some respects the North Sea region is fortunate in that it has many advantages , for example in education .
My own constituency of North-East Scotland has no less than four universities .
That is replicated across many parts of the North Sea region .
We have fishing grounds which are extremely important to Europe and very important to the fishing communities .
We have tremendously important historic and cultural aspects which are capable of development .
On the other hand , we suffer from peripherality and , in particular , from the perception from London that we are very far away from anywhere .
I am glad to see that Brussels is somewhat more sympathetic than London on occasion .
We also suffer from problems such as pollution and the need for coastal development and coastal preservation .
This is even more accentuated when you look at other parts of the North Sea such as the east coast of England and parts of the Dutch and Danish coasts .
In all this , there is a tremendous potential .
In the resolution Mrs Myller has put forward - and I commend her wholeheartedly on the whole of it - there is a very interesting point 5 about cultural identities and minorities and I can see , for example , that not only the Scots but the Friesians too could benefit from emphasis on their particular language and history .
There is potential for the development of the information society and for the protection of coastal communities .
I should like to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur for this report and to the Commission for being so innovative and thinking in terms of INTERREG IIc . I am very happy to support it .
Madam President , it is good to see proposals for increased cooperation between regions both within and outside the EU .
It is important that the EU does not turn in on itself .
I also support the idea of survival strategies for peripheral regions .
However , I do not have the same favourable attitude towards the call for the creation of a formalized ' Europe of the regions and municipalities ' .
As the proposal stands , it contains the seeds of a Europe without frontiers , divided into regions .
The nation states still have a monopoly in terms of taxes , but with greater funding of regional cooperation , it will increasingly be the EU which distributes Member States ' tax revenues to the regions .
Increased funding and politicization of regional cooperation will strengthen the position of the EU and the regions , at the expense of the nation states and local autonomy .
Already , too many decisions are being taken in the EU and implemented at district and county level .
At present , a very intensive debate is taking place concerning one of these cross-border initiatives , namely the cooperation across the frontier between Germany and Denmark in what is known as the ' Euroregion Schleswig / Slesvig ' .
In this border area , the ' Euroregion Slesvig ' has been strongly criticized , because of fears of undue dominance of the area by both the Federal Republic and the EU .
Since the Euroregion is meant to operate as a single unit in the European context , many people in the border area see the Euroregion as an EU state created through the back-door - and there is absolutely no question of any kind of anti-German feeling here , as has been suggested .
I share this scepticism .
In Denmark , it is the parliament and government which decide on external policy , and not the individual counties .
The county of South Jutland , which forms the Danish part of the border area , is not an EU municipality , but a county of Denmark .
We ourselves have chosen that this should be so .
In historical terms , there has been a great deal of conflict over the Danish-German border .
Today , the border is accepted on both sides , and we have an excellent relationship between Danes and Germans in the border area , a relationship which has been a model for many other places .
We are good neighbours who have a low fence with many openings , but we take our own decisions for ourselves , and respect those taken by the other side .
And this is what people have been demonstrating for at the border , that things should continue in this way , and German opponents of the removal of the border have also taken part in the demonstrations against the Euroregion .
We believe that cross-border cooperation can only be successful if there is complete acceptance that such cooperation requires agreement between the two parties .
For two sides to agree , however , it is not necessary to build up complicated institutions .
It is sufficient for them to meet and work out their agreement .
I have nothing at all against cooperation , but I do object to cooperation having to be regulated through EU projects .
People call this decentralization , and say they want to bring EU cooperation closer to the people .
But if they wish to bring EU powers down to local level , it must be done through real decentralization , in other words by handing legislative powers back to the national parliaments .
Cross-border cooperation is , in my view , both important and necessary , and extremely exciting and challenging .
But I do not believe that we shall have a better or more democratic form of government by drawing down the curtain on the nation states .
I believe in a Europe with a variety of different countries , not a new European superpower .
It is important to preserve the nation states , above all because they are the best foundation for democracy and a sense of community and common purpose .
If borders go , they will not simply be removed - they will have to be torn away .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , cross-border cooperation now has two quite distinct aspects . That is reflected in Mrs Myller 's report .
On the one hand there is cross-border cooperation between the countries of the European Union and on the other cross-border cooperation with countries outside the European Union .
The first type of cooperation , principally effected through Interreg-IIA , is showing very positive results .
For the period 1995 / 1999 ECU 2 400 million are being mobilized for Interreg A , ECU 500 million for Interreg B and ECU 415 million for Interreg C.
In our opinion it would be a good idea to set up an Interreg D instrument to finance linguistic cooperation in these cross-border regions .
Such linguistic cooperation is currently under-funded and I think greater emphasis should be placed on improving that type of cooperation .
The resolution does indeed , in points 5 and 20 , stress the importance of multi-lingualism , but for the moment that remains essentially a vain hope .
We note moreover a shift of interest towards the outermost regions of the European Union - perhaps in slightly too exclusive a manner .
The project for developing the Mediterranean economic area is already mobilizing ECU 4 865 million , that is twice as much as Interreg-IIA , and ECU 8 million has been allocated for the Atlantis project .
Of course we welcome this financial contribution for the respective regions , but we fear that at this rate crossborder cooperation in the heart of Europe will become the poor relation and anyone elected to represent Alsace , as I am , can only feel concerned about such trends .
That is exacerbated , moreover , by the objective of social cohesion if that is interpreted as an obligation to keep the European Union 's money for the less-developed regions only .
Other criteria need to be taken into consideration for cross-border cooperation .
That is why I want to say here that Franco-German cooperation as well as trilateral cooperation between Switzerland , Germany and France around Basel also need funding and must not be sacrificed on the altar of these new priorities .
I should also like to see credit amounts released more clearly in order to strengthen bilingualism in my region - Alsace - and to see that more inhabitants of Alsace are represented in the French media .
That is partly a financial question .
It is quite clear that bilingualism is of great economic interest - even above actual cultural attachment proper - and it makes it possible to reduce local unemployment by a not inconsiderable amount , as may currently be seen in the Rhine Basin .
Despite all these omissions which I am sorry to note in this report , which places great emphasis on the outermost regions but rather neglects inter-regional cooperation at the very heart of the continent , I shall of course be voting for the report , since we support the general principles and inter-regional cross-border cooperation is still an altogether positive principle .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Myller report is indeed an integrated and well documented proposal on the improvement of cross-border and interregional cooperation .
Yet , besides the economic dimension of the issue and the clear need to achieve the aim of economic and social cohesion and , above all increased employment , cross-border cooperation can serve in a very genuine and effective way another equally important aim , that of approach and cooperation between peoples , the elimination of prejudices and stereotypes , and the discouragement of mentalities that favour and foment isolation , xenophobia , nationalism , enmity and violence .
Consequently , if our policy to reinforce cross-border and interregional cooperation is to be effective , it must include a broad range of statutory measures and significant resources aiming both to improve the economic and social conditions of the weaker regions in the European Union , and to create a climate and conditions of equal democratic , peaceful and creative coexistence between peoples , without distinctions of sex , race , national origin or religion .
Such a policy must also go together with a range of programmes to ensure the accession and incorporation of weaker groups , immigrants and minorities , into social , political and economic life in the European Union , in a balanced and natural way .
The role of the media remains of course important , in that they contribute to the suppression of prejudice , by emphasizing the beauty of the variety , polychromism and multi-cultural character of modern society .
As for the south-eastern borders of Europe , there has indeed been some delay in the promotion of cross-border cooperation , as the Myller report points out .
That , however , is due to the well known peculiarities and serious problems of the area , problems to which the European Union should pay special attention in the context of regional policy , which call for the application of programmes appropriately adapted to the particular features of the region , and which above all require the provision of substantial resources and at the same time a trimming down of bureaucratic procedures .
Today , with the emerging settlement of crises and the stabilization of the situation , the prerequisites are being created for cooperation between the Balkan countries at many levels .
As you have seen , Greece now plays a positive part in solving the problems , in the effective implementation of a policy of interregional and cross-border cooperation , and in the peaceful settlement of any differences in that difficult area of south-eastern Europe , which is nevertheless very important for European integration .
Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Myller .
I represent one of those townships , País Vasco , which through circumstances of history , was divided between two states either side of a frontier - a frontier which has long made communication difficult between two entities which share the same language and culture , in addition to forming a unit suited to cooperation in other fields such as the social and economic field .
Fortunately these frontiers , these scars of history , are beginning to fade and we are again finding ways of creating bonds with the other part of our town within a European context .
We must take the European area as a joint horizon for various peoples to live together without internal frontiers but with respect for our respective identities , our self determination and diversity .
In this context cross-border cooperation is fundamentally an instrument for the creation of this joint Europe and is , similarly , the way to take to remove frontiers , not only physical ones , which make it difficult to build the planned coexistence which the European Union represents .
Frontiers are in many cases artificial and have divided some peoples internally or have separated them from their neighbours .
Robert Schuman hailed from Lorraine , a frontier region , De Gasperi from the alpine region of Trentino , Adenauer was from the Rhineland .
It is not by chance that the founding fathers of this Europe should come from frontier regions .
We must bring Europe closer to the citizens and if there is one place where our citizens can see that Europe exists , it is in the border regions .
The effort which the Union is making in this matter will be the best catalyst for a process of political union , a union of citizens and peoples .
Nowadays Biarritz and San Sebastián are not regarded as separate items on offer for tourists within international tourism .
It would not seem logical if the Austrian Tyrol and the South Tyrol , Alto Adige , did not cooperate on the joint promotion of economic or tourist projects .
It is absurd that a worker in Irún , the Basque country , working in Hendaye on the other side of the border , should not have access to coordinated services within the fields of health and social security ; we see shades of Kafka when he telephones from his home to his workplace and has to pay for an international call .
We must build Euro-regions where citizens find their natural community in a Europe without frontiers .
Finally , Madam President , I should like to underscore the importance of the report approved in this committee , which not only launches proposals , but also demands that the framework for cross-border cooperation should be binding on the Member States .
This Parliament asked as much of the Intergovernmental Conference .
In conclusion I hope that the Member States have the courage to resolutely pursue this cooperation .
If they do they will be demonstrating that they are not afraid of a United Europe as a pluralistic area .
If they do not do so or do not support this in realistic everyday terms , the citizens , the towns and the natural communities will continue building this Europe as a space for coexistence and diversity .
The geo-political upheavals which Europe has experienced have brought in their wake strong movements in favour of integration .
Mrs Myller 's report is particularly interesting on this subject since it considers all the problems and questions raised by inter-regional and cross-border Union policy .
It would indeed be appropriate to classify and coordinate all the initiatives which are sometimes developed in too disorganized a manner often without control or expert guidance .
Thus when cross-border areas of activity are to be exploited a common financing and guidance fund should be set up , checks should be made to ensure that legal and tax rules are compatible , job creation should be encouraged and the environment should be effectively protected .
In this regard I should like to mention a region not considered by the rapporteur - the Alpine region - although European Union / Swiss negotiations are at a standstill , the associations of the Chamonix valley have for their part managed to cooperate with their Piémont and Le Valais counterparts as needed to fight pollution .
The building of Europe will also involve the citizens , the towns and the regions .
Madam President , my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur on an excellent report .
The aim of a united , socially and economically harmonized and permanently peaceful Europe is far less likely to be achieved by centralist strong-arm tactics than by sustained , far-reaching voluntary cross-border and interregional cooperation .
In this sense I should like to highlight a particular type of project which affects my immediate home area and which , I believe , merits respect on account of its uniqueness and its innovative and audacious character and should be supported by the European Union .
I refer to the joint bid by three States - Italy , Slovenia and Austria - to host the Winter Olympics .
These Olympics would be staged jointly by the federal state of Carinthia in Austria , the autonomous region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia in Italy and the Republic of Slovenia .
This would be the first time since the revival of the Olympic Games that any Olympics had been held in a region covering several States .
This region is trilingual , multicultural and multinational , but despite this - or perhaps precisely because of it - has decided to mount a joint bid to carry out this important cooperative project .
This mega-event , which would attract enormous media attention , could be a flagship pilot project in the realm of interregional cooperation , a project in the true European spirit with an inestimable symbolic value .
Madam President , there is no doubt that cross-border and interregional co-operation is a very important aspect of the European Union 's policies , since it can contribute significantly to European integration and to a real approach between the populations and regions of Europe .
Such co-operation can contribute effectively to the abolition of political and economic , but mainly of national frontiers , and I would add , to that of ill-considered cultural and religious frontiers , and it can of course contribute to reducing the corresponding gulfs and making the populations of areas that take advantage of it , one could say somewhat more ' European ' .
Our impartial moral and substantial support is therefore needed for the better organization , the more successful implementation and maximization of its positive results in the future , since it involves programmes with added European value .
I think the report by Mrs Myller is a step in the right direction .
For my part , however , I would like to say that special note should be taken of a number of points which are included in the report , but which in my view are particularly important .
The first , is that besides internal interregional and cross-border co-operation , particular emphasis should be placed on external co-operation , in other words co-operation with third countries , which in light of the Union 's enlargement , can contribute significantly to the preparation of those countries .
In that connection , and I want to stress this , the legislative framework should be simplified .
In the INTERREG-2A Programme we have today the strange situation that on either side of the borders , that programme 's projects are implemented as something separate , as if different programmes were involved .
This creates difficulties both for the coordination and the progress of the work , and I think that the issue will have to be solved in due course .
Secondly , interregional co-operation could prove particularly useful for the Union 's coastal and island areas , especially for improved communications between the islands , but also to improve their contacts with national and Community centres .
Thirdly , it goes without saying that an initiative of this kind must involve increased participation by local and regional authorities , and by the social partners , both in the planning and in the implementation of the related programmes .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , cross-border interregional cooperation is undoubtedly of prime importance to the people of border regions .
It serves to guarantee peace , freedom and respect for human rights .
The key objectives of economic development , employment promotion , social and cultural cooperation , environmental protection and greater democracy are central elements of this cooperation .
In addition , mechanisms for the support of minorities must be established and developed .
I am afraid I can only agree with the rapporteur 's criticism that there is no adequate strategy for interregional cooperation and that the funding instruments are too fragmentary .
What is certain is that the subsidiarity principle will have to be more rigorously applied in this domain too .
Greater responsibility for planning , administration , execution and funding must be devolved to the regional and local authorities than has hitherto been the case .
At the same time , however , decisions on cooperative measures must be a matter for democratically elected bodies .
An evaluation of the results is necessary , so that tax revenue is not squandered and wasted on irrelevant projects .
This presupposes a good control system .
Efficiency of performance must not be hampered by excessive bureaucracy and daunting administrative hurdles .
Considerable simplification is needed , along with timely advice and guidance from the Commission .
Support for less-developed regions , promotion of rural development and improvement of the necessary infrastructure must take priority if we are to avoid further migration from border areas .
The Member States in the frontier regions must press on with their cooperative ventures .
Emotional barriers must be dismantled .
The importance of this is demonstrated by the unfortunate occurrences in southern Denmark in connection with the creation of a Euroregion .
The Commission would do well to start with our colleague Mrs Sandbæk and try to dismantle her emotional barriers too .
It is my hope and wish that the development of cooperation in the border regions of Member States and third countries will be successfully expedited - irrespective of whether the countries in question want to become EU members one day - for the benefit of the people living in those regions .
That is an important precondition for the preservation of peace , freedom and democracy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Myller , on the quality of her motion for a resolution on cross-border and inter-regional co-operation .
The subjects covered will undoubtedly give us food for thought during the coming months as we endeavour , if possible by the end of the year , to produce a Commission communication on regional policy and cross-border and interregional co-operation - a communication which will summarize what has already been achieved in an endeavour to interpret the future .
The Commission attaches great importance to these two forms of co-operation .
I therefore fully share your hope that the European Union 's future regional policy will attach the necessary importance to cross-border and interregional co-operation .
As far as cross-border co-operation is concerned , the Interreg programmes of the 95-99 period represent a substantial advance over those for the previous period , especially as regards borders where no co-operation existed before 1990 .
However , there is still extensive room for improvement .
The Commission agrees with the Committee on Regional Policy in its belief that co-operation must not only allow regional and local authorities to assume greater responsibility for the preparation and implementation of programmes but also step up those measures which tend to promote co-operation among the operators on the ground .
The Commission will be working in two ways to eliminate the shortcomings that exist .
First , through individual programmes requiring , both at the contracting stage and subsequently in the work of the steering committees , that co-operation is organized more effectively and that more emphasis is placed on measures calculated to promote genuine partnership . Secondly , offering the regional and local authorities , within the framework of a scheme to be known as LACE TAP - ' link and assistance in co-operation for the European border regions - technical assistance and promotion ' , conducted by the association of cross-border regions and financed by the European Regional Development Fund , the possibility of organizing exchanges of experience and skills between the border areas .
You are proposing the creation of a single European fund to implement more complex forms of co-operation on both the internal and the external borders .
The establishment of a single fund is not possible at present , not among the associate states of Central Europe , given the present status of the Treaty - Article 130c - and the differences arising in procedural matters and in the financing of programmes , depending on whether the State concerned is a Member State or a third country .
However , significant advances are possible even without a single fund .
With regard to the internal borders , the INTERREG programmes implemented on some borders demonstrate that the Structural Funds are capable of promoting in-depth co-operation , with a single programme on both sides of the border , a steering committee and working groups that mobilize a wide-ranging partnership , and a single common fund for the financing of the projects .
Unfortunately , the situation is not so advantageous on all the internal borders because , even if the Community resources originate from a single fund , it only needs the procedures for administering the appropriations to be different on the two sides of the border to make it difficult to finance common projects in both border regions .
The Commission shares your wish to see the administration and financing of INTERREG simplified .
The situation regarding the external borders is rather more complex , given that the cross-border co-operation procedures under PHARE and TACIS , programmes that are external to the Union , are different from those of the structural funds which are internal bodies .
Of course , the Commission 's services responsible for INTERREG and PHARE CBC have already worked together to bring the PHARE CBC regulations and procedures as close as possible to those of the structural funds , and we are taking steps to encourage even greater harmonization and simplification of the procedures .
Finally , as regards inter-regional co-operation , the last two calls for proposals , addressed to the territorial entities in conjunction with other bodies operating at territorial level , place the emphasis on the development of partnership , on innovation and on the exchange of knowledge and skills .
Madam President , I realize that , although I have exceeded my time , I have not dealt with all the points raised in the motion for a resolution but have confined myself to a few of them .
The Commission will of course review all the ideas and proposals put forward , and will reach a decision on every one of them .
This of course will not be possible until around the end of the year , when the studies and decisions that I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks will be available .
In the meantime , I can assure you that the Commission will continue to favour a frank and constructive debate between Parliament and the Commission on cross-border and inter-regional co-operation .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
' We are not uniting any States ; we are bringing people together . ' These are the words of Jean Monnet , author of the Schuman Declaration of 1950 .
Policies , ladies and gentlemen , are made by people , and only if people know and understand each other , implement joint projects and share responsibility for them can sound European policies materialize .
Europe is open , with a free single market and freedom of movement , and yet each of its national frontiers still makes its presence felt , even without customs checks and barriers .
Cross-border and interregional cooperation is an essential means of bringing people together and solving problems by consensus .
The motion for a resolution before us deals with cross-border cooperation in the Union .
All regions in Europe continue to need European Community initiatives .
Cooperation at internal borders must enable people to go about their everyday business without any problems .
The aim is a Europe without frontiers , where communal services are available at the most convenient places .
It is a matter of developing cross-border areas with homogeneous social and economic conditions .
Part of this involves the creation of legal and fiscal conditions for the operation of cross-border enterprise zones , the coordination of instruments designed to promote regions and their economies on both sides of borders and crossborder social cooperation .
This means that it should be possible to make the best possible cross-border use of facilities in order to avoid duplication of investments .
Why must I wait for the emergency services from another part of my own country when there are emergency vehicles free just across the border ? Or if the hospital across the border has a consultant who specializes in my illness , why can I only be admitted to the county hospital on my own side of the border ?
The Myller report deals with many detailed issues .
It highlights good points and problem areas .
In the quest for more common ground in Europe , these problem areas must be eliminated .
There are many positive features in this report , but also some areas where we should proceed with caution .
The call for ' the creation of legal and fiscal preconditions for the operation of cross-border business areas ' is simply likely to clash with the national rules in this sector .
For example , we cannot introduce cross-border tax and legal rules in one part of southern Denmark , just because it is a border area .
For this reason , I shall abstain from voting .
I would also point out that regions consisting of parts of more than one country should be established taking full account of local circumstances .
There are different backgrounds - political , historical and cultural .
We therefore cannot lay down standard models for regional cooperation .
In Denmark , we have this problem close to home in the Danish-German border area , where even the title given to the cooperation has created difficulties .
It seems neither natural nor easy on the ear to call this the ' Euroregion Schleswig / Slesvig ' .
Here too , the subsidiarity principle must be applied .
The way to succeed is to create a psychological and popular climate which encourages cross-border cooperation , and then to give this a name which suits local conditions .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Integration policy for island regions
The next item is the debate on the oral question ( B4-0166 / 97-0-0053 / 97 ) to the Commission , tabled by Mr Arias Cañete on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on an integrated policy for the specific situation of the insular regions in the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , deputizing for the Chairman of the European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy , I have been asked on behalf of our Committee to deal with a question to which we attach particular importance .
It is the question of islands and the position they occupy , or rather ought to occupy , within the framework of the European Union 's various policies .
Having myself been born and grown up on a Mediterranean island , Crete , I know very well and at first hand all the vital problems faced by an island , precisely because of its insular character . I know very well the difficulties created by isolation , first and foremost among which is the dependence of the island and its dwellers for their economic development , social survival and medical care , on often uncertain and usually inadequate sea and air transport .
I know very well the problems of survival faced by island businesses , by far the majority of them SMEs or small companies , in their everyday efforts to compete successfully against similar businesses in mainland areas .
The cost of importing their raw materials and exporting their products and services is much higher , and the procedures involved generally much more time-consuming .
The necessary area for their development does not exist , and as a rule qualified personnel is lacking .
Technological equipment and infrastructure for communications and transport are usually deficient .
Finally , I well know the daily but important problems faced by the residents due to water shortage and the difficulty of supplying energy , inadequacies of infrastructure for health , education and culture , and the employment problems faced by young people in particular , which lead them to abandon the islands and seek their fortunes elsewhere .
Problems and difficulties which , as is natural , ultimately bring the islands to a state of economic and social stagnation , isolation , developmental backwardness and more general downgrading .
Besides , it is no matter of chance that islands , with very few exceptions , number among the European Union 's most poor areas , as emerges clearly from a series of reports by the European Commission , from your own reports , Commissioner .
It is also worth noting that despite the particular features of each island , the basic problems they face have much in common in all the Union 's island areas , whether in the North , or in the West , or in the South , and whether we are speaking of Crete and the Aegean islands , or of the Isle of Wight , or of Sicily , or of the Balearics and the Canary Islands .
Finally , this is no trivial issue , but one which involves a by no means insignificant number of European Union residents .
Taking as a base the classical definition that we accept in the European Union concerning what an island is : in other words , of course , an area of land surrounded by sea , with no continuous connection to the mainland and on which the capital of the corresponding country is not located , then the European Union today comprises a total of 22 island regions making up 4.5 % of its territory and being home to 4 % of its population .
Based on these facts , the following picture emerges : the Union 's island regions constitute a significant part of its territory and are the home of a by no means negligible proportion of its population .
Notwithstanding their respective particular features , they face in common a range of very important problems that stem precisely from their insular character and which result in their economic and social downgrading .
In the view of our Committee , Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy , this constitutes good reason for the adoption of an integrated special policy for islands within the scope of the Union 's regional and other policies , aiming precisely to help them overcome their inherent difficulties by giving them equal opportunities for development with those of the Union 's mainland areas .
Besides , such a policy has been called for consistently for many years by all the European Union 's island regions , and the need for it has been recognized from time to time and under various circumstances , by all the Union 's institutional bodies .
It is also a policy which safeguards free competition in practice , since it aims precisely to help islands cope with the additional disadvantages they face following the creation of the single internal market , which we should admit , often works to the disadvantage of islands .
On that basis , then , could the Commission tell us how it views the idea of starting to give greater importance to the peculiar character of island regions ?
Specifically , does it intend in the future to attach greater importance to improving infrastructures on islands , particularly sea and air transport ?
Does it intend to contribute to the promotion of the sectors of agriculture , forestry and fishing , and that of alternative cultural and ecological tourism for the islands ?
Will it take all necessary steps to enable businesses on islands to compete with mainland businesses under equal conditions ?
Mainly , however , Commissioner , how does the Commission react to the idea of including in the revised treaty that will emerge from the Intergovernmental Conference , an order recognizing the particular nature of island regions , and the problems they face in common , which could in the future constitute the legal base for the implementation of an integrated Community policy that is essential if islands are to escape isolation , overcome their structural difficulties and claim a better future within the framework of United Europe .
In the hope of a positive reply from the Commission to all these questions by our Committee , which are at the same time called for by Europe 's island regions , I thank you for your attention .
Madam President , the Commission recalls that in 1994 it published a document on the island regions which made it possible , simultaneously , to uncover the wealth represented by the diversity of the islands within the Community and to gain a better understanding of their socio-economic situation .
That document sets out , for each Member State , a complete list of islands , with maps and statistics , a description of the level NAZ 2 and NAZ 3 island regions , and a brief analysis of the territory and of the economic situation of all the other islands .
With regard to the Community appropriations currently allocated to the islands within the Union , I must emphasize that the majority of the large islands within the Community are eligible for Structural Funds subsidies , mainly under Objective 1 .
This applies to the seven outermost regions - the Canaries , the Azores , Madeira , Guadeloupe , French Guiana , Martinique and Reunion - and also to Corsica , Sardinia , Sicily and all the Greek islands .
Under this heading , cofinancing is possible for investments in sea and air transport infrastructures .
The Cohesion Fund can also cofinance transport infrastructures in the islands of the eligible Member States .
The island regions can thus benefit from the investments in the trans-European networks .
For the new planning period , the Commission shortly expects to present the document ' Agenda 2000 ' , which will include the future financial perspectives ( Santer package ) , the broad guidelines for the future reform of the Structural Funds and the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy , and the opinions on the CEECs which are candidates for accession .
For the island regions , as for the other regions of the Union , the aim is to guarantee the sustainable development of those regions in which sufficient convergence has not been achieved .
In order to stem the tide of depopulation and to prevent the desertification of the island regions , and of all rural areas , the Commission intends not only to sustain and promote agriculture , forestry , fishing and aquaculture but also , on the basis of an integrated approach , to promote economic diversification , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises and rural services , the management of natural resources , improved services relating to the environment , and the valorization of the cultural heritage , tourism and recreational activities .
The Commission agrees about the need to combat the excessive burden placed on natural resources by certain forms of tourism , in the island regions and elsewhere .
The proposal for a decision on a first multi-annual programme in favour of European tourism - PHILOXENIA - takes the promotion of sustainable tourism and of alternative forms of tourism as one of its primary themes .
The Commission hopes that the Council will be able to make rapid progress towards adopting the decision to which I have referred .
On the other hand , tourism is also referred to in the fifth programme for the environment , 1992-2000 , as one of the five key sectors not only at the regulatory level but also in terms of self-regulation by the public , operators and public authorities , by means of instruments to encourage sustainable tourism .
Finally , several projects - LIFE , NATURE - encompass measures to promote ecological tourism .
The Commission understands the desire of the island regions to enjoy the benefits of a consistent approach ; in the Commission 's view , their specific nature should be pointed out to the Community legislator whenever necessary .
This , in any case , is the line which the Commission pursues in its proposals .
Finally , as regards the present Intergovernmental Conference , the Commission is supporting the possibility of adding a declaration on the island regions to the revised Treaty .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to express my satisfaction at the Commissioner 's statement that he understands the particular nature of island regions and supports the inclusion in the new Treaty of a statement which will constitute the correct legal basis for the establishment and implementation of a special policy of support and development in island regions .
We are convinced that conditions have really matured and that everybody understands the need to adopt an integrated European policy and development strategy for the European Union 's island regions .
A policy that will deal effectively with structural inequalities between the Union 's island and mainland regions .
As one who comes from Greece , a country comprising 42 % of the total number of inhabited islands in the European Union - 167 inhabited islands among a total of 400 in the Union - I am in a position to know how urgent it is that measures should be adopted to curb the negative trends created by the isolation of island regions and their abandonment by the Union .
Of course , the problems differ from one island to another , and in many cases those differences are both great and critical .
Yet , for a large number of islands , mainly those of small and medium size , the economic and demographic base has been weakened , I would say , to desperate levels .
Important constituents of an integrated policy for island regions and of a strategy for sustainable development must include improved transport infrastructure , the development of advanced telecommunication networks , measures to support SMEs and to boost employment , combined developmental choices to encourage local production and the local economy with interventions on behalf of agriculture and tourism , the correct management of natural and in particular water resources , the promotion of special measures to increase investment and favourable taxation measures for permanent residents , modernization and in exceptional cases coverage of the needs of local administration with trained personnel , integrated interventions in social infrastructure , especially education and health , and the creation of networks of small islands , with action on the protection of the environment .
We also need a broad programme of legislative intervention and special projects to make the most of and to protect the natural beauty and cultural wealth of our islands , the refurbishment of traditional housing , the protection of the sea , the management of water , sewage and wastes , and the creation of conditions leading to democratic recovery and steady development .
Today , the European Parliament is called upon to transmit a message of solidarity by its practical recognition of the need for direct promotion of a policy for the survival of our islands .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am an elected representative of the two largest islands in the Union which are not home to a European capital city - Sicily and Sardinia - and I must therefore express my continuing regret at the lamentable absence of any integrated Community policy or specific instruments for the European island regions , confronted as they are by an extremely wide range of problems which continue to act as a permanent obstacle to their development .
I therefore repeat once again , in this House today , my hope that in future , and starting with the forthcoming Amsterdam summit , the Council will turn over a new leaf and consider the specific problems of the Union 's islands from a new standpoint , a more considered and specific standpoint , as indeed I understand the Commission also wishes to do when considering the matter of the reform of the Structural Funds .
I am glad to take the opportunity offered by Commissioner Monti 's presence to emphasize the fact that a new common policy for the benefit of the island regions should also be designed to give these disadvantaged territories a genuine opportunity to complete the internal market and the process of integration , beginning with full implementation of the fundamental principle of freedom of movement for individuals and goods ; this is something that has not yet been given concrete form , so much so that , despite the fact that Article 129b of the Treaty stresses the need to link the island regions to the central regions of the Community , we have yet to see any concrete measures taken to ease the problems that island status creates with regard to transport .
The European Union cannot impose its own policies - transport , fiscal harmonization , the agricultural policy itself , fisheries - in a uniform manner that also includes the islands and island groups that experience extremely difficult economic development situations because of their limited agricultural and water resources and the limited availability of skilled labour .
Instead , it should implement ad hoc systems and measures tailored to the specific features typical of , and shared by , the island regions of the European Union .
What is needed , therefore , is a global Community policy for the islands , taking into account all the aspects of island status .
The objective of a European policy for the islands should be both to establish a general framework of compensation for the adverse effects that Community policy often has on the island regions , and secondly , more generally , to establish a new way of thinking that recognizes the right of islands and island groups to diversity .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , one of the principal objectives of Community policy and in particular of regional policy is economic and social cohesion within the European Community .
This aim , based on the fundamental principle of solidarity , entails taking into consideration the specific features noted at the levels and in the models for development of the European regions .
Thus certain areas of the Community territory have their limitations which lead to imbalances affecting their development .
That is the case with island regions .
These regions are well and truly an integral part of the European Union .
They represent approximately 14 million European citizens , that is a population greater than that of certain Member States .
The Europe of the islands is not merely a theory , but rather a human , cultural , economic and social reality .
We must then ask ourselves whether the concept of the single European area is relevant for the islands which , as they are isolated and out of touch , inevitably labour under manifold spatial and human limitations .
That explains why numerous rules of economics designed within and for the great continental units cannot in fairness be applied to the island regions without corrective mechanisms .
Widely varying conditions are of course found throughout the islands of the European Union and yet however , above and beyond that diversity , how can we avoid noticing a great similarity within development problems , such as the narrowness of the economic market , environmental conservation and transport costs , even within the social conditions of the peoples linked to the concept of being cut off and limited in space .
How can we think of regional planning in purely continental terms ?
The island regions need research into appropriate differentiated treatments .
Their future depends upon it , but so too does the future of Europe .
For several years past the Union 's island regions have been trying to make their voice heard ever more clearly and with greater solidarity .
Let us mention the Committee on the Islands - CRAM 6 , the European Parliament 's Eurisles group , the Imedoc Protocol , the Baltic island group , to name but a few .
Faced with that the European Union has not to date come up with any global approach to the problems underscored by the island regions .
The REGIS programme has of course been set up and in this connection .
We must repeat that taking account of the problems of island regions is not an alternative to the search for solutions to the problems of the outermost regions .
Quite the reverse .
The two processes are perfectly complementary .
It would be fitting to set up a truly integrated policy for the island regions with the collaboration of the Member States and the regional authorities on the principle of partnership .
That will have to be based on the laying of a legal foundation , that is the inclusion in the Treaty of Union of an appended clause or statement recognising the special features and the need to tackle them by means of tailored policies and provisions .
The island regions are a good illustration of the challenge facing the whole of Europe - moving towards a stronger Community with more harmonious development and greater solidarity .
That certainly entails , over and above the legal and economic aspects , a political type of imperative .
I could not end , Mr Commissioner , without expressing my pleasure on hearing your proposals a few moments ago in which you expressed the view of the Commission which would , you mentioned , support the inclusion in the annex to the new treaty of a specific statement on the arrangements for island regions .
That would constitute a legal basis for the setting up of an integrated policy having regard to the actual specific features of these regions which are very dear to our hearts .
We are grateful to you .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the last plenary session in Brussels the European Parliament agreed that it was necessary to incorporate the status of outermost region with full legal backing in the future treaty .
The manifold and permanent handicaps of the outermost regions arise from their island status but are exacerbated by their remoteness from other regions of continental Europe and , similarly , other island regions .
Although we cannot and must not confuse this with the actual situation of the outermost island regions , there is in the European Union , and particularly in the Mediterranean , a different type of island reality which we are dealing with today , much less pronounced because inter alia it is significantly alleviated by much shorter distance and isolation - often a great deal less , frequently not very significant .
This is a matter of a different reality fundamentally resulting from being cut off and the scarcity of certain resources and that naturally presents a specific joint framework warranting an integrated and differentiated approach on the part of the European Union .
An integrated and differentiated approach is needed for the island problem as a whole , without detracting from the essential attention to the widely varying stages of development seen throughout the island territories , because the European Union must provide specific responses to the different situations which occur within its territory .
Therefore , in support of the principle of economic and social cohesion , we uphold and support the motion for a political resolution which this House will no doubt approve .
Madam President , I , like previous speakers , welcomed what Mr Monti said , pointing out that as long ago as 1994 the Commission presented a document on the islands .
He mentioned , moreover , a whole series of programmes which dealt with the islands , above all the Agenda 2000 of the Filoxenia Programme to enable these regions to develop for the purposes of tourism .
Most interesting I find Mr Monti 's statement that it would be appropriate to include , provided the Commission were in favour , a statement by the Intergovernmental Conference on the subject of the islands in general .
The Commissioner has heard what previous speakers have said , for example Mr Baggioni , Mr Viola and Mr Karamanou , and I should simply like to take this opportunity to point out to him that there are two possible approaches to the problems bound up with island status .

What I would call the ' incrementalist ' approach which consists in the analysis of given programmes or activities , and then , as Mr Baggioni mentioned , an approach which places the accent upon a certain political imperative which is linked to the fundamental geographical reality of the islands .
The Commissioner will realise that some of the poorest regions in the Union , such as Corsica or the Azores are indeed island regions .
The only island region among the relatively rich regions is the Balearic Islands , Spain , which come close to the Community average with 98 % of the average income , but there are not in fact any island regions which are highly developed .
This is because , from the point of view of the economic structure , the whole concept of the European Union is based on a continental idea , that is the model for the building of Europe is the North American continental model like a kind of great rectangle over which there is uninterrupted territorial continuity . This continental territory lends itself to the establishment of a series of lines of communication based for example on the train , great motorways and of course on the elimination of all barriers to trade .
But there is one barrier - one customs due - which must be paid if the sea needs to be crossed .
I am not of course referring to large islands such as the United Kingdom or Ireland , but in general to the rest of the island regions and Mr Commissioner Monti will actually agree with me that Sardinia and Sicily in his country are the poorest regions precisely because they are islands and without that continental continuity there is a whole range of structural elements standing in the way of definitive integration in the common market .
That is , the continental concept of the common market as a continuous territory which is a prerequisite for example for banning transport aid in order to put everyone on an equal footing , means that unless islands receive some kind of transport aid they are placed at a disadvantage from the point of view of competition .
Island regions have specific needs and the Commissioner , who is a cultivated man , will recall how in Greek literature there are two basic fundamental great works the Iliad telling of the conquest of Troy and the Odyssey describing Ulysses 's efforts to get back home and in practical terms , the tasks facing Ulysses are greater than those required to conquer Troy .
That is , the island context presents certain specific difficulties which cannot be overcome .
I agree with Mr Monti that the appropriate sphere for launching an in-depth debate on the islands which is not merely an ' incrementalist ' debate dealing with little bits of aid here and there , is precisely a statement by the Intergovernmental Conference .
I think that the Intergovernmental Conference should face the European Union and the Community institutions with a debate on the role of the islands .
I know that Mr Monti is concerned about one matter and I should like to quote it as an example , since I think it is the best example of what might happen - we are moving towards Economic and Monetary Union , internal frontiers are disappearing , from 1999 there will be no barriers to prevent a French citizen or a German citizen from putting his savings in a Luxembourg bank where there is no tax on savings .
That is relevant for anyone living on the continent of Europe who can simply get into a car or hitch hike to take his savings to a Luxembourg bank , but I do not think anyone will feel inclined - unless he has many millions - to take an aeroplane for example from a regions such as the Canary Islands , Guadeloupe or Martinique to place modest savings in a Luxembourg bank .
That is when all is said and done a great disincentive .
That brings me , Mr Commissioner , on to one last aspect ; I think that within the context of treatment for the islands , although basically the islands have aspects in common , they are different one from another .
I mentioned earlier the example of the Balearic Islands , currently the richest region in Spain and an island region .
Both the Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands have for centuries formed part of the same political entity - Spain .
Whereas the Balearic Islands have developed to a considerable extent , the Canary Islands have rather lagged behind , because there is one additional aspect : in the European Union there are , in addition to what might be termed the nearby islands which form part of the immediate environment , the unusual aspect of some very distant island regions - the French overseas departments and territories , the Portuguese archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira , the Canary Islands and the Island of La Réunion , which are so remote from the Community umbrella that unless they are given quite different legal treatment there can be no possibility of economic development .
As regards these outermost regions , Madam President , Mr Commissioner , it is not enough for the IGC merely to make a statement as it did for the last Maastricht Conference .
I think a highly specialized regime is called for and it is currently being drawn up thanks on the one hand to the POSEI programmes , to Protocol No 2 annexed to the Treaty of Accession to the European Union of Spain and Portugal and to a whole series of Community legal standards which have considered this special situation of the outermost regions .
I think that the European Union should now consider for these island regions with additional difficulties a legal system which is not based on secondary legislation of simple regulations or directives which are then open to challenge before the Court of Justice , but on constitutional treatment in the Treaty establishing the Union .
It must be remembered that France already envisaged such constitutional treatment when the first European Union Treaties were signed - the Treaty of Rome 1957 - since there is a specific reference to the French overseas territories .
Although Spain and Portugal joined later and could not therefore include the point in the original Treaty , the Act of Accession of Spain and Portugal did envisage this specific point in a document which we might regard as constitutional from our point of view - and that is Protocol No 2 and other articles in the Act of Accession of spain and Portugal to the European Union .
I therefore hope , Madam President , Mr Commissioner , that today 's debate will serve on the one hand to establish the need to consider the subject of the islands in its global perspective and on the other and in a very special way , to stress the effort needed in this final stage of the Intergovernmental Conference , so that the outermost regions of the European Union receive different legal treatment so that they may be regarded as a special case .
I stress for example the tax aspect .
The harmonization of Community taxation , which is important and essential , does not necessarily need to be extended to outermost regions of the Union .
( ES ) Madam President , I fully concur with what Mr Medina Ortega said and I shall not go further into those matters for reasons of time .
But as regards what Mr Monti said in his speech , I should like to mention two matters :
On the one hand I am glad to hear that the Commission is supporting a statement in favour of the islands and , on the other hand , I should like to point out that , despite its statements about the Cohesion Fund as an instrument for helping the islands , the Cohesion Fund is not being implemented ; there is practically zero implementation in the 22 island regions of the Union .
The islands are part of the European heritage .
European culture and history would not be the same without the contribution of its islands .
For continental Europe island is synonymous with holidays , but behind an attractive exterior , which is a shop window for a tourist attraction , islands have a series of problems common to them all , as has been mentioned here .
In this Parliament 's Joint Group on the Islands which I have the honour to chair , Members from all nations and of all shades of political opinion have had no difficulty in establishing arrangements for diagnosing joint problems affecting us caused by the sea .
The sea is a bond for peoples only as far as poets are concerned .
We island dwellers know very well that the sea separates and causes a multitude of problems : transport , communications , energy delicacy of the region with specific environmental problems , added business expenses , delicate economy .
It is not by chance that almost all European island regions are Objective 1 .
The only fundamental obsessions which I have heard in the Commission for a specific policy for the islands are budgetary and no doubt very important ones .
But the islands cannot benefit on an equal footing from the advantages of the great internal market nor take part in most of the projects in the great trans-European networks .
It would therefore be fitting if such comments as Mr Monti 's were to give rise to a new Union vision of the problems facing island regions .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Madeira , Porto Santo and the Azores are island regions which particularly feel the lack of a special scheme and specific support mechanisms within the framework of the European Union .
But they are also for Community purposes outermost regions .
We want to obtain the best possible treatment for these islands in order to offset the disadvantages caused by their island status and to promote equality of opportunity for their inhabitants .
But we do not accept that the Community concept of outermost region should become diluted in the concept of island region . The fact is that the outermost island regions , because of their remoteness from the continent of Europe , are faced with more disadvantages than islands in general .
We shall not therefore accept any compromising of the progress already made as regards the guaranteeing of special treatment for the outermost regions by the lumping together in the the IGC , in the future Treaty and in the resultant decision-making process , of all islands even if they are close to mainland Europe and more prosperous than many continental regions .
I should therefore like first to register the strongest protest against the Netherlands Presidency 's proposal ( made within the IGC ) on the outermost regions , since it does not provide guarantees for the special situation of these exceptional European regions in its clear attempt to exclude the French overseas dominions and territories ; secondly to insist that the IGC should follow the European Parliament 's position on the IGC based on the Weggen report , in particular the twelfth paragraph of point 3 in which Parliament demands that the Treaty should expressly include a provision conceding special and specific treatment for outermost regions ; thirdly to ask for the recognition and effective support for problems arising out of island status which are felt particularly in the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores which are outermost regions .
Thus , as already indicated , I have no alternative but to vote against this motion for a resolution in order to avoid supporting the attempt to dilute the outermost regions with island regions as a whole .
Madam President , the text of the resolution makes it clear that the insular regions of Europe , be they in north or south , are facing great environmental and economic challenges , and that is why the European Union must do more to ensure that these areas are not left alone to deal with their problems .
Above all , the island regions must be incorporated into the sort of physical planning strategy that is currently being developed within the EU .
The adoption of a European regional planning strategy in Noordwijk in June 1997 will constitute a major step in this direction .
We shall then see whether the responsible parties in the Commission , and above all in the national governments , are capable of incorporating the reality of island life into this European planning strategy .
Pie in the sky , many will say , and probably with some justification , for it would require more action in the domain of structural policy in particular than we have seen so far .
The European Union needs to do more in three core areas while strictly observing the principle of subsidiarity .
Maritime borders have hitherto played a minor role in the promotion of cross-border cooperation .
Only Sardinia and Corsica and the Danish island of Bornholm were part of Interreg I. That is why it is gratifying that the Commission has included considerably more programmes in Interreg II which affect maritime borders and islands .
Keep it up !
Interregional cooperation programmes such as Recite are also very important to the islands .
In addition to fostering normal neighbourly relations , they also serve as a means of sharing experiences that are relevant to other island communities .
The creation of networks enables island communities to discuss common problems and to come up with ways of solving them .
That must also be encouraged in the framework of other policies .
I am thinking particularly of the information society , from which the islands must not be excluded , since modern communication technology is the very thing that can help them to overcome their peripheral situation .
For that reason , I commend the idea that the House should compile a report on coastal and island regions on its own initiative and that the report - or both reports , if we treat each type of region separately - should be tabled for discussion by the House as quickly as possible .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too represent an island region - the Balearic Islands - which although Mr Medina has said on various occasions have a high average income , do have the disadvantage of being dependent solely on tourism , which is very dangerous for future sustainability ; they are also in a critical geographical situation in a none-too-stable Mediterranean .
Nevertheless , despite the great diversity which exists between the 22 European island regions , they all have features in common because they are surrounded by the sea and they will be particularly affected by globalization and the process of European integration .
They therefore need special attention to enable them to become integrated not so much homogeneously as in a balanced way .
The extra effort which these island regions need to make is a millstone round their necks and round the necks of their businesses which , in an ever more competitive and global context see their survival and the opportunities for job creation under threat .
The limited amount of space requires great pains to protect the natural environment and makes these regions susceptible to phenomena such as variations in air and sea transport , an interruption in the supply of essential products , provision of drinking water , water treatment and the management and recycling of solid waste .
Recognition of island status in the new Treaty would be an advantage for a framework for cooperation between the European islands for the drawing up of an integrated policy , pilot projects and specific actions for the sustainable development of the islands .
A strengthening of the information systems and networks on the islands would break down barriers to education and training .
As regards tourism as an economic alternative for the islands , as rapporteur for the Filoxenia programme , I ask you , Mr Commissioner , to intimate to the Council the need to unblock this programme - an essential point for the drawing up of a strategy for tourism in the medium term .
The island regions also need the progress of the information society for their qualitative growth and progress with renewable energy sources to make them less dependent on traditional energy sources .
And although the natural and cultural heritage is important for the whole of Europe , for the islands it is the sole asset for their development , for recovering and maintaining their countryside .
It is an essential for survival .
Recognition of island status in the Treaty would be the basis for putting right the structural disadvantages of some regions which are different , of promoting their sustainable growth , of maintaining and encouraging local selfdevelopment and finally , without prejudice to the continental regions , of achieving an equilibrium between economic efficiency , social equality and environmental conservation .
Madam President , I just wanted to say how interesting I have found this debate on the island regions and the outermost regions of the Community .
I have noted what seemed to me to be positive reactions to my statement ; and I have also appreciated the considerations linking this subject to the single market and to economic and monetary union , and the idea just advanced that the development of the information society , which we were discussing earlier this morning , can in turn do something to overcome the disadvantages of the island and outermost regions .
Finally , with reference to the comment that has been made on the fact that very little use is made of the Cohesion Funds to benefit the island regions , I must remind the House that this is one of those instances in which the attitude of the Member States is of crucial importance , so that , as regards many aspects of the problem , we are in their hands in this respect .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution on an integrated policy adapted to the special situation of island regions in the European Union .
The reason for the resolution is to put pressure on the Intergovernmental Conference to introduce a special clause into the Treaty which will require special treatment and greater flexibility for islands compared with other regions so far as the introduction of EU policy is concerned .
The Committee for Regional Policy will very shortly be developing in earnest a report on the development problems of islands .
We agree that there is a need for a flexible approach and a regional application of EU policy ; but that it should be enacted only when urgently needed and under specific conditions , for example in the island regions : but we also have mountainous regions , arctic regions and regions on the very periphery of the EU .
Why should islands be considered more sensitive to the negative effects of EU policy and be given special legal status ?
How are we going to decide on the size of island regions ?
Are we also to have a special legal status for Ireland , Aspö and Pantelleria ?
We ought to concentrate on the real problem and realise that EU policy often prevents social and financial development .
To approve a special status to just a few regions is a bad way of keeping an unsuccessful EU policy alive .
The EU 's vision of unrealistic social and financial development could cause an unjustified increase in expectation and rivalry between other regions .
We therefore cannot vote for this resolution which requests special legal status solely for islands .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
International Registration of Marks
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0090 / 97 , tabled by Mr Medina Ortega on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0372 - C4-0651 / 96-96 / 0198 ( CNS ) ) amending Regulation ( EC ) No 40 / 94 of 20 December 1993 on the Community trade mark to give effect to the accession of the European Community to the Protocol relating to the Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks , adopted at Madrid on 27 June 1989.-A4-0092 / 97 , tabled by Mr Medina Ortega on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 96 ) 0367 - C4-0554 / 96-96 / 0190 ( CNS ) ) approving the accession of the European Community to the Protocol relating to the Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks , adopted at Madrid on 27 June 1989 .
Madam President , there is no difficulty as regard the content of this report .
But this Parliament has the obligation to keep public opinion and the citizens informed about what we are doing .
Specifically I think that both the proposal for a Council decision and the proposal for a Council regulation on the Community system for trademarks and , to be more specific , getting involved with the system for international marks , is of considerable legal interest .
Unlike other legal institutions which date back to Roman times or to the Code Napoléon , the system of intellectual and industrial property rights developed at a great rate at the end of the nineteenth century and then , following the Paris Convention for the protection of industrial property rights , one aspect of industrial property rights became the protection of trademarks , governed by the 1991 Madrid Agreement .
Account had perhaps not been taken when the Madrid Agreement was approved of the economic consequences which it would entail .
But at the moment the various aspects of intellectual property rights ranging from copyright to the plastic arts and the performing arts to industrial property rights proper - that is the system of patents - I would say that in economic terms , in this age of mass production and the information society , the system for protecting an intangible right such as a right to a trademark has is of paramount importance .
Let us think only of Coca Cola .
Whatever may be in the Coca Cola bottle , the mere mark Coca Cola has inestimable economic value .
That is to say that nowadays a mark alone may have earning potential and take on its on underlying importance , since the mark has developed and acquired its own strength , its own significance and constitutes a point of reference for legal aspects .
Trademark law has been developing very slowly , since marks were not regarded as a very worthy subject for detailed study , although with the development of industrial society it became more important as the mark itself gained importance .
At the moment , ever since the 1980s , there has been a kind of competition between the European Community and International Law in general .
To be specific , the European Community in its first Community directive on the approximation of trademark law - Directive No 89104 of 21 December 1988 - paved the way for the setting up of Community trademark law and was complemented by Regulation 4094 of 20 December 1993 setting up the Community mark .
That is , it presupposes Community intervention in an area of private law with the recognition of an actual legal title which is granted in return for inscription in a Community register ; this Community register has already been in operation since 1 April 1996 - the Office for the Harmonization of the Internal Market - in the Spanish town of Alicante .
That means that the here the Community has not followed the path of a certain general harmonization , but has moved into substantive Community law .
At the same time there were developments taking place in the international system for marks with the setting up on the one hand of the Stockholm Agreement , which amended the Madrid Agreement above all by setting up the World Industrial Property Organization with its head office in Geneva with a number of registration offices allowing for a certain degree of international collaboration and a certain efficiency in international mechanisms which did not exist previously .
Along these very lines , again in Madrid in 1995 , a protocol was adopted making it easier for international organizations of a regional nature and with their own system , such as is the case with the European Union , as opposed to signatory States , to accede to the Madrid Agreement .
This 1995 Madrid Protocol also enabled international organizations to take part in the international system for the protection of marks .
It must be pointed out that there is one fundamental difference - that is that the Community citizen who registers his mark in the European Union through the Office for Harmonization of the Internal Market obtains a substantive right , whereas the international agreement , the Madrid Agreement merely sets in motion a procedure under which , by means of registration with the World Intellectual Property Organization , the registration is automatically made in a series of national offices , so there is no need to go from place to place .
In any event it would be in the Community 's interests to link the two systems .
That is to say that had the Madrid Agreement not been amended by the 1995 Madrid Protocol , anyone holding a Community mark would have had to go to the national system and then to the international system , but as a result of the Madrid Protocol , international coverage can be obtained for the mark by going through the Community office rather than on some peregrination .
At the present time all the Member States of the European Community are party to the Madrid Protocol and are of course governed by the Rule of Community Law and they are not the only ones ; in addition many more countries who are hoping to join the European Union or who form part of the European economic area have also acceded to the Madrid Protocol .
This produces very positive results which will be exceptionally helpful to the development of the Community mark .
The approval mechanism might appear a little complicated since on the one hand we have the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation 4094 to make it possible to interlink the two systems - the Community system and the international system - and on the other hand the Council decision approving Community accession . That is accession of the Council and of the European Community to the Madrid Protocol and subsequently , as a result of this accession to the Madrid Protocol , Community law in force will be amended by a regulation in order to resolve the whole matter .
There is one small problem from the point of view of languages , since more languages are used in the Office for Harmonization of the Internal Market in Alicante than in the Madrid Agreement . To be precise the Madrid Agreement uses only English and French .
This raises a few minor problems of a technical nature which will not , however , make any difficulties for harmonization .
It is a subject which will probably require subsequent legal adjustment since experience tells us that all these legal matters , especially those with such important economic consequences , always prove to have different aspects and difficulties which have to be put right .
I therefore think that the rapporteur , having considered both the regulation and the proposal for a regulation and the proposal for a Council decision in detail , finds once again that the Community institutions are operating correctly .
May this prove to be to the advantage of the Community 's citizens , and as a result of the harmonization may the Community mark be better protected on the international scene than hitherto .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , these proposals will mean that enterprises , by submitting a single application , will obtain protection for their trademark as a Community trademark , not only in the Community but in all States which are party to the Madrid Protocol .
The Madrid Protocol provides for the international registration of trademarks to be effected by the World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) in Geneva .
So if the European Community accedes to the Madrid Protocol , which we should welcome , applicants for and holders of Community trademarks will be able to apply for international protection of their trademarks by submitting an international application in accordance with the provisions of the Madrid Protocol , and holders of trademarks which have been internationally registered on the basis of the Madrid Protocol will be able to apply for registration of their marks as Community trademarks .
Consequently , these two systems are mutually complementary and will result in simplification on the basis of two systems becoming one .
I should also like to subscribe to this idea of making two into one .
We do not need two speeches on this subject .
I can associate myself entirely with what Mr Medina Ortega has already said , so I shall spare the House the other two minutes of speaking time , which will be my gift to the House as a contribution to the quality of life here and as a foretaste of the working of the Holy Spirit this coming Pentecost Sunday .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I offer my warmest congratulations and thanks to Parliament 's Legal Affairs Committee , and especially to Mr Medina Ortega as the rapporteur , for the quality of the reports presented here today .
I am very glad to note that all the efforts that have led up to this sitting have demonstrated , through the broad consensus achieved , that the various institutions have understood the importance of supporting the Commissions 's proposals that are now under discussion , proposals that have been adopted virtually unanimously and without amendment by the Legal Affairs Committee , the Committee on External Economic Relations and the Economic and Social Committee , and that have also been broadly supported by the Council 's working group , and have enjoyed the support of the Community 's industries .
On the other hand , the two proposals on which Parliament has been consulted today are not the subject of conflict , in so far as they are confined to the establishment of a link between the Community trade mark system and the international registration system set up by the Madrid protocol ; two systems which , in essence , pursue the same objectives , though by different means , two systems which need to be harmonized and made compatible .
The Commission has no doubt that , unless such a link with the Madrid protocol can be established , the Community trade mark , adopted in December 1993 and operational - as the rapporteur recalled - since April 1996 , would become less attractive both to European enterprises and to those in third countries .
They might prefer either the international system , which is less favourable , or the national systems with all the attendant risks of fragmentation of the internal market .
Apart from being a setback for the completion of the internal market , this would constitute a serious problem for European industry .
I therefore thank Parliament in advance for the support it intends to offer for these two closely linked proposals , and I once again congratulate Mr Medina Ortega for the skilful contribution he has , once again , made in a matter that is so important for the legal system , the economy and , ultimately , the citizens of the European Union .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( In successive votes Parliament adopted the legislative resolutions . )
Madam President , perhaps this is outrageous cheek but I want to place on record that at the beginning of the week I raised the matter of a Belgian Government report which looked at religious sects .
I want to add two points which are not related to this Parliament but are related to my constituency .
One of the groups named in the report is an organization called Operation Mobilization , the headquarters of which are in Shropshire , which is part of my constituency .
I want to assure the House that , contrary to the Belgian Government report , it is a respectable missionary orga