Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 2 May 1998 .
Ladies and gentlemen , you are all aware that Italy is currently undergoing a time of great suffering and sorrow because of the tragic mudslides and floods which have affected various localities in the region of Campania , particularly Sarno , Bracigliano , Quindici and Siano .
So far , there are known to have been 135 victims , and the number of people missing may be even higher .
Ninety-five people have been injured , and more than a thousand have lost their homes and possessions .
I think that at times like this it is important for the whole European Union to show solidarity with the victims and their families .
If you agree , I will convey our institution 's condolences and sympathy to the Italian authorities .
Mr President , the Commission shares these sentiments regarding such a serious and immense tragedy and , for its part , is considering the possibility of some form of concrete intervention to show this solidarity .
Mr President , I would like to inform this House that today at 13.00 hours GMT India made an underground thermonuclear test similar to the one that she conducted in 1974 .
I would ask this House to condemn these nuclear tests outright and condemn India for not being part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .
I would also ask this House to criticize the acknowledged five nuclear powers for setting a bad example and in particular for the nuclear test in Mururoa some time ago .
We in the European Union have set India a bad example and I would also like this House to condemn the transfer of civil nuclear technology to third countries .
Mr President , a very quick point of order to express the wish that the Commission may rapidly set aside an adequate sum to deal with the serious disaster which hit Campania and the Sarno valley .
Mr President , I had already asked to speak , but you were sensitive enough to open this sitting by immediately remembering the victims in the Sarno valley .
I would like to thank you and Professor Monti for this solidarity .
Parliament must urge the European Council and the Commission to intervene effectively , so that these tortured people - whom I have visited and seen for myself the conditions in which they are living - can know that Europe is not far away .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for the sensitivity you have shown , by dedicating the opening of this sitting to the tragedy which took place in Campania .
I hope very much that the warmth of feeling and sensitivity shown by my colleagues who applauded your initiative and the sensitivity shown by Commissioner Monti , who made some promises , will truly allow Italy to feel that Europe is close at hand at these tragic times .
Mr President , I would like to know if there is anything you can do to find out why Air France has cancelled its regular and special flights to Strasbourg .
Yesterday it took me 14 hours to get here .
When I finally arrived in Strasbourg - which is an enchanting city and the headquarters of this Parliament - I was so tired I felt like I had travelled to India .
I would therefore be very grateful , Mr President , if you could do something to find out why the Air France flights have been cancelled .
Secondly , since you opened this sitting with sympathy for the catastrophe in Italy , I would be grateful if you could also mention another enormous catastrophe - not in terms of human life , but in terms of people 's livelihoods , and the unique European habitat of the Doñana national park .
I would be grateful if you could express our solidarity to the relevant authorities .
Thank you very much .
Thank you very much , Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza .
I shall do so .
Mr President , during the sitting of 29 April , the European Parliament honoured the memory of a great Greek statesman and a great European .
Konstantinos Karamanlis was a national leader who had the approval of all parties , transcended party politics and had the good fortune of being alive to see the recognition of his work by political friends and foe alike .
He acquitted himself with prudence , moderation and insight .
He turned the visions of a nation into reality and consistently and responsibly carved out the most advantageous national policy and laid the foundations for the growth of prosperity in the region .
But Konstantinos Karamanlis was also a great European , not only because he was a unique and wonderful leader who , literally by himself , placed Greece among the ranks of the European Communities , but also because he always had a clear and definite idea of the European ideal .
He believed that only a united Europe could achieve great things and safeguard democracy , prosperity and peace for its peoples .
Tomorrow morning at 8.00 a.m. in the Palais , the Greek Members of the European Parliament will hold a short memorial service to honour Konstantinos Karamanlis and all those colleagues who would like to take part will be welcome .
Mr President , this Parliament , which has so often demonstrated its desire to defend human rights , must not ignore the fact that last week the terrorist organization ETA once again attacked a politician , a defender of liberty , in Spain . He was Tomás Caballero , a member of the Navarre People 's Union and that political party 's spokesman on Pamplona city council .
ETA also murdered a sub-lieutenant in the civil guard , Alfonso Parada .
Mr President , today ETA still represents the most flagrant violation of human rights within the territory of the European Union .
This Parliament cannot ignore these crimes , and we should condemn these attacks .
I beg you , Mr President , to convey this condemnation to the Spanish authorities and the victims .
Mr President , on behalf of the Spanish Socialists , I want to express my condolences to Mr Pomés Ruiz for the murder of a fellow politician , and join in with the condemnation of this vile attack and the murder of the civil guard , Mr Parada .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our painful denunciation of the assassinations of two more European citizens is not just a ritual . In the face of the murderer 's fascist irrationality , we are affirming once again the principles which form the basis for the construction of the European Union : democratic coexistence , respect for minorities , and the recognition of the wishes of the majority .
By saying " no ' to attempts to establish violence as a way of imposing the will of visionaries , we are restating our decision to defend democracy , using democratic methods and means . This is not to be seen as weakness but rather as an expression of our profound conviction that although irrational , fascist violence can kill democrats , it can never assassinate democracy .
The pain we feel for the victims and our sympathy with the people closest to them commit us to the cause they stood for and for which they were murdered .
So , in saying " no ' to any form of fascism - though it may be disguised as nationalism - it is worth remembering that while cowards might murder European democrats , they cannot weaken our conviction nor breach our solidarity .
Mr President , while endorsing what my colleague Mrs Ahern has said about the Indian nuclear tests , I wish to draw to the attention of the House that this week in the UK it is Christian Aid week .
I would hope that we could send a very clear message from this Parliament to the G8 meeting in Birmingham that we are all in favour of them urgently addressing the issue of world debt .
This is killing so many millions of people , especially young children , and I do not think that we would wish to neglect sending a very clear message that they must now at last resolve the issue of world debt and the way it is affecting young children in particular in the Third World .
Mr President , I am attending the European Parliament for the first time , and I am also a regional councillor for Campania , therefore I must mention your consideration for the people of our region who were affected in recent days by the mud slide , a tragedy which has destroyed whole communities , and caused victims , while there are still many people missing in the rubble .
I should also like to emphasize that our region is living through , and now paying the price of , an insane policy over recent decades and that an intervention plan is therefore necessary , which the region is preparing through a plan for the monitoring , identification and prevention of natural disasters .
All of this also requires the effort and solidarity of the European Union however , and I therefore thank you and all my colleagues who have asked the European Commission to intervene as quickly as possible to give a tangible sign of European solidarity towards our region .
Mr President , going back to what my colleagues Mr Pomés Ruiz , Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Gutiérrez Díaz said , I also want to express my condemnation of the outrages in the Basque Country and Navarre last week , and our condolences to the victims and their families .
Thank you very much , Mr Vallvé .
Request for the waiver of Mr Ribeiro Campos ' immunity
The next item is the report ( A4-0155 / 98 ) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the request for waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mr António Carlos Ribeiro Campos .
Mr President , it is my honour to present , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , this report on the Portuguese authorities ' request for the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of our colleague in this House , Mr Ribeiro Campos .
The conclusion reached by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , by seven votes in favour to two against , is that there are NO grounds for a decision from this Parliament in relation to the Portuguese authorities ' request , because the dossier they sent does not provide sufficient reason .
I will return to this later .
Secondly and in parallel , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure has declared itself in favour of Parliament 's report making it clear that there would be NO obstacle placed in the way of Mr Ribeiro Campos appearing in court - although this would have to be in the capacity of a witness , without the slightest compromise to his rights - especially those rights he enjoys as a Member of this Parliament - and , of course , without any coercion .
So the measure adopted by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities is in two parts : NO reason for a decision and NO objection on Parliament 's part to Mr Ribeiro Campos appearing and being heard in these proceedings .
Mr President , this is actually an old problem , which we have been dealing with in this Parliament since at least 1976 , ever since the election of MEPs by direct universal suffrage made people realize that there was a need for a single MEP 's statute .
This is a very clear demonstration of the problems caused by not having a single MEP 's statute .
Because in order to examine this question , we have to refer to Article 10 of the 1965 Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities , the 1976 Act concerning the Election of Representatives of the European Parliament , and the Constitution or legislation of each Member State . The situations in the Member States are very diverse : no parliamentary immunity in the UK , and others with a totally different type of parliamentary immunity .
That creates unnecessary differences .
This Parliament increasingly represents the citizens of Europe .
So there should be mechanisms to protect its Members - because parliamentary immunity is nothing more than protection for the work they do in this Parliament .
And that protection should be provided with full respect for the principle of equality between Members .
In that sense , Mr President , I should like to go back to the second part of the decision adopted by a wide majority in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
Notwithstanding the disparity caused by referring to the legislations of the various Member States , as Community legislation obliges us to do , that committee has been trying for a long time to establish a jurisprudence - a line of conduct to constitute a common practice .
And the basis of that line of conduct should be an absence of artificial differences between an MEP and a normal citizen .
An MEP is a normal citizen in the eyes of the law , but he or she is also a representative of the people and , as such , should be protected against legal proceedings which might compromise , not themselves , but what they represent - compromising the citizens of Europe , in fact .
That , Mr President , is the reason for the clarification in the second part of the decision adopted by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
What that committee wants to convey to the Portuguese authorities is that it places no obstacle , but upholds the guarantees to which any Member of this Parliament is entitled , by the very fact of being so .
Therefore , the committee clearly states that at the moment there are no grounds for a waiver of immunity , and requests that we should be sent more information once the proceedings have reached a more advanced stage . Meanwhile , there is no objection to Mr Ribeiro Campos being heard under these conditions .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking Palacio Vallelersundi for an absolutely excellent report , the conclusions of which I entirely agree with .
Let me say also that the matter of principle which we discussed in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities concerns where in the judicial process parliamentary immunity shall start to apply .
It thus turns on a judicial process which can be said to extend from an inquiry via preliminary investigation to prosecution , judgement and sentencing .
The question is therefore where in this process parliamentary immunity shall start to apply .
As we know , there are instances of parliamentary immunity which cover solely the actual penalty ; one can be prosecuted and judged , therefore , but not punished .
However , immunity of this kind does not apply to Members of the European Parliament .
We end instead before the point of prosecution .
The principal question is then whether a preliminary investigation , as is involved in this case , shall also be covered by our immunity or not .
We have of course decided that it is not covered by our immunity .
The Portuguese authorities may accordingly initiate preliminary investigations in this case , but if they reach the point of prosecution , in the case of Mr Campos , they must come back with a request for the lifting of immunity .
There are two reasons why we do not consider that a preliminary investigation should be included in the requirements for immunity : In the first place , it can be said that a preliminary investigation is needed to clarify the exact nature of any offences which the person is said to have perpetrated ; a preliminary investigation can thus clarify the situation for us here in the Parliament .
The second reason is precisely that mentioned by Palacio Vallelersundi , namely that we would like to minimize this right to immunity as much as possible and ensure that it will not imply any privilege for Members of this Parliament .
It shall instead be just what it is intended to be , namely a safeguard for our freedom of expression .
With that I would like to call for this report to be approved .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Request for the waiver of Mr Rosado Fernandes ' immunity
Mr President , although the facts , it is true , are different from those in Mrs Palacio 's earlier report on Mr Campos , this request is in fact concerned with the same thing .
The Portuguese Public Prosecution Service wishes to start enquiries into the charges which , although not otherwise relevant here , are concerned in both cases with charges of misuse of European Union agriculture funds .
We , in Parliament , have gradually built up a law of precedent and in this case , indeed in both cases , we could say that it is a matter of fumus persecutionis .
Nevertheless , we do not want to do that , precisely because in recent years we have taken the line that we ought not to give the press and public any reason at all to think that we would wish to protect our Members , and that they can do or say virtually anything without sanctions by availing themselves of parliamentary immunity .
Parliamentary immunity is intended , and must be used and continue to be used , so that the institution as such can safeguard itself from the obstruction of our duties as a co-legislator in the meantime .
This means that Members as individuals cannot claim protection against criminal investigation .
This brings us right to the heart of the problem that lies before us today in Mrs Palacio 's and my reports .
Article 10 of the Protocol says that Members enjoy ' in the territory of their own State , the immunities accorded to members of their parliament ' .
Members of Parliament in Portugal cannot be cross-examined , not even as witnesses - Mr President , I must just explain this - without their immunity being formally waived , whereas we assume that no waiver of immunity is needed for our Members to be cross-examined .
Once again we are having to pay for the lack of a detailed statute of our own and equal immunity for all our Members regardless of their nationality .
It is high time that the Bureau came up with the necessary proposals for this , which have been held up as false hopes for so long , otherwise , yet again , nothing will come of it before the next session .
My committee has tried time and time again to come to an informal agreement with the Portuguese authorities , because this is certainly not the first time that the Member State of Portugal has asked us to waive immunity , in particular with regard to Mr Campos .
We invariably reply that the authorities can proceed with their cross-examination and enquiries as long as Parliament as an institution , or in this case the Members concerned , are able to carry out their duties freely and without disruption .
After all , the question of waiver of immunity cannot arise for us yet , because no charges , criminal or otherwise , have yet been brought .
A delegation from our committee will soon be making a working visit to Portugal to raise this issue once again , when it will be done directly and not only through an exchange of correspondence with colleagues from the Portuguese Parliament and the relevant authorities at the Ministry of Justice .
Meanwhile , we stick to our proposal not to respond positively or negatively to this request .
We ask the Public Prosecution Service to conduct the necessary enquiries , including cross-examining the Members , but to keep us informed and not to take any measures against the Members in question which could prevent them from carrying out their duties in our institution before we have been given an opportunity to express our view .
Mrs Palacio and I ask the House to support this recommendation .
Mr President , I would like to say again that I have no objections whatsoever to the report which Mr Wijsenbeek has drawn up .
As he himself says , the question of principle of course is actually the same as in the previous business , that is whether a prosecutor shall have the right to initiate a preliminary investigation , or whether this requires us to lift Members ' immunity .
In this case the same resolution applies as in the Campos case .
However , there is a certain difference between these two cases which may merit attention .
I believe that we are almost completely in agreement in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities as regards what parliamentary immunity shall actually cover , to be precise , freedom of expression for we Members ; it must not therefore be able to be restricted in any way .
In principle , this means that we shall not be able to be prosecuted for anything which is said from the rostrums in this House .
We are likewise completely in agreement that when it is a question of " ordinary ' violations , that is to say criminal offences , then we Members of Parliament shall quite simply be able to be prosecuted and our immunity lifted .
However , I should like to point out that there is a grey area between these two extremes .
It is thus conceivable for a Member to make a speech in Parliament which he cannot be prosecuted for .
If the Member then returns to his native country and makes exactly the same speech , with a political content , shall he then be able to be prosecuted for this ?
Are we thus to lift his immunity for this ?
This is roughly what applies in the Campos case , but does not apply in this other case , which concerns a possible offence entirely unrelated to work as a Member of the European Parliament .
With these detailed observations I wish to congratulate the rapporteur once again on a quite excellent report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Legal protection of biotechnological inventions
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0170 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0132 / 98-95 / 0350 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions ( Rapporteur : Mr Rothley ) .
Mr President , in Europe a directive is required which harmonizes the procedures for patenting biotechnological inventions .
The question has been open for more than ten years . Finally it can be closed , by approving the balanced and efficient text of the common position established by the Council without further amendment .
I agree with the report drawn up by Mr Rothley .
There is an urgent need for order and clarity in a situation which is chaotic and confused , to avoid disagreements in interpretation and age-old disputes which continue to penalize Europe , leaving the way clear for the large American and Japanese multinationals .
This directive is the result of the urgent need to define European rules , given the framework of standards which is becoming more precise and detailed at international level : the Council of Europe 's Convention on Biomedicine and Human Rights and the Rio Convention on Biodiversity , which is now subject to verification in Bratislava .
Anyone who has not accepted from today the establishment of the directive in discussion considers that the patent , in the context of a global economy which does not allow marginal or exceptional solutions , is fundamental to guarantee research , allow control , circulate results , and encourage the consequent widespread economic development .
As for biotechnology , it is a retrograde step , in my view , to state an ideological and prejudicial " no ' , although I respect that .
In my view , it is necessary to govern it , direct it , deal with the specific and restricted sphere of patenting methods , fixing precise and insurmountable ethical limits ; this is the specific European dimension , on the basis of the proposals which our Parliament put forward at first reading .
I do not recall the features of the text which are stated here .
Much inaccurate criticism was expressed on the agreement reached ; it should be confirmed that it is not true that techniques of genome line genetic engineering can be patented ; it is not true that blocking patents can be created , because the patent confers rights on the process which refer to a drug restricted only to the function shown .
I cannot underestimate the possible imbalances damaging agriculture and favouring industry and the risks of aggressive exploitation in the South of the world .
Europe must be in the forefront in fighting for effective cooperation and choices which are consistent with the protection of biodiversity , respecting nature and the rights of people , but it must do it with courageous policies , it is not with the ability to give patents and with this directive that one can have an instrument for this purpose .
For this directive we must think positively however , when looking at the future of biotechnology .
To those who call to mind suggestive and frightening images of pig men or new Frankensteins , as Dario Fo stated recently , I recall other monsters , real and not imaginary : serious illnesses which are not yet beaten , scourges such as cancer and AIDS .
This directive can help us to conquer them , giving certainties in terms of regulations to research and industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for his patience , his commitment and his incredible staying power during this ten year legislative procedure .
I would like with wholehearted conviction to support his recommendation that we accept the common position unchanged .
I , too , recognize explicitly that the common position which is now before us represents an improvement over the first text .
It presents many things in a way which is textually clearer and more easily understood .
Nonetheless , I cannot refrain from pointing out that in the case of the second draft , which is now before us in the shape of the common position , we are not dealing with any basic change to the result that we achieved in the Conciliation Committee .
At that time , the Group of the European People 's Party voted by an overwhelming majority for the compromise reached in the Conciliation Committee , and it is fully behind it .
I would like to point this out in order to counteract the impression that a genuinely acceptable text has become available only in the context of the second legislative procedure .
Nonetheless , as I have already said , the present text is more clearly drafted and for that reason it is to be welcomed .
Any problems in relation to the acceptability of this directive are based on a fundamental misunderstanding .
It is assumed , for example , that all concerns in the area of ethics also need to be regulated in the context of the patent directive .
That is to miss a number of points .
On the one hand , patenting an invention does not in any sense mean that the patent holder is also allowed to deploy it or even to make use of it on an industrial scale .
National laws alone determine this .
In the field of biotechnology , these are , in Germany for example , in the first case the Gene Technology Act , the Embryo Protection Act , and law on medicine .
If standardization is desired in this field , we shall need a European Gene Technology Act and a European Embryo Protection Act , but you cannot make a start on this in the context of the bio-patents directive .
In addition , and contrary to the first impression , the rejection of a patent application , in other words the refusal of patent protection , does not mean that all exploitation of the invention is excluded .
It simply means that it is then freely available for anyone to use , provided that its use is permissible under general national laws .
It is important to point this out in order to gain an understanding of the directive , be it in its first or second draft , and in order to classify it correctly in terms of its legal character .
Only if we bear these aspects in mind will we be in a position to take an objective view in the context of this legislative procedure .
Patent law is not an instrument for postulating a European legal and moral order .
In this respect , I give my unreserved agreement to the substantive explanations of the rapporteur .
We need this directive , and if we adopt it tomorrow , as I hope we do , by agreeing to the common position , we shall achieve a strengthening of Europe 's attraction as a location for biotechnology , and as a result we shall be able to hold our ground far better in terms of the law of competition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the common position which has been submitted today is much clearer and more precise in legal terms than the initial draft , and , thanks to the rapporteur 's remarkable and persistent efforts , it is also more ethically acceptable .
This common position ensures that a clear distinction is made between the gene as a medium for hereditary matter , and as a life giver , and the gene as a simple element in cellular machinery which is a medium for biotechnological inventions and a hope giver .
By clearly distinguishing between a discovery and an invention , and with reference to Articles 3 and 4 , the common position avoids the appropriation of life , the human body and its elements in their natural state .
In recital 28 , a gene patented as part of an innovative procedure remains free for research and any later application insofar as it is not included in the initial patent .
This therefore is a directive which aims to guarantee the intellectual property rights of the inventor on the basis of the usual three criteria - innovation , inventiveness , industrial application - but gives it the framework of specific ethical rules .
It excludes from patentability the human body in all its stages of development , procedures which use germinal cells , embryos and clones created for the purpose of reproducing human beings .
Ethical guarantees are given by an independent European Group on Ethics which has just been revived by President Santer , and which will work closely with the European Parliament from now on , and especially with STOA , its parliamentary assessment office .
We can be sure that biodiversity will be sustained , animal suffering will be taken into account and public order and morals will be referred to .
So two special dispensations are intended to guarantee the " farmers ' privilege ' to make private use both of the products of his harvest and of the products from the cattle on his farm .
In the final analysis , the common position takes into account two main concerns : respect for ethical rules , based on the fundamental principles of respect for life and the rights of the human being , and the protection of intellectual rights , a protection which should never be confused with the subsequent obtaining of a licence .
In this light , the common position meets two important objectives .
Firstly , an economic objective , which will enable the internal market for biotechnological inventions to be developed , therefore attracting back investment which had left the European Union , for this is something which today leaves us at a disadvantage in the face of competition from the United States , Japan and China .
The return of this kind of economic dynamism will mean that new jobs will be created in innovative and rapidly growing enterprises .
Secondly , the common position meets a humanitarian and public health objective . Here I refer to fighting famine in the world by using plants which are resistant to drought or to insects which devastate crops , and fighting serious endemic illnesses by using new vaccines , such as the ones currently used for hepatitis , and doubtless soon for AIDS and for certain parasitic diseases , which are the real scourges of humanity .
We must ensure proper diagnosis of and treatment for genetic diseases , especially rare ones known as orphan diseases . In other words we need to live up to the expectations of millions of patients and their families who are placing their hopes on the progress of genetics and biotechnological inventions .
In these circumstances I support the adoption of the directive . In the current state of affairs I consider it a matter of urgency to do so , in order to bring back the necessary capital for developing and producing agricultural food products in a context of product safety and consumer information , but also to bring back the diagnostic tests , vaccines , and medication which are essential in order to fight the new genetic and infectious diseases which plague mankind .
Mr President , at last after years the rules defining the conditions and limits on research into the living will be finalized .
Congratulations and thanks go to Mr Rothley , who led the debates with great skill .
I am delighted to say that Parliament has modified the draft directive considerably and has been supported in this by the Council of Ministers .
We now have a text which is balanced between the desire to allow scientific progress through research on the living , and the concern to protect human dignity and the integrity of human beings .
From now on , any invention relating to a biological substance or a breeding process can be the subject of a patent .
Therefore , a partial gene sequence can be patented if the invention states a definite industrial application .
However , as Mr Pompidou said , the directive also sets limits on research and on patents .
Article 6 states that the following cannot be patented : procedures for cloning human beings , procedures which modify the genome line genetic identity of the human being , the use of embryos for industrial or commercial purposes , and of course the human body .
Therefore it is clear that any objections relating to the risk of genetic manipulation are not well founded , inasmuch as the directive provides for the creation of a European ethics group , as Mr Pompidou also told us , without detracting from the positions of the ethics committees in each country .
This provides an answer to the deceptive campaigns being led in some countries , such as my own , Belgium , where people are being made to believe that cloning , the manipulation of genome line cells or other experiments are permitted even though this is not the case .
By reading the directive it is clear that there is no truth in this .
Ladies and gentlemen , looking exclusively at health issues , thanks to this directive it will be possible to carry out research which attempts to abolish genetic diseases , under good conditions .
If there are those who would like to block this research for purely ideological reasons , I would suggest that they meet some of the patients suffering from genetic diseases like Huntingdon 's disease and tell them face to face that it will not be possible to cure them because Parliament has decided not to do so .
Furthermore , the expenses involved in discovering new medication are huge .
Patents are one way of covering the cost and European industry cannot afford to remain outside this market in biological products otherwise , by the year 2000 , we will have to treat people with medication from the United States and Japan .
Ladies and gentlemen , it would be unthinkable to abandon the future of Europeans ' health to others .
To conclude , I would say to all those who remember what was happening fifty years ago that history has shown that it was not delinquent doctors or scientists who created totalitarian regimes , but quite the reverse .
Every democratic state must ensure that they do not prohibit , but rather lay down a framework for scientific activity to avoid any deviant behaviour .
This is exactly what the directive does with its well-balanced text and we support it wholeheartedly .
Mr President , we will vote against both the common position and the Rothley report since it approaches this issue , which is of vital importance for the present and future of mankind alike , with technocratic and financial regulations . Nor does it provide for and establish rules and strict , pre-emptive , repressive , continuous and effective controls to prevent the risk of causing an affront to mankind and nature and the overturning of social life and of human growth and development .
On the contrary , we believe that , whether the report or the common position wishes it or not , these regulations make it easier for oligopolies and monopolies to lay their hands on these biotechnological discoveries and inventions and to apply them on behalf - always - of their own unregulated and inhuman profit .
For this reason I said that we would vote against the report and the common position and we request that they receive a radical overhaul in a direction and with a content which correspond to the true mission of science , which is at the behest of mankind . Finally science , with its discoveries , must enable mankind to make its life better and more secure and not to make it worse and to place it in danger of being destroyed by a holocaust .
Madam President , the Green Group 's opposition to this directive is well known , and our motives are also well known and clear .
The directive proposes to patent living organisms , their genes and parts of their body , including those of mankind .
This is an absurdity clear to each and every citizen : a living organism is not an object , a thing , an invention , even if some of its genes are modified , using biological systems which exist in nature .
At most these genes are discovered , but the discoveries cannot be patented .
We are not prejudicially against patenting techniques which allow modified organisms to be obtained or to isolate and replicate genes : but this does not authorize the patenting of organisms and genes .
Genes are information , information which is written with a molecular alphabet , and this information is the property of the person to whom it belongs ; it can be stated at most that it is the collective property of humanity , but it cannot be for any industry to transform it into goods .
To define this information as patentable - for example a human gene when it is isolated and reproduced outside the body - is like stating that the literary writings of Homer , Dante or Shakespeare - today the cultural property of humanity - can be patented if they are reproduced on another system which is the result of human technology , such as a compact disc for example .
I think we all agree that it is the compact disc which can be patented , not the work of Dante or Shakespeare .
And in the same way the technologies can be patented , not the genes and organisms .
This logic may lead to very dangerous consequences : for example it questions the Convention on Biodiversity , and the sole objective is the companies ' profits .
For this reason we think that it is not acceptable to patent living organisms , and to do so constitutes above all a dangerous block for scientific research , as stated by the National Institute of Health in the United States of America , which now refuses to patent genes .
In addition , gene therapy will only be available for the most common diseases , given that the companies will not be interested in developing therapy for rare diseases which cannot offer sufficient profits .
The European Parliament has already modified this directive , but the Council has rejected all the amendments which we have proposed , in particular for bio-piracy , concerning the " farmers ' privilege ' and the mistreatment of animals .
For all these reasons we the Greens state that this directive must be rejected , or at least the amendments which were approved by the Parliament must be reinstated .
Madam President , my group will be voting against this directive .
I would like wholeheartedly to endorse what was said by the last two speakers - Mr Ephremidis and the speaker from the Greens - and re-echo all their points about the debasing of the currency of humanity .
It seems to me we are being asked to give carte blanche to multinationals ' profit motive in the pharmaceutical sector .
I do not think that sector needs a lot of sympathy from us .
We are really being asked to be the handmaidens of patent law .
Some of the claims that have been made have been quite false .
We were told that the common position takes into account 66 crucial amendments that Parliament passed , but on examination you find that is not the case .
And yet that has been put about , making people who object to this seem unreasonable .
But in fact some have been changed , some have been deleted .
I give an example of Amendment No 13 where the word ' rights ' is omitted and only the word ' obligations ' remains . I take issue with that .
There is also a contradiction in the way the supporters of this directive are putting it forward .
They are able to say ' we are against patenting the human body ' , but then they are making it legal to give a patent on an isolated gene on a gene sequence .
There is a certain misleading aspect to much of this publicity .
The claim is that legislation is needed to prevent a patchwork of national laws on intellectual property rights .
It interferes with the single market .
But surely ethical considerations are much more important than that .
We cannot leave our humanity behind us just to talk about patent law .
I have a letter from Mr De Clercq , the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on which I sit , who argues that the present lack of protection is causing a brain drain of research towards the US and Japan .
I say that is another question altogether .
There are many false claims being put forward that multinationals will not advance this competitive market of drugs unless they get this particular protection .
While I am sympathetic to patient groups , many of the patient groups have come to me and said they were misrepresented .
I really regard this as a very serious matter for Parliament !
I appeal to your common humanity to deal with it correctly .
Madam President , unless the amendments are adopted , I , too , will be voting against this directive .
The reasons for this are many and varied and time does not permit me to elaborate on many of them here , but two matters are of particular importance to me .
On the one hand , I do not believe that the Council 's common position actually safeguards research into rare diseases , and on the other hand , the common position makes it extremely difficult for us to meet our obligations to the poorest part of the world .
I still have a serious problem with the patenting of genes .
A gene is a piece of information and it does not really make sense to say that you can take out a patent on a copy of a gene , that is , patent a piece of genetic information , because the difference is so slight , if there is indeed any difference at all .
I can agree with the idea of taking out a patent on the information concerning a very specific application of the gene , but only for that particular application .
That should be sufficient to secure potential earnings for the industry , and at the same time , it would also provide a greater incentive to carry out research into rare diseases .
My other concern is that the Council 's common position undermines the ability of developing countries to protect the wealth of nature in their countries , and , not least , the moneymaking potential of this .
It was established at the Convention on Biodiversity that ownership of genetic material is nationally determined .
Ensuring that this principle is adhered to is a straightforward matter .
All that is required is to abide by the laws of the country in question , or to obtain free consent from the person at the root of the invention .
This is an effective way of safeguarding the interests of developing countries .
I simply cannot accept the argument that a requirement such as this could be contrary to the TRIPs agreement .
In the forthcoming negotiations on this agreement , the European Union must work towards safeguarding the interests of developing countries , and this House must ensure that in these negotiations , the Commission has a clear position in favour of the Convention on Biodiversity and a fair distribution of income from the wealth of nature in the developing countries .
In conclusion , I would simply like to urge everyone to support these two important amendments , which safeguard our obligations to sick people and to developing countries .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , some here would like to get the directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions out of the way with all possible speed .
That is not the task of the European Parliament .
Our task is to ensure that at second reading we do not allow the Council to deprive us of what we agreed at first reading .
Otherwise we shall be creating a dangerous precedent which will undermine the rights of Parliament .
That is why there are some amendments to the common position which we simply must accept .
I shall limit myself to two examples .
Firstly , even if we have decided that the building blocks of human life and parts of the entire animal and plant world may be patented as inventions , we should not be throwing the doors wide open to bio-piracy .
That is why at first reading we demanded at least evidence of the origin of biological material . This will prevent misuse , and if necessary will allow claims for damages .
The Council deleted this .
We must write evidence of origin back in .
Secondly : we must preserve the ethics committee in the form which we agreed .
The new European Group on Ethics appointed by the Commission , whose tasks range from communications technology to bio- and gene technology , is not good enough .
How on earth can twelve scientists , even top-flight ones , seriously cover the whole field of modern technologies , alongside their main activity ?
In an area which is full of hopes and fears , our fellow citizens are expecting reliable guidance , not a token body .
That is why the European Parliament must hold out for a separate committee on bio-ethics in the context of the patents directive .
Madam President , when we first voted in this Chamber on the common position discussed by the Council , I strongly supported the defence of the common position .
I did it for a reason which seemed to me to be ethical : I simply told myself that the value of human life is the basis of each legal system and must be at the basis of all political programmes , in short that to encourage research , in particular medical and pharmacological research to fight terrible illnesses is a way of safeguarding and even promoting ethical principles .
But Parliament considered that other ethical requirements had not been sufficiently taken into consideration and the first common position of the Council was rejected .
The work recommenced and the ethical requirements were considered in particular by Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
At first reading Parliament voted a series of amendments which made the directive clear and respectful of ethical requirements , even in the new open areas .
The Commission stated that it recognized all these amendments voted by Parliament .
The Council considered , however , that it should make some modifications .
Now , I believe that the key point , about which everyone expresses his own opinion and I believe that this opinion is personal but shared by many colleagues , is that the litmus paper showing the openness of the modifications brought by the Council is the question of the human embryo and on this point the Council made modifications which make ambiguous a language which was previously clear .
To make it comprehensible to all in a subject which is complex legally , I will note that Parliament stated , " the human embryo is never patentable , either as the product of a process or as an instrument of a process ' .
The Council has introduced a language which , instead of interpretation , instead of transforming the European directive into internal State law , will allow the patenting of processes which use embryos and the embryos themselves .
This is my opinion as a lawyer .
At least an element of ambiguity was introduced .
I believe that it is the duty of this Parliament to remove this ambiguity .
I shall therefore vote for Amendment Nos 1 , 14 , 19 and 24 which aim to remove this ambiguity .
I know the fundamental discussion is not a legal one , nor an ethical one , but a practical one .
This directive has been before the European Parliament for too many years , and is a fair directive which will be approved , without wasting any more time .
I agree that the directive as a whole is a good one , but I would like to correct this point .
Why did the Council introduce some modifications which made clear language ambiguous ?
Or does it mean , as was stated in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and as will perhaps be stated in this Chamber , that these changes are only lexical and do not change the substance ?
I cannot imagine that an amendment which makes clear what now appears ambiguous to me , may produce delays and prevent the Council from accepting this amendment of Parliament .
Or perhaps there will be a new battle on this point , but to use an Italian expression , it means that behind these expressions which are somewhat ambiguous " there is more to this than meets the eye ' , that is , they want to leave their hands free for something which the Parliament does not want done .
For these reasons , while I still express agreement with the basic choice to encourage research to fight illnesses which are serious to human life , I hope that Amendment Nos 1 , 14 , 19 and 24 - which basically all have the same aim - will be approved .
I trust that this will not delay the final approval of the directive .
Madam President , in my previous contribution to this debate , I acknowledged the importance of carefully managed genetic research and its role in meeting the challenge of world food production and maintaining the commercial viability of family farming .
I am , however , very disappointed that previous Amendments Nos 95 , 76 and 78 which were debated and agreed on by this Parliament have re-emerged in the context of the proposal before the House .
I do not regard that as a very democratic system and it is certainly not a system which fully reflects the views of the Members who spoke here .
When this original directive was voted on by the European Parliament , a specific clause was inserted , known as Amendment No 95 , which recognized the right of small farmers to freely re-use all patented seed and to save and further develop their own seed .
Fundamental to farmers ' practice of constant innovation is free access and exchange of seeds and genetic material .
If Europe is to protect the future diversity of crops , it must ensure that farmers are guaranteed such free access and use . Farmer privilege must be protected in this regard so as to protect the social and economic unit of the family farm throughout Europe .
Otherwise we may as well hand over the monopoly of food production to large multinational corporations , which would be a very anti-social development indeed .
My final point is that I do not support - and I made this point previously - genetic engineering as it applies to humans .
Life is not a commodity that can be bought and sold .
I welcome the fact that the revised directive excludes the following issues from patentability : processes of cloning human beings , processes for modifying the genome line genetic identity of human beings and use of human embryos for industrial and commercial purposes .
Madam President , Commissioner , as chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I take the view that the current draft directive on biotechnology is a textbook case of European legislation .
Never has the European Parliament had so much influence on European regulations as on this matter .
First the Commission , then the Council , have accepted just about all the amendments of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights , its rapporteur and finally Parliament .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights greatly appreciates this and throws in its lot with the common position of the European Council of Ministers .
I hope that this will also be the case in response to this debate and that , after ten years of debate , the way will at last be open for legal protection of biotechnological inventions at European level .
Indeed , we cannot wait any longer for a European regulation on this , as a lack of protection for biotechnological inventions will result in a brain-drain to the United States and Japan .
We risk losing an important market which is growing very rapidly completely .
Jobs play a role in this too .
Industrial applications also continue to get behind , certainly in pharmaceuticals , which is the area where 96 % of biotechnological discoveries find an application .
Of course , it is unworthy of man to allow animals to suffer needlessly .
The common position provides a solution for this .
But it is equally unworthy of man to allow children and the terminally ill to suffer when there is a solution to hand .
I consider , therefore , that the right balance has been found in the draft directive , the right balance between technological and ethical dimensions .
We , as the European people 's representation must not be frightened of biotechnology .
On the contrary , we must show that we are equal to the challenge of biotechnology and that we dare to make a start on it through appropriate legislation .
Madam President , both the European Union and its Member States have signed the UN Convention on Biodiversity .
What , then , have we pledged to respect ?
It is already laid down in the preamble to the Convention that every state has the right to its own biological resources , including genetic resources .
This is developed further in Articles 3 and 15 .
It is also made entirely clear in Article 15.5 that the utilization of genetic resources shall be preceded by obtaining the permission of the state of origin .
This is not consistent with this common position which we are deciding on .
It is crystal clear and unacceptable .
Today the majority of genetic resources are found in the developing countries , that is , in the poor world .
A patent system which does not respect the Convention on Biodiversity risks developing into a system in which large transnational companies can take control of the genetic wealth of these countries which they must then buy back in various forms .
I believe that this is wholly unacceptable .
These formulations can be improved if Amendment Nos 25 and 5 are adopted , but it is still not enough .
Out of respect for the Convention on Biodiversity and for other ethical reasons , I feel that this proposal should be rejected .
Mr President , I hope that Members will not be deluded by the rapporteur 's assertion that the common position respects this House .
There are 68 changes in the common position text from that adopted by Parliament at first reading .
This should demonstrate that this document does not accurately reflect the wishes of this House .
After ten years and one previous rejection we still have not got it right .
I am not going to repeat all Green objections - you have heard them before .
I am going to put on the record the views of some of those sections of civil society whose voices have not been heard in the preparation of this directive .
I have circulated to Members a list of those patients ' organizations who oppose the patenting of human gene sequences .
Here is the position of the Official Genetic Interest Group in the UK : ' If a patent is granted on a product or therapy or pharmaceutical product which incorporates or relies upon knowledge of a gene sequence , the patent protection should not cover the sequence itself .
A different product or therapy incorporating or using knowledge of the same gene sequence should be covered by an entirely separate patent and there should be no derivative patenting . '
The Irish Inherited Disorders Organization has complained that it was misled and misinformed and its position misrepresented .
It does not support the patenting of human gene sequences .
The German Society of Human Genetics , through its chair , states : ' We are opposed to the patenting of the human genome and the DNA sequences it contains .
We support the position of the World Medical Association , the Committee of European Physicians , in opposing the patenting of human genes without any exception . '
The British Society for Human Genetics says : ' Article 5 appears both to permit and to exclude the patenting of human gene sequences . '
The confusion exists because this House adopted in July at first reading a conflicting proposal which both allowed and prohibited the patenting of the human genome .
A sustained campaign by lobbyists financially supported by Smith-KlineBeecham misrepresented and misinformed MEPs about the patients ' organizations .
Our Amendment No 22 tries to correct this directive 's drafting .
The European Ecumenical Commission for Church and Society says : ' We are still deeply dissatisfied with this directive .
We strongly urge Parliament to reinstate the need for a separate ethics committee able to look at patent application and Amendment No 76 regarding material of foreign and human origin ' .
Our Amendments Nos 4 , 11 and 12 restate the ethics amendment in full .
The Commission 's own group of advisers on the ethical implications of biotechnology , Opinion No 8 , paragraph 2 : ' An invention based on the use of elements of human origin having been retrieved without respecting the principle of consent will not fulfil the ethical requirements .
The common position does not guarantee this ' .
I wish to say to my colleagues on the use of embryos : let us be clear , we cannot commercialize the use of embryos .
Madam President , for ethical reasons the Group of the European Radical Alliance is opposed to any form of patenting of human beings or any of their biomolecular elements .
My Group had indicated that it disagreed with the rapporteur , who did not adequately take ethical aspects into account .
Yet the new common position of the Council , which has been taken up by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , substantially alters the actual text which we adopted , and the changes tend to weaken the ethics by broadening still further the field of application of patents .
We cannot condone this .
Even if we weigh up the pressures , lobbies and financial issues against the advances made by the USA in this domain , biological piracy runs counter to the humanist philosophy which I hope a large number of us share in Parliament .
At a different level , the Council has also removed an ancestral practice ; the privilege clause which entitles farmers to reuse the seed they produce and resell for agricultural use .
Our group will support Amendment No 28 , in particular , which aims to reintroduce this practice .
Moreover , according to the proposal submitted to us , it would also become possible to patent old varieties .
This could have far-reaching effects .
By way of example , I will cite an Indian variety of Basmati rice which has been patented by an American company . This means that it will no longer be possible to export this type of rice to the USA as previously .
We do not wish to campaign on a simplistic anti-American agenda here . We only wish to do our work as politicians and , on the basis of our common values , resist the cold logic of profit for profit 's sake , which unfortunately the Member States seem to be unconcerned about having imposed upon them .
Madam President , once again Parliament is tackling a common position of the Council concerning the directive on patenting of inventions derived from biotechnology .
We were unable to support the Rothley report at first reading .
This was for ethical reasons .
It is our conviction that human beings , animals and plants are unique creations of God and so can never , even in reconstructed , synthetic components , be called a human invention .
This is regardless of the debate about how genetic knowledge is used .
The directive turns genetic material into a mere resource for commercial gain .
It is also questionable how far patenting will benefit patients : patents are requested for commercial not charitable purposes .
Meanwhile , we have a second common position and Parliament seems to be tired of the struggle .
The economic benefits for industry seem to have completely overpowered the ethical reservations , so much so that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is not retabling a number of important amendments tabled by Parliament which were not adopted by the Council .
The rapporteur recommends adopting the common position as it stands .
Did we adopt these amendments for nothing ?
We , like a number of others , have retabled the most important amendments again .
It cannot be that the rapid implementation of the directive is more important than achieving a directive which is balanced in its content .
Finally , I would like to observe that the ease with which the economic interests of this directive have dominated and the socalled naivety of the ethical objections cause me concern .
The patenting of genes is not something to be taken for granted .
Only with a great deal of goodwill can synthetic genes be considered to be inventions .
Human dignity , respect for animals and plants within God 's creation remain important issues to discuss .
It is too easy to detach this so-called purely technical directive from moral and ethical considerations .
Anyone who thinks that by approving the common position they will be done with these recurring ethical questions has got it wrong .
The debate has only just begun and will not be made any easier by the approval of the current common position .
Madam President , some considerable time ago 1.2 million of my compatriots signed a petition to put on record their opposition to the patenting of biotechnological inventions .
Against this politically explosive background , I have read this report even more carefully than usual .
The observation that the Commission and the Council 's common position have taken up amendments from Parliament does not stand up to close scrutiny .
There has been a weakening of significant points by surreptitious means .
The Council 's common position specifies in Article 5 , paragraph 2 that an isolated component of the human body can be an invention that can be patented .
This provision is a de facto circumvention of the ban on cloning human life forms .
It is further specified that the use of human embryos for industrial and commercial purposes may not be patented .
The exclusion of patentability thus does not cover the use of embryos for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes .
I , however , think that all use of human embryos ought to be excluded from patentability !
The original position of the Parliament concerning the so-called " farmers ' privilege ' has also been weakened .
The derogations envisaged are nonsense , because although farmers are permitted to use crop material for generative and vegetative reproduction , economic exploitation of the application patents is deliberately excluded from the derogations .
As a result , there can be no exchange of seed material between farmers without the payment of licence fees .
Small seed associations will go out of existence for economic reasons .
The result will be a market cleansing .
The same also applies to animal breeding .
For these reasons , we reject the draft .
Madam President , I would like to thank the President for all his hard work .
I have followed this proposal with interest and was a member of the original conciliation which failed .
The directive represents a delicate balance between granting a patent and respect for animal welfare and dignity of humans .
It should be noted that pharmaceuticals are a world leader in the European Union and represent a considerable amount of wealth in this Union .
I have letters from trade unions in the UK who support this directive , who fear for job losses if we do not have some kind of directive .
But do not be naive - the rejection of this directive will not prevent experiments in biotechnology .
Research and jobs in this area would simply go elsewhere in the world and the European Union would be the loser .
I broadly support the common position although I share some of the concerns of my colleagues in relation to animal welfare and ethical control .
However , some of my colleagues in this House are being less than sincere by pretending to oppose the directive because of the wording of certain ethical constraints in the proposal .
The reality is that they would never be prepared to accept the proposal , whatever the wording .
I think they should come clean on that .
As for the arguments as to whether or not the lobbying we have had represents patients - I believe this is a sterile debate .
Which organisation have you ever come across which has had no dissent from its members ?
It is the overall balance of the membership 's views which is important .
In conclusion , I broadly support the common position although I have some concerns with the ethical considerations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the present common position on which we shall be voting tomorrow is better than its reputation .
I see no grounds for euphoria , and , in contrast to Mr Rothley , I am also of the opinion that one or two things could perhaps be even better formulated , but the text on which we shall be voting tomorrow is better than the text which a majority of the Parliament rejected in February 1995 .
There have been very many improvements , and I believe that the Parliament had good reasons to vote against it at that time , but now we have equally good reasons to resist calls for the rejection of the common position .
At that time , the clear exclusion of manipulation of the gene sequence was missing .
The common position contains this clear exclusion of the breeding of human beings through intervention in the human gene sequence .
At that time , we had a very woolly formulation on the farmers ' privilege .
Now we have a stronger formulation .
As far as patients are concerned , I must really caution against using their support for any particular position .
There are some patient associations which support the directive and there are others which oppose it .
Both have good reasons .
Nobody here in Parliament can claim with a clear conscience that it will have any particular effect on research into medicine X or medicine Y. Certain serious scientists argue for the one position , and other equally serious scientists argue for the other , and we should not let ourselves get carried away with polemics , as have some of our colleagues .
We should see this directive for what it is , an internal market directive and a directive dealing with economic factors and unemployment .
However , we should spare no efforts in pointing out the ethically motivated limits that have been set , to which the Parliament has always attached importance .
Because in contrast to what the Green Group is claiming , it is just not true that we want to create jobs through cloning , but through possible applications in the field of gene technology which are ethically undisputed in the view of the majority in this House and , I believe , the majority of European citizens as well .
However , we must formulate these ethically motivated limitations very clearly .
That is why I am pleased that in the common position the Council has arrived at a very far-reaching formulation on cloning .
The cloning experiment on Dolly the sheep and the publication of this experiment have caused legitimate fear amongst many people in Europe and elsewhere .
The cloning of human beings is not a fantasy .
Unless we remain alert , there will be cloned human beings sooner than we imagine .
That is why it is a good thing that we as the Parliament - and now the Council as well - want to set a clear limit here because what the European Commission 's bio-ethics advisory body proposed was not very clear .
What it said was that only the reproductive cloning of human beings should be rejected , and that would have meant that cloning experiments on embryos were to be permitted and only the creation of a cloned baby would be reprehensible .
However , that is a very inconsistent approach , firstly because the right to life and human dignity apply from the very beginning , and secondly because the creation of a cloned embryo is the decisive technical step on the way to the emergence of a cloned baby .
That is why it is good that we have this formulation under which cloning is defined as the creation of human beings with the same genetic information as other human beings .
As a result , our position is stronger than the cloning protocol of the Council of Europe , because in this case the term " human being ' is also defined in the interinstitutional file .
Any attempts to weaken this ban on cloning will be resisted by the Group of the European People 's Party now and in the future .
As we only have a minute in which to speak , Madam President , I will be brief .
We also regard the improved text as a step forward , if we compare it with the first reading .
But it has not gone far enough yet .
I think there are reasons enough to go to conciliation with the Council on a number of points .
One of these points is the European Group on Ethics .
Only very recently , we listened to President Santer 's interpretation of this Group and I still do not understand why the European Commission wants to expand that package of duties with the addition of information technology .
Let the Commission provide a good explanation as to why it cannot adopt the tabled Amendment No 11 and why it considers its own text , its own interpretation , to be so much better than that of Parliament .
Finally , Madam President , this is about animal welfare .
We tabled an amendment , not only the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party but also David Martin and 29 others , to exempt animals if it would cause them to have a physical handicap .
Mr Rothley may say that is merely a couple of words but they mean something for the welfare of animals .
I hope , therefore , that this House will adopt this amendment this morning .
Madam President , it cannot be denied that biotechnology can contribute to the progress of humanity in the areas of foodstuffs , the environment , health and lasting development which creates jobs and businesses .
Europe must not be left behind .
In the pharmaceutical research sector , only 15 % of patents are of European origin whereas 65 % come from America .
A directive on biotechnological inventions ought to help Europe close this gap , but not at any price .
Biotechnology poses new problems whose solutions demand transparency , democracy and ethics .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left was of the opinion that the 1995 conciliation report sacrificed these factors on the altar of the economy and of profit , and for this reason we voted against it and helped ensure that it did not succeed .
The Commission 's new proposal has drawn some lessons from this failure , but it is still not enough .
Parliament has adopted 66 amendments which have been practically integrated into the Council 's common position in order to clarify patenting conditions and exceptions .
As we have heard , the human body and certain plant varieties and animal species are not patentable .
The " farmers ' privilege ' is affirmed , allowing him to use the products of his harvest for reproduction or propagation by himself on his farm .
However I regret that the Council did not retain the European Parliament 's amendment which aimed to protect the rights of developing countries as regards genetic inheritance .
Despite these advances , this text gives rise to legitimate fears , for there are real risks .
Since 1995 these risks have been reduced by protecting the dignity and integrity of human beings and by setting boundaries .
Moreover , the common position states that patent law does not replace or do away with legislation which for ethical reasons limits , prohibits or controls research and the use of its results .
However the critical question remains that of the means of control of the people and their representatives over the area of developing biotechnology .
Human beings will not draw benefits from biotechnology unless they have a say in the details of its development , in place of the multinationals which only see it as a new source of profit .
Madam President , the rapporteur and all those who advocate accepting the common position of the Council have recognized that the present common position contains improvements over the draft at first reading .
Mr Rothley , that is an acknowledgement of criticism , because at that time you wanted to accept the original common position .
If we had followed your advice , we would not have these improvements today , and this report would be linked to your name and it would be worse than the other one .
Let me make myself clear : I am in favour of a directive , but I am also in favour of it being qualitatively sensible throughout .
I am rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and the so-called " farmers ' privilege ' has been improved in the present common position by comparison with the first draft .
However , what the Agriculture Committee wanted , and what this Parliament voted for , has not been included .
Mr Rothley , you should not give up before you cross the finishing line .
Even if you are exhausted , I can keep going !
We have worked together on this issue for 10 years , and that is why I am in favour of having an argument with the Council and going into the conciliation procedure with this amendment which we have once again proposed .
I am fairly sure that either the Council will not even launch the conciliation procedure and will immediately accept the point , or we will get our way in the conciliation procedure .
Why should we give up the opportunity of an improvement when we both support the same position on this point , because , as has been said , the draft from the Council lacks internal conviction and logic .
So , Mr Rothley , please listen to the critics one more time and show a little patience , then we shall have an improved draft , and then Parliament will be in a strong position in its argument with the Council .
Madam President , many of the earlier speakers have expressed the view that the Parliament now needs to do nothing but accept the common position in its present form .
It has been said that the Council has in any case accepted many of Parliament 's amendments , that the directive is now much better than the earlier drafts , and in particular that it is significantly better than the draft directive from the Commission .
I would like to associate myself explicitly with these findings , but not with the conclusion which has been drawn from them .
We must certainly thank our rapporteur for the significantly improved legal quality and consistency of the directive .
However , the fact of the matter is that , contrary to what has been claimed , the Council has not accepted some of the amendments which were agreed with widespread support in this Parliament .
And if it is conceded on all sides that the directive was much improved after its first reading in the European Parliament , we can reasonably conclude that the directive can be further improved at second reading ...
if all the amendments which have not so far been accepted by the Council are re-introduced and agreed .
The timing and the deadlines do not militate against the acceptance of further amendments .
The Council agreed the present common position quickly , and the present amendments do not seek to make any changes to those points which were essential for the Council compromise .
We may therefore assume that the directive will come into force rapidly even if we accept further changes and come to an understanding with the Council either in a rapid conciliation procedure or perhaps even earlier .
However , I simply cannot understand why the Council did not accept Parliament 's formulations on one matter , and that was the derogations for farmers .
As many here know gene technology , especially in agriculture , is rejected by a large majority , particularly in Austria .
Among our farmers , there have just been the first signs of a greater open-mindedness , and they can see that seed and reproductive material that have been genetically modified might be beneficial to them as well .
However , if they are now forced to recognize that this directive will make them economically dependent again because the derogations for farmers are too limited , this will do nothing to promote the acceptability of biotechnology in agriculture .
Madam President , as the last speaker from the Group of the European People 's Party , I think the first thing I want to do is stress my congratulations .
I think the common position will be consolidated into a directive tomorrow , and this Parliament and the Commission deserve to be congratulated .
I think the verbatim report of proceedings should record the fact that Mr Vandergheist , whom I see sitting here , has worked magnificently .
But most of all I want to say that during the last few years , I have come to have great respect and admiration for the rapporteur .
I have not followed this directive for the full 10 years , Mr Rothley , but ever since I arrived at this Parliament , this directive has been on the table , causing problems .
Through it , I have had the chance to get to know a great lawyer and parliamentarian .
It is a very self-centred thing to say , but it has been useful to me .
Madam President , this is not a " lesser evil ' directive .
No : this is a good text .
Perhaps it is not what the expert would have produced , and no doubt there are imperfections , but it is a good text .
In that sense , we must contradict the odd statement which has been made , such as that Mr Rothley wanted to accept the text at first reading .
That is not true .
Mr Rothley has fought very hard to arrive at the present version .
A compromise is better than the text which resulted from Parliament 's amendments .
Those amendments reflected the agreement between the different groups but I insist that , technically , this text is better .
Allow me to give you some examples : firstly , farmer privilege .
Well , Amendment No 28 is an attempt to modify Regulation No 2100 / 94 .
This is a patents directive .
That has been repeated several times , and I can only endorse the words of Mr Barzanti , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , Mr Pompidou and Ms Oddy .
This directive is a patents directive .
If anybody wants to modify Regulation 2100 / 94 then let them do so , but you cannot make modifications through the back door , by means of the present directive .
The same is true of the piracy which has been mentioned .
The TRIPs agreement , among other international texts , which binds all Member States of the European Union , establishes the three criteria for patentability : innovation , inventiveness and industrial application .
Mr Pompidou reminded us of that .
We cannot introduce a fourth one .
It would be null and void .
Obviously , if anyone obtains an element fraudulently and patents it , the Member State 's substantive laws will come into play . It will be a civil or criminal offence , as appropriate , and the whole body of law and justice will be applied so that , if appropriate , the patent can even be annulled .
But we cannot include in a patent law new criteria which do not exist in international agreements , just as we cannot modify substantive laws through the back door .
Madam President , the fact is , as Mr Barzanti and Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn said , there is a lot left to do .
There obviously is , but not in a patents law .
In a patents law , we have to keep to the matter in hand .
And I must make one last comment about what was said by my colleague Mr Casini , whom I greatly admire .
It is not true that Article 6 is unlawful .
Article 6 establishes , for the first time in an international text , protection for the embryo as contained in the Oviedo Convention on Bioethics , which is expected to come into effect subsequently .
And that phrase , which is in fact inessential , is no major impediment because this is a question of an open list in an article preventing the patentability of anything contrary to ethics or public order .
To sum up , Madam President , St Augustine said you have to be wise to know what to change , even wiser to know what not to change , but true wisdom is knowing when you have reached an acceptable text .
I think that moment is now , so I hope it will be consolidated tomorrow .
Madam President , the directive we are debating today will produce harmonized legislation on patents for biotechnological inventions within the European Union .
This is essential to guarantee that the biotechnology sector in Europe is able to compete .
It is this sector of all sectors which will provide many jobs in the years to come and only with good legislation will Europe be able to catch the United States and Japan up .
This is a better therapy for Europe than a Treaty text on employment .
Remarkably , the Netherlands has isolated itself within Europe by being the only Member State to vote against this directive in the Council of Ministers .
The Netherlands has actually passed national laws prohibiting the patenting of plants and animals , thus isolating the Dutch biotechnology sector internationally , so that it will be doomed to dwindle to a backward position .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party 's Amendment No 9 to Article 26 does not put scientific research on genetic material already obtained at risk .
Not now , nor in the future , as the directive does not come into force with retroactive effect .
The amendment guarantees correct information and the free consent of donors of genetic material , independently of national provisions .
Finally , Madam President , I appeal to my colleagues to use their legislative powers to ensure good , transparent and ethically responsible legislation in Europe and not to be intimidated by the threats of the Council to reject the directive if Parliament tables amendments .
Madam President , the European Parliament is now taking a position on the whole question of human ethics : what is right and fitting from the point of view of life , and what is not .
The proposal is about the patenting of natural life forms on behalf of major European companies , so that they cannot enjoy the same unethical rights that their counterparts in the USA do .
Parliament must now assess to what extent the amendments we approved last summer have been incorporated into the new draft Directive .
A particular area of controversy is Amendment No 76 which we approved , but which was shot down by the Council .
But it goes into every aspect of the problem : whether genetic material is capable of being patented in general , relations between the pharmaceutical industry and the developing countries , and the basic issue itself : can you rob naturally produced material of its secret by patenting it for exclusive use ?
It is essential that Parliament reviews the amendments .
If not , this sort of patenting practice may well be compared to the kind of biological gold-digging that goes on in the nonindustrialized world .
Four fifths of the world 's genetic polymorphism happens in the developing countries .


I am convinced that this debate has shown , especially to Mr Rothley , Mr Pompidou and Mr Monfils , that this issue is linked to many such problems , which they have neglected to touch on in their speeches .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am afraid that I am not able to follow the rapporteur 's recommendation to accept the common position , for the reason that certain minimum requirements which are all in the interest of the matter itself have not been fulfilled .
The first minimum requirement relates to the fact that the freedom of the Member States to exercise their rights under international conventions is restricted by the present wording to the duties which are linked with them .
Secondly , the ethics committee which has rightly been envisaged has neither the necessary specific and comprehensive competences , nor the necessary independence .
Thirdly , no account has been taken of the detailed provisions in relation to the distinction between living creatures and inanimate objects in Articles 3 , 4 , 5 and 9 , which the churches had urged .
I put the following question to those , who are in the majority , that want to accept the common position : do you really believe that you are serving biotechnology well by doing so ?
You can bring the debate here to an end with the vote , but in society the debate and the political and moral arguments about this issue will continue all the more vigorously .
Madam President , I do not believe for one minute that this is something that we have been discussing for ten years .
The strict position is that the last time this came before the House we rejected it at third reading after the unsatisfactory conciliation .
My contention is simply that we rejected the previous proposal because it did not include within it an ethical dimension .
Therefore , my Amendment No 78 on the new proposal called for an ethical dimension and more particularly for the establishment of a proper ethics committee .
Can I remind the House that I asked that a committee should be set up to assess all ethical aspects of biotechnology and its utilisation in particular with regard to patents .
The Commission should summit proposals for the composition and terms of reference of that committee before this directive comes into effect .
That has not been done .
In my view , and I speak as the author of the socialist group amendment , that is not reflected in the common position that we are asked to debate today .
Accordingly , I do not accept that the proposal on the ethics committee is satisfactory and on this I would expect the Commission to give us some answers .
They did not when we discussed the matter recently in Brussels .
I have already asked the new ethics committee for an opinion on terminator crops .
Neither have I had an acknowledgement from the President of the existing committee , nor have I had an acknowledgement of my request from the President of the European Commission .
The reason for that is quite simple .
Parliamentarians currently have no access to that committee .
That is something we should put right .
How are we going to achieve gender equality ?
Why are there so many men on that committee and why are they almost exclusively professional ethicists ?
What happens when a particular development in biotechnology requires an ethical consideration ?
Will there be the possibility of maybe calling for a moratorium in a given development ?
All of these questions need to be answered .
None of them has yet been properly dealt with in what we have got before the House .
I say this to those people in biotech wearing the yellow tee-shirts in the gallery : I am a supporter of biotechnology but I do believe that it must be firmly and properly controlled by a properly organized ethics committee .
Madam President , our rejection of the proposal in 1995 was well worth the trouble .
Today we have a proposal that takes far greater consideration of animal protection , humanitarian and ethical issues .
We must promote research into , and development of , methods of treating people with genetic diseases .
Many are pumped with chemicals all their lives without ever finding a real solution to their suffering .
We must respect our obligations to the original people .
Even though it is already a part of the text , I do support the amendment clarifying informed consent .
We support the " farmers ' privilege ' , so that the rights of farmers to sow their crops without paying royalties are not restricted .
In my view , the Santer European Group on Ethics seems a bit dubious .
If it is permitted , why is a regulated ethics committee not grounded in the Treaty ?
Naturally , we welcome the promise of transparency , but I would rather have a right to transparency than be assured of it as a favour by the President of the Commission .
Mr President , as you can hear , we have a huge clash here between ethical and moral considerations of many religions and cultures and the ambitions of the pharmaceutical industries to secure their position in global markets .
I still judge that the draft directive does not provide adequate protection for farmers either here in Europe or in developing countries .
As we know , many new plant varieties patented by biotech companies are based on traditional wisdom handed down through the generations , and now farmers are being asked to pay for these patents .
We in Parliament have exercised a certain amount of power already with regard to this piece of legislation , and it would be a pity if we did not continue to exercise this power wisely .
By voting for the amendments , then going to conciliation on issues such as the patenting of human embryos and provision for a proper ethics committee , as Mr White has just pointed out , we would see the advances we want in medicine and agriculture but with the various safeguards built in .
Mr President , I have great respect for the rapporteur , he knows that , and the text has been improved , but like many others I do not think it is enough .
My country , the Netherlands , has resisted right through to the end on principle the right of people to patent plants and animals , while a great deal of important medical research is done in the Netherlands and biotechnology is , indeed , an important sector .
It was the Group of the Party of European Socialists which tabled Amendment No 76 - I was the original rapporteur on that .
The new text does not contain an amendment giving Third World countries in particular , but countries in general , the right to protect their own biodiversity .
I have to say to you , Mr President , I was shocked to hear that a representative of the Commission in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights expressed the view that the European Commission need not observe the Biodiversity Convention , signed by all fifteen European Union Member States , because it is not legally binding .
Meanwhile , we have a declaration from the Biodiversity Convention in Vienna , where delegates from 34 countries , who are meeting at this moment in Bratislava , are opposing the absence of Amendment No 76 .
Thirty four countries , I will not read the list out to you but we will make sure that the Commissioner and the rapporteur also get a copy of that text .
Madam President , Commissioner , the text which has been submitted to us for debate is a new improved text , as we have heard .
So I am rather surprised at the conclusions which some people are drawing from it .
In effect we have started with a new proposal from the Commission which at first reading was radically changed by Parliament . The changes relate in particular to the definition of patentable materials , where we have used the wording of the bio-ethics advisory body , and also to the exceptions to patentability for reasons of public utility where we have taken up the proposals of Mr Liese in particular .
In the common position , the Commission and the Council have included all our amendments , with one exception which I will come back to later , without greatly altering their substance .
So today we are discussing our own text .
It was drawn up by the European Parliament .
Do we really need to improve it as some Members of this House are suggesting ?
The Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights take the line that we should vote for the text as it stands without any amendments , and they do this for two main reasons .
Firstly , in order to retain the coherence of the text , to avoid ambiguity and the one-sided declarations which spoiled the first conciliation .
As you will recall , Parliament quite rightly rejected the result of this first conciliation .
Today the text before us for approval is clear , honest and coherent . It is not polluted with unbalanced statements which could distort or complicate the understanding of it .
We must preserve this coherence .
Secondly , we will cause yet further delay if we start a conciliation which we feel is pointless , for this text has already been pending for ten years . If it goes to conciliation , we risk reopening the Pandora 's box of the debate within the Council itself .
And if things go badly in the Council , we will not reach a result in the discussion before the end of this Parliament which is fast approaching . This would mean a catastrophic delay for us , blocking economic investments and , more importantly , scientific and medical research .
Madam President , I would like to say a few words here about the patient groups .
Mrs Ewing said they were misrepresented .
Doubtless the patients ' organizations have a wide range of views on this issue , and that is as it should be .
I note that the large French organizations are in favour of adopting the directive .
But I would particularly like to protest at the injustice done to these associations in accusing them of being in the pay of the pharmaceutical industry , an accusation which was repeated here by Mrs Ahern .
This kind of attack is not fitting in such an important debate , particularly since otherwise I note that the Commission and the Council have largely taken into consideration the concerns expressed by the authors of the present amendments .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection again tabled its amendment on the origin of patentable materials .
As Mrs van Putten well knows , this amendment poses serious problems in terms of proof before a national judge .
Further , I note , and doubtless Commissioner Monti will confirm this , that the Commission has undertaken not only to respect the Rio Convention on Biodiversity , but also to present an annual report on this to enable us to review the situation .
Mr White 's amendment on bioethics was taken from a different subject matter , but above all we had a formal declaration from President Santer , who gave us a number of assurances , particularly that Parliament could refer directly to the new European Group on Ethics which has been set up .
As regards the amendment on animal suffering , I would like to ask Mr Monti here if he can assure us that these two wordings are in fact effectively identical , and that the fact of having removed three months does not change anything in terms of the actual application of patentability on this point .
Finally , I would like to say to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf that doubtless he spoke from a personal standpoint on the problems facing agriculture , but the Committee on Agriculture did not support him and has not re-tabled his amendments .
He is today thus not speaking on behalf of the committee , which was unable to support him .
Madam President , for all these reasons , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I recommend that we vote for this text without amendment .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission and myself , I wish to express my deepest gratitude and admiration for the very important work carried out by the European Parliament during the legislative procedure on this directive .
The Commission is convinced that the text on which you are now being asked to give your views is a good text , clear and of high quality , in which the specific nature of the patent rights and the legitimate concerns regarding ethics are properly balanced .
This text is the result of an intense collective effort , during which the opinions and arguments of everyone , inside and outside the institutions , were openly considered and evaluated to obtain a final result which I am convinced represents something of importance for the Community .
On 16 July 1997 , at first reading , the European Parliament adopted 66 amendments .
The Commission included all of them , except one , because it was incompatible with current international law .
And yet , at the moment of adopting the common position , with a further effort to understand the requirements expressed through this single rejected amendment and with an undoubted willingness to show openness and compromise , the Council and the Commission agreed to reconsider the essential points of Amendment No 76 .
I consider that to modify them , in the sense shown by some , would be neither useful nor wise .
It would not be useful because it would lead to a clash with the Council , which has current international law on its side and the clarity of the present legal structure , which would be compromised by the requested modifications .
It would not be wise because the distribution between the Community dimension and the national dimension , here established through careful use of the criterion of subsidiarity , would be altered in favour of the Community , but without the Community being able usefully to establish certain rules and being able to bring in any added value .
On 27 April last , during a meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I intended to give some clarification to explain why the common position of the Council could be accepted as such , thus supporting the position of the rapporteur , Mr Rothley .
With the vote of 28 April , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights confirmed that the common position of the Council could be accepted as it adequately included the amendments adopted by the European Parliament at first reading .
I am very pleased at this decision of the committee .
Now Parliament must make known its views at a sitting of the House .
It is therefore up to you to confirm the approval of the text by your vote , thus opening the way to its final adoption .
I do not think it is useful to repeat in detail here , at this time , the reasons - in the opinion of the Commission - in favour of approving the text adopted as the common position .
However , I think , having listened closely to this debate , that there are still four points on which it would be useful , Madam President , to confirm the position of the Commission so that you can make a decision in full knowledge of the case .
Firstly , I should mention the European Group on Ethics , Science and New Technologies , to remind you of what President Santer has already confirmed to the Parliament during his speech on 29 April , and that is that this Group is and will remain independent and will ensure total openness as regards its work .
The European Parliament will be able to question it at will , based on a procedure which the Parliament itself must establish .
I have always stressed fully the important role which the committee already plays and will be asked to play increasingly in this delicate matter .
I am completely convinced of the substantial contribution which Parliament can make , and it is my duty to confirm this today in particular .
Secondly , concerning the embryo .
It can be confirmed here that , in the opinion of the Commission , the essence of the position expressed by Parliament has been reflected in the common position , as it specifically excludes any manipulation to exploit the embryo and as these procedures in favour of the embryo are clearly stated , to protect it , and Parliament never intended to exclude this latter aspect .
Thirdly , concerning the protection of biological diversity .
The Community is heavily committed , internationally and internally - the annual report is part of this - to defending this diversity and has no intention of retreating from these positions .
For this reason , the case of the American patent on Basmati rice is a good example for the Commission in favour of its own consistency .
Such a patent could not be issued in Europe simply because the directive would forbid it , because it is not an invention and it is a vegetable variety which is specifically excluded .
Fourth and last point : the suffering of animals .
The objective to prevent , through the patent right , atrocities and acts of cruelty against animals and the legal instrument for this are present in the text because we are all in agreement on this point .
Not having taken up the reference to physical harm has no particular significance : simply it seems that the concept of suffering already includes it , it is difficult to imagine physical harm which does not cause suffering .
It is only for that reason that the Commission does not believe it is necessary to mention this aspect .
Madam President , Mr Rothley , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on the proposed directive within the European Parliament - and I am not saying this out of deference - has been absolutely fundamental and the text of the common position respects it fully .
For all of us the experience of 1995 was a serious and important time and I believe that I can say that we all tried to draw reasons for reflection to recommence our work with tenacity , humility and calmness .
I trust that the misunderstandings which existed are now overcome , because we have discussed them at length and because the text is much clearer .
The part relating to the patentability of elements of human origin is valid for us all , where the common position of the Council includes the text of the European Parliament fully to the letter .
The Commission is convinced that , by confirming the position of the Council , the European Parliament will reap the rewards of its important work .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I conclude by thanking you for this important work and for your kind attention .
Madam President , I am speaking now to express my view that Mr Cot needs to show proper respect for his colleagues in his dealings with them : for example , he voices the suspicion that we are not capable of reading the text because it is identical with the amendments which the Parliament introduced .
It is one thing to say that it is the same in substance - which one might argue about - but it is another thing to claim that the text is the same .
In any case , I am not saying that you have been bought by the gene technology industry .
I was not the one who started causing offence !
That is the first thing .
The second thing is that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development cannot introduce any amendments in this procedure nor can it introduce them in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , because that can be done only by individual Members with the appropriate number of signatures , namely 29 .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has written a letter to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which is not the subject of the procedure , but in order to express the fact that the position of the Parliament was not accepted in the question of " farmers ' privilege ' .
As rapporteur , in discussions with colleagues , I gathered these 29 signatures in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and introduced them , because that is what is envisaged by the procedure .
The fact that there were socialist Members on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development who were somewhat hesitant in adding their signatures cannot be taken to mean that overall this was not an expression of the views of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Cot .
I must protest if you seek to give the impression in Parliament that I might mix personal interests with the interests of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development !
I will not put up with that , make no mistake !
If you want a fight , you can have one , otherwise please take matters seriously and show respect for the dignity of your colleagues !
Madam President , I did not hear Mr Monti give an answer , in his response to Parliament , on the Commission 's vision of how Europe and the European Union should implement the United Nations Convention on Biodiversity .
I have already commented on this , reflecting on what was said about it in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Is it not rather bizarre that the European Commission flies off to Rio de Janeiro with a plane full of civil servants and then takes the view that there is no real need to incorporate the Convention on Biodiversity into legislation ?
Mr van Putten , I can refer in particular to Article 1 , paragraph 2 , of the directive where it states , " This directive shall be without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States pursuant to international agreements , and in particular the Convention on Biological Diversity and the TRIPs Agreement ' .
I believe that , setting aside my opinions , this is the definitive textual reference .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Second banking directive
The next item is the report ( A4-0152 / 98 ) by Mr Wijsenbeek , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission 's interpretative communication on freedom to provide services and the interest of the general good in the second banking directive ( SEC ( 97 ) 1193 - C4-0465 / 97 ) .
Madam President , we must be grateful to the Commission that it has realized that not much has come of the original intention of the second banking directive to promote cross-border banking services .
We must also be grateful to the Commission that it wished to consult Parliament on the document before us , even though it was not obliged to do so .
Still , and you would probably have expected this from me because I follow the comings and goings of the Commission with a positive attitude but still with " Argus eyes ' , I have something to say about the form , namely the communication .
No matter how desirable it would be to have more precise detail , in fact too much is still being left open because there is a statement at the end of the communication to the effect that the communication , which was drawn up in response to a judgment of the Court of Justice , can ultimately only be finally and conclusively judged by the Court of Justice .
Although Parliament as an institution would be the last body to want to undermine the subjection of the effect of legislation to the judgment of the courts , those who use the law , that is the banking institutions of the Member States which wish to operate in other Member States , and in so doing wish and are able to make the internal market and competition credible , are still left in uncertainty .
I would appreciate it , therefore , if the Commissioner would like to clarify for us why they resorted to this instrument of the communication and not a new or amended directive , seeing as that would have force of law and so no longer be subject to doubt and uncertainty .
The greatest uncertainties are twofold .
How can you clearly define the public interest , on the grounds of which Member States can stop a banking institution from one Member State setting itself up in another Member State ?
When is a service being provided to a client who does not live in the country where the bank was first established , but who is introduced by or from the head office , whether or not with the aid of electronic communications ?
The second question is important because it can influence a dispute at law to a large extent .
It is best for the client and cheapest , of course , if any legal procedure takes place in his own country .
Looked at the other way round , it is important to the banking institution that it does not find itself in a disadvantaged position and it is better , therefore , if it can also formally have a branch in the same country as the client .
The first question , in my opinion , ought not to be asked at all , Why is it actually necessary that banking institutions be subject to a notification procedure before they set up in another Member State ?
Why can the doctrine of the Cassis de Dijon case not also be the underlying assumption for banks ?
When a bank is subject to strict supervision by the central bank in its own country , and wants to provide services elsewhere in the Union , the authorities in the other Member State should have confidence that this supervision has been exercised with care and that clients in other Member States are therefore also protected against failings in the area of solvency , liquidity and other requirements .
Or is it the case that the Commission has reason to believe that banks will misuse their branches elsewhere in order to escape the requirements of their own central banks ?
Does the arrival of the euro , which one can assume will increase the drive among banks to expand their services throughout the Union , not also mean that the supervision of credit institutions and of their supervisory authorities , that is the national central banks , will be centralized ?
You see , while the communication was intended to resolve certain questions , you could say it has raised more questions than it has answered .
I hope that the Commission will look into these questions and I would like to thank all my colleagues who worked with me on this report which , in my opinion , brings a free internal market closer .
Madam President , may I remind the rapporteur of the Crédit Lyonnais bank which used its branch in the Netherlands to do things which it preferred its head office not to know about .
This report examines the regulations for credit institutions which are operating in the Member States of the European Union .
The second banking directive from 1989 is required to ensure that the regulations in the different Member States are harmonized to guarantee freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide financial services .
That is an important matter .
The internal market in financial services will only increase with the coming of the euro and the expansion of information and communication technology .
The Commission 's communication looks at two parts of the second banking directive : the notification procedure and the right of establishment .
Banks have to inform the supervisory authorities of the Member States in which they are operating of any cross-border operations .
It was not always clear when they had to do this .
The communication clarifies a number of points in this area .
I think it was too easy to say in the report that the SLIM project would render this communication superfluous .
Not all Member States were represented in the SLIM group for the banking system , which means that not all Member States would want to abolish the notification procedure just like that .
And I think that is how it should be .
So the communication really is important as long as abolition has not been achieved .
The second part of the communication clarifies the conditions under which a Member State can appeal to the public interest in imposing restrictions on banking institutions .
I agree with the view of the rapporteur that the communication could help in the event of conflicts between interested parties .
The conditions for an appeal to the public interest are set out in a structured way .

I would like to comment on paragraph 8 of Mr Wijsenbeek 's report , which says that the notification procedure is only for Community banking institutions in relation to banking institutions from third countries .
That seems wrong to me .
Banks from third countries have to apply for a licence to operate in the Union and they then come under exactly the same rules as Community banking institutions .
The WTO speaks of national treatment for banks .
So there is no difference in treatment between the two , perhaps just a small observation from a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy to a lawyer .
Madam President , I would like to apologize to you , the Commissioner and the rapporteur , because I was attending the public hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy with members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
Please accept my apologies that I was unable to attend the whole debate on the report .
Madam President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists will agree with the substance of the Wijsenbeek report .
I should like to comment on the institutional aspect of this problem .
I do not believe that the Commission is competent to place communications on the interpretation of legal documents in the public domain .
Neither the European Parliament nor the Council - in other words , the two legislators in the European Community - expresses views before the European Court of Justice on the interpretation of a legal document which they have enacted .
The Commission has still less authority to express views on the interpretation of legal documents which the European Parliament and the Council have enacted .
In this area there is no competence attaching to the Commission .
That is why such communications , insofar as they are intended to expound legal effects , which is indeed the intention , are unlawful .
I believe this is a profoundly political problem .
The European Union suffers from the fact that it presents a diffuse image to the public .
No one knows exactly who is responsible for what .
Who is accountable ?
That is why we must take account of such matters , I believe , we must take account of responsibilities .
Moreover , the European Court of Justice confirmed this last year , when it declared such a communication from the Commission - it must have been in February - to be unlawful .
That is why , Commissioner , if we are to maintain this clear responsibility , if we are to ensure that in the eyes of others the European Union has a clear profile and shape , it would be helpful for the Commission to refrain from such communications in future .
Either there is a necessity for a directive to be changed , and in that case the Commission can make a new proposal , or there is no such necessity , and in that case it should leave well alone !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in order to achieve the free movement of services for everyone who wants to make use of this right , it is necessary for there to be clear , unmistakable and reliable Community rules .
The second banking directive made an attempt at this but , as has been shown in practice , this objective has not been achieved .
To this extent recognition should certainly be given to the fact that , with this communication , the Commission has attempted to reduce uncertainties in the interpretation of various terms .

However - and here I agree with those who have spoken before me , Mr Rothley and Mr Wijsenbeek - the chosen route of a communication may be regarded as a suitable instrument only if two conditions are fulfilled .
The communication cannot and must not undermine or circumvent the democratic legislative process - clearly the codecision procedure in this case - in which the Council and the Parliament are legislators with equal rights , and it must in addition be subject to the express proviso of any further judgement by the European Court of Justice .
Given these pre-conditions , I nonetheless consider the Commission 's communication to be a practically focused measure which may be extremely helpful .
With the imminent start of monetary union , all the experts anticipate that there will be a significant increase in cross-border services in the banking sector , so we need clarity quickly .
In my view , the main merit is that the communication gives a systematic presentation of the extensive judgements which have already been given by the ECJ in the area of the free movement of services and the general interest clause in the second banking directive .
It thus mainly serves the cause of greater transparency and greater information .
I should like to deal with one concrete point , the question of the electronic counter .
I believe that in this case we must await developments with great care , and any premature commitment to the application of the right of settlement or the right of service provision must be left up to further technological development .
In conclusion I should like to inform you that the Group of the European People 's Party will support the rapporteur 's report in its entirety .
Taken as a whole , the communication will be of use to banks and also consumers .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to express my appreciation for the report presented by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and in particular I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Wijsenbeek .
We are particularly satisfied by the fact that the committee is in favour of abolishing notification in the case of the provision of cross-border financial services .
As is known , the abolition of Article 20 of the second banking directive was recommended by the SLIM task force for banking questions and the Commission supported the recommendation in its report to the Council .
To abolish the notification procedure , in the case of the provision of cross-border services , means recognizing that it is no longer essential to establish with accuracy in which Member State a financial service is provided , making superfluous a distinction which is increasingly difficult to operate , given that financial services are more often provided through electronic means , such as the Internet .
However , it would not be correct to state that the abolition of Article 20 and the consequent irrelevance of the place of provision of a service means that the consumer has a greater choice of place where he can seek legal redress .
Legal redress and the competence of the courts , in fact , are a different problem , governed by distinct regulations .
I would also like to mention some principles of the single market for financial services which should be considered in the examination of points 4 and 8 of the report .
The supervisory authorities of a host Member State are never asked to issue or refuse authorization to a foreign credit institution , either for reasons of general interest or for any other reason .
One of the fundamental results of the single market for banking services is that only the supervisory authorities of the Member State of origin are able to adopt such a measure .
The second banking directive , in fact , states the principle that a credit institution must request authorization from the supervisory authorities of the Member State of origin .
This credit institution can therefore provide , in any other Member State , the financial services for which it has obtained authorization in its Member State of origin .
I would like to demonstrate that the Commission 's communication presents a view of the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice and expresses the position of the Commission concerning these questions , therefore it does not in any way constitute a binding document .
It is therefore an attempt to contribute to a clear interpretation on the part of the Commission , which is the guardian of the Treaties .
On the other hand , I agree , what is this communication based on ?
It is based on a compilation of the relevant case law of the Court of Justice in this field .
If you like , this is the added value brought by the Commission : to collate the material based on the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice , certainly not with the creation of additional pieces of legislation .
We consider that this initiative is useful and essential to increase openness in banking , because we cannot honestly expect that the European citizen is informed - or that all European citizens , if we want to be more optimistic , are informed - of the most recent developments in the case law of the Court .
This is why the Commission has not followed the legislative procedure ; if the Commission decides to adopt a proposal for the abolition of Article 20 , the European Parliament will obviously be asked to carry out its role of codecision in full .
Finally , Madam President , two points . The question on the second banking directive and the Cassis de Dijon case is interesting .
In fact , the second banking directive is no more than the pure application of the doctrine of Cassis de Dijon in the sense that it applies the principle of reciprocal recognition , but the idea of having notification within the terms of free provision of services was to have reciprocal information for the supervisory authorities in the respective Member States .
However , in the light of new technological developments , such as the Internet , this request for notification , when financial services are offered in another Member State , seems to be slightly dated .
This is why the Commission will propose the abolition of this need for notification .
Finally , my last point , with reference to the specific request of the rapporteur , Mr Wijsenbeek , ' But why ?
Would it not be more logical to modify the second banking directive rather than issue an interpretative communication ? ' Concepts such as " the general interest ' are developing : the Member States may have very different ideas , as regards the specific aspects of the principle of the general interest ; only a system of legal re-examination can guarantee respect for this principle with sufficient flexibility .
If we try to define this concept in the directive , the directive will become subject to frequent modifications .
On the other hand , the legislative process is such - and no one knows this better than I - that modifications to directives take a long time .
If the Commission had announced the abolition of Article 20 of the second banking directive , before being able to remedy the legal uncertainty it would have taken a few years from the beginning of the legislative procedure .
We therefore decided to clarify the situation immediately , and in this context , I can also announce that a proposal concerning the abolition of Article 20 of the second banking directive will be examined shortly by the Banking Advisory Committee .
Many thanks , Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 7.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
Mr President , I would simply like to say that I was here yesterday but my name is not on the attendance register .
Thank you .
Are there any more comments ?
Mr President , I have to inform you that although I was here for yesterday 's sitting , my name has not been recorded in the Minutes .
Thank you very much .
Thank you .
Your comment will also be recorded .
Mr President , the same applies to me , I was present , but I am not in the Minutes either !
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , I would like clarification on the deadline for tabling amendments to the recommendations we will be considering tomorrow concerning Parliament 's vote on the appointment of the Executive Board , President and Vice-President of the European Central Bank .
Mr Giansily , if I recall rightly , you were present in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy that met yesterday evening . I was present too and I recall that the President spoke of a deadline , 8.30 p.m. yesterday .
I have no further information .
Yes , in fact I tabled an amendment at 7.45 p.m.
Given that the deadline was 8.30 p.m. , I tabled it in time .
It was just that I was told confirmation was required from the House .
That was why I asked for clarification .
But I am quite happy with your reply , given that my amendment was tabled within the deadline .
There is thus no problem with the House considering it tomorrow . Thank you .
Mr Giansily , I have only mentioned what I witnessed yesterday evening .
Actually , the chairman 's reply seemed rather ironic , as he gave it at 8.32 p.m.
That is why he said that the deadline was 8.30 p.m.
But I think the chairman , Mr von Wogau , can explain better than I can .
Mr President , yesterday evening I proposed that the deadline for amendments should be set at 8.30 p.m.
I realized that this would not work particularly well .
But I would like to ask my colleague , Mr Giansily , to consider whether he could not achieve the same thing either by an oral amendment or by a separate vote .
It is after all only a question of the words " for 8 years ' , and of whether there can be a separate vote on this issue .
I therefore request that we invite the experts on the Rules of Procedure to examine whether this possibility exists .
This would mean that our colleague , Mr Giansily , is being treated fairly , because it is entirely legitimate for him to make this demand .
The problem was that we had to work exceptionally quickly and a deadline for amendments was therefore not necessary .
The problem we are dealing with here is essentially a political one .
That is why I take the view that my colleague , Mr Giansily , has the right to express his opinion on this issue .
While this does not concur with my own view in this particular case - which is quite an unusual turn of events - I nevertheless consider it legitimate that this opinion should be expressed .
Normally , when voting on an applicant , the vote is a " yes ' or a " no ' without amendments .
I think that Mr von Wogau 's proposal can be accepted by Mr Giansily and by my other colleagues as well , and in this way we can accept a request for separate votes .
Decision on urgency
Mr President , the Commission shares the reasons put forward by the Council in asking for these motions raised by the Commission to be included according to the urgent procedure .
They are , in fact , connected with the Fifth Framework Programme to the extent that the rules on participation and dissemination of the results of research are necessary to implement the Programme .
The Research Council will meet on 22 June next . If the European Parliament agreed to give its opinion during the sitting in Brussels on 27 and 28 May , rather than during the June sitting in Strasbourg as currently planned , the Council would have the information to adopt a common position in good time .
( Parliament agreed to the request for urgent procedure )
Conciliation procedure concerning investment services
Mr President , it will do no harm just this once to admit that the conciliation procedure has failed with regard to the committee on securities , in spite of the efforts of a number of people . I would like to pay tribute in particular to the rapporteur , Christine Oddy , who has taken great pains to bring this to a conclusion in spite of all the odds .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we came up against the Council 's stubbornness in wanting to impose a type 3b committee , which we have always denounced as anti-democratic . We sincerely hope this will disappear within the framework of the overall solution the Commission will very shortly put to the European Parliament with regard to commitology .
Mr President , I mention this failure with regret , of course , but with no bitterness , and I also know that Mrs Lidl has personally shown a great deal of availability and understanding with regard to this issue .
In reality , the factor which I have just mentioned was the determinant one for our delegation .
On the eve of the search for a new commitology agreement , we could not accept a solution which could have committed us to an unfortunate precedent , likely even to compromise the issue of future negotiations .
I would like to thank the members of the delegation very sincerely for having been willing to accept that this institutional aspect should prevail in this case , in spite of the importance of other issues . I would like to thank our institutionalists , in particular the chairman of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , Mr De Giovanni , for his enlightened assistance on this sensitive subject .
I would like to emphasize that our delegation 's decision was a unanimous one .
The Council chose the option of not confirming its common position .
As the President clearly said in his announcement , it was a wise decision which we must note positively since it anticipates the application of a new Article 251 in the Amsterdam Treaty which , as we hoped , will remove the much discussed third reading .
It now only remains for us to hope that an agreement will be rapidly reached so that conciliation procedures may be once and for all released from this widespread and nagging problem which affects so many issues .
We hope that the Commission will show some understanding - I am looking at Commissioner Monti as I speak - and will help us to make the Council realize that implementation measures must also be adopted out of respect for transparency and democracy .
Mr President , I wish to state that the decision of the conciliation team was completely unanimous .
I also wish to thank colleagues for the support and steadfastness they showed through very difficult negotiations ; particular thanks to Mrs Fontaine and the President of Parliament who took a personal interest in the dossier ; also the staff who supported me and even rescued me from some bad dreams .
The conciliation failed for the following reasons .
Firstly , Parliament did not want to create a precedent .
It has never accepted a type 3b committee in conciliation .
Secondly , Parliament believes that commitology is anti-democratic : essentially it bypasses Parliament and may allow amendments to directives to be made without recourse to Parliament .
The current modus vivendi is , by all accounts , not satisfactory .
Thirdly , the Commission has announced a review of the commitology procedure .
Again , the conciliation team felt strongly that the deliberations on the dossier should not prejudice the commitology review and , as Mrs Fontaine has said , there is to be a new procedure in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Fourthly , the Commission was not particularly supportive , if I may say so .
When Parliament indicated it was prepared to support the Commission 's position , the Commission did not take up that offer .
Fifthly , the Council did not , again in my humble opinion , negotiate in true good faith .
It wanted Parliament to do all the moving and not to move at all itself .
As COREPER has recently visited my constituency , I can assure colleagues that no permanent damage has been caused , and cordial relations have now been resumed .
It was also unfortunate , for reasons outside her control , that the British Minister was unable to attend the original meeting .
Had she been able to , then the common sense and persuasive skill she could have brought to bear would have been available right from the beginning of the eight weeks .
I would say that in future we should never start conciliation without a minister present , as a matter of principle , and we should not create a binding precedent .
Parliament has done the right thing , and I wish to congratulate my colleagues for standing by me through quite a difficult eight weeks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shares the positive opinion you have expressed on the functioning of the codecision procedure to date and , in particular , on the fruitful result of the work carried out by the Conciliation Committee in those cases in which it has taken measures to reach an agreement .
It is in this favourable context that the Commission considers it advisable to examine the conclusion reached by the Conciliation Committee on the proposal for a directive to set up a Securities Committee and it wishes to provide two keys to a reading today .
On the one hand , we regret that , despite the commitment of the parties involved , it has not been possible to reach an agreement .
We are very grateful to the Conciliation Committee which , under the admirable chairmanship of Mrs Fontaine , has devoted time and attention to this matter .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Oddy , for the role he has played .
The Commission , allow me to recall , has played its role to favour approximation between the positions of the two parties , particularly by clarifying the technical nature of the implementing duties provided for in the proposal and by proposing several respectful forms of compromise on the political responsibility which the Treaties attributed to the Commission as the authority responsible for the implementing measures .
On the other hand , and this , Mr President , is the second key to the reading , I think that the lack of agreement on the Securities Committee should be seen as an entirely negative result .
This result has enabled the co-legislators and the Commission to note , to see with their own eyes in a specific case , the extent of the basic problems of the decision taken in December 1987 and therefore to calmly confirm the need for a revision .
To conclude , Mr President , I confirm that the Commission is discussing today the final direction to be given to the new proposal on commitology , which will be submitted at the beginning of the summer .
Thank you , Commissioner . I think this brief exchange of ideas has been useful and interesting for all of us to hear .
This situation has actually never arisen before and we have found that it has not been possible to take the essential institutional requirements of the European Parliament into account .
Control of synthetic drugs
The next item is the report ( A4-0157 / 98 ) by Mr Pirker , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the control of new synthetic drugs ( designer drugs ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0249 - C4-0244 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since the end of the eighties , but particularly in the last few years , there has been a dramatic increase in the consumption of synthetic drugs .
These include amphetamines and their derivatives , as well as ecstasy and LSD , in other words , drugs which are manufactured in laboratories from chemicals and not from natural products .
According to conservative estimates , five million young people already use such synthetic drugs in the European Union .
In some countries it is as much as 10 % .
The report from the European drugs unit makes it clear that in 1996 , 1.5 million pills and 29 000 LSD portions were confiscated in the Netherlands alone , representing a thirty-fold and ninety-fold increase respectively within a single year !
Ladies and gentlemen , the situation is a drastic one .
In my view this increase can be attributed to the simple fact that synthetic drugs can be manufactured in the most basic of laboratories , in kitchen laboratories , in garages and mobile laboratories , because the raw materials are available almost everywhere , because they are cheap to manufacture , and because they have a long-lasting effect .
These synthetic drugs have become part of a youth culture which is to be found at so-called rave parties and clubs .
But they have also become a significant part of the business of organized crime , simply because the profits are enormous and the risks extremely low .
The situation for young people in Europe is now a drastic one .
Young people do not know what they are consuming .
They have become guinea-pigs for unscrupulous profiteers !
Although the LOGO database of the European drugs unit has examined , classified and catalogued 250 pills , new concoctions are being added every day .
By the time new pills are classified as illegal , they have already disappeared from the market .
There has not been enough research into either the side-effects or the long-term effects .
Young people are completely unaware of the dangers to which they are exposed .
Generally speaking , they do not think of themselves as drug-takers .
Wide-ranging measures are required to deal with this dramatic situation .
The Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has dealt in depth with the report , which comes down firmly against drugs , in an extremely objective discussion .
Three-quarters of the members of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs accepted this report , and in so doing clearly spoke against legalizing the production , trading and consumption of synthetic drugs .
I would like to express my thanks to all those who supported this wide-ranging package of measures .
This is a pragmatic package for the protection of our young people .
I would like to discuss some of the measures in detail .
Firstly , we urgently need to harmonize criminal law provisions for the appropriation of precursor substances , and for the production , trading and consumption of synthetic drugs .
Secondly , we need to apply the threat of punishment , particularly against dealers , as this will also have a preventative effect .
We need real and effective cooperation between the different EU authorities in the fight against organized crime .
This is the key to our success .
We also need to develop a structure which will enable the police and judicial authorities of the EU to cooperate with their counterparts in central and eastern Europe .
We can do this with the help of the OISIN , FALCONE and PHARE programmes .
We need to introduce a system for the faster identification of new synthetic drugs , a sort of early warning system .
We need to take effective control of the feedstock substances , and here we have to involve the countries of central and eastern Europe , and we need our police services to work closely and effectively with the chemical industry .
Above all , we need to step up our drugs prevention work , we need to see an assessment by the Drugs Monitoring Centre in Lisbon of those measures which work and those which do not , we need to use the Internet as a means for educating our young people and we need to create a system of anti-drug discotheques .
But I would also like to propose a new approach to prevention , and this must be the focus of all our actions .
Schools across Europe should voluntarily declare themselves to be drug-free zones .
This will allow us to reach all young people .
We are not talking about police actions , but about raising consciousness , about information , about helping rather than punishing , so that our young people are given the strength to reject drugs and to stay well away from them .
The costs of this project are minimal , but the impact may well be enormous .
I have already found schools in Austria , France and Germany which are ready to cooperate in these projects .
Representatives from these schools will be present in the House at midday today .
If you support the amendment which I have put forward on behalf of the PPE , the concept of a voluntary network of drug-free schools right across Europe can be made a reality .
We now have five million young people taking synthetic drugs in Europe .
The battle against drugs will have to be fought more effectively than ever before .
Ladies and gentlemen , I ask you , on behalf of our young people , to give your broad support to this report .
Mr President , I wish to express my satisfaction at the rapporteur 's work .
I also agree with the analysis made by this House and confirm the gravity of the phenomenon in Europe .
Synthetic drugs have burst onto the scene and we have to take note of the increasingly more difficult situation . It will be increasingly harder to prevent , deal with and suppress drug abuse .
That is why we have to work with great commitment and , in particular , not underestimate the problem .
Unfortunately , as the rapporteur said , some people including authorities in the scientific world , have tried to spread extremely serious attitudes : some maintain that it is possible to live with the Saturday night drug .
These statements do not take into account the serious , even physical , potential consequences connected with the use of drugs , destroying brain cells .
They do not see the extreme gravity of the mental effect these drugs have on young people who , initially in a state of euphoria , suddenly fall into severe depression .
The consequences increase if we take into account the fact that synthetic drugs are often associated with the use of natural drugs and alcohol : this produces a real phenomenon of refined psychology .
These consequences are firstly social : we need simply think of the unmotivated violence of so many young people , gangs of youths , road accidents , Saturday night destruction and , finally , the increase in suicide .
We believe that the spread of synthetic drugs should be taken into great consideration .
We agree with the suppression of criminal organizations , but we also believe that measures need to be taken to reduce demand and therefore to think of prevention aimed at promoting values , not constructed pleasure , but spontaneous pleasure .
Finally , I believe that the European Parliament should ask for a commitment . Today more than ever , we are seeing this constant change in the world of drugs and , consequently , it is not possible to outline the consumption of the various drugs .
We need to say a decisive " no ' to all drugs .
The threat which is posed by synthetic drugs is directed almost exclusively at the health and the lives of young people in our society , and this is where synthetic drugs differ from conventional drugs .
It is natural that as the representative of the Committee on Culture , which is also a committee on youth , I should deal in particular here with the question of how preventative measures can be employed as part of a direct approach to young people .
An essential step must be to inform young people more fully about the risks of consuming synthetic drugs , to ensure that education starts at an early age , and above all to involve parents , teachers , educators , doctors and pharmacists .
Many amendments based on this realization have already been introduced in the Committee on Culture .
A further peculiarity about synthetic drugs is that they are consumed almost exclusively in the techno and rave scene , which is part of the culture of many young people at all levels of society .
That is why it is especially dangerous for this scene to be glamorized in the media , and above all on the Internet - where there is quite literally advertising for certain new drugs .
Not only must we counteract the pernicious influence of the Internet , we must in turn use this medium to launch an educational campaign .
It is important that the dialogue with young people should be conducted seriously , as it is with adults .
In my country , antidrugs discos , as they are called , are now part of the scene .
But at the same time we have to make one thing absolutely clear : taking drugs is never risk-free .
It is self-evident for me , as a pharmacist , to know that no medicine is without its side-effects , and this also applies to the so-called designer drugs .
Even the smallest dose of these synthetic substances can be dangerous , and what one person can cope with may cause serious physical harm in another .
That is why I particularly support Mr Pirker 's call for a network of drugs-free schools .
I have been advocating this for 20 years , but I have to say that while the schools may be made drug-free , the students will all too often have taken the stuff before they get there .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I too want to congratulate Mr Pirker on his excellent report .
Once again in this Parliament we are debating a phenomenon with devastating effects on our citizens : the drugs phenomenon .
Like the rapporteur , I want to stress the special risks associated with the consumption of so-called " synthetic drugs ' .
I think it is better to say " synthetic ' rather than " designer ' drugs , because the word " designer ' has positive connotations which can cause confusion , especially among the young people who are the main consumers of these drugs .
At the present time , the drug consumption pattern which has emerged is predominantly juvenile , centred around these synthetic drugs and associated , in some cases , with the consumption of other drugs , especially hallucinogens , amphetamines , cannabis and cocaine .
It is a sporadic form of consumption , closely related to lifestyle and weekend leisure , which is becoming the dominant pattern in a certain sector of young people .
At the moment , this " constellation ' of drug-taking , together with alcohol abuse , constitutes a serious epidemiological and social problem which requires our full attention .
I agree with the rapporteur on another aspect of this report : the special set of problems these drugs present due to the ease with which they evade controls .
So we need to develop uniform programmes and models to promote effective cooperation measures between government authorities . I also think it is very important to promote expert investigation into the chemical substances which could be used to produce illegal drugs , for monitoring and regulation purposes , without interfering with trade or the legitimate commercial or industrial use of such substances .
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , our efforts should be particularly directed towards prevention and training , with a special emphasis on strengthening positive values and alternative behaviours as the basis for turning away from drugs .
By offering realistic information about the harmful effects of these substances and the dangers of using them , between us we will be able to achieve our objective , which should be a drugs-free society .
Mr President , synthetic drugs have been around for a long time .
The Beatles ' splendid , classic number " Lucy in the sky with diamonds ' is already more than 25 years old , so it is rather strange that we are only now starting to pay attention to these drugs and that , according to the report , so little is known about them .
What we do know is that large quantities of synthetic drugs are made and consumed in the European Union .
My country , the Netherlands , is among those at the forefront of this .
The resolution before us is a good resolution .
It is right not to speak of legalizing these " designer drugs ' .
We have discussed legalization many times in this House and that does not produce much harmony .
Just as with the general policy on drugs , the view of the Liberal group is that we also have to have a threefold policy in this area under the slogan : prevent , combat and treat .
That means a combination policy , therefore .
The approach to tackling synthetic drugs must be part of the general drugs policy , and not become a separate sector .
The principal policy points in the report - to summarize briefly - are more research by the drugs observatory , harmonization of the relevant penal provisions and better cooperation with eastern European countries .
The Liberal group is very ready to agree to the main points of the report and I would like to compliment rapporteur Pirker sincerely .
In principle , as things look at the moment , we will be able to vote for his report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I approve of the Commission 's proposal , especially with regard to the fight against trafficking , as it adopts a balanced approach which is fully in line with the spirit of the current negotiations on the United Nations convention .
This , in fact , relates primarily to traditional drug traffickers , but also includes new methods relating to those who supply the products which enable new drugs to be made .
Much as we support this fight against drug trafficking , however , the Confederal Group of the European United Left and I cannot support this motion for a resolution whilst its punitive nature is maintained , as this will have absolutely no dissuasive effect on young people whatsoever .
We already know this for a fact .
For a long time in France now , and against the better judgement of many , people have continued to be punished for drug consumption .
Consumption , however , has not decreased .
We are told that these young people are completely unaware of the risks .
Perhaps it is precisely because they know the risks that they take the drugs .
When will we finally take on board the existence of social suffering in relation to drug addiction , the fact that it is clearly the result of a social disease , that it is also due to the individuals themselves who , sometimes , have no other way of expressing their desire to put their life at stake , to attempt to give it some meaning , when society , their family and parents , have not been able to instil into them a desire for living ?
So let us put an end to these dissuasive efforts aimed at consumers !
Secondly , my group cannot accept the fact that the preamble states that these people " are not conspicuous in society ' .
It is unacceptable and that is how young people are pushed into criminal activity .
My group will not support this resolution unless there are certain amendments removing the strictly punitive aspects linked to consumption and , above all , the contemptuous attitude of a society which produces young people who sometimes feel obliged to seek their future in the taking of such risks .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for the clear description he gives of this phenomenon in his introduction .
I would , nevertheless , add a few minor qualifications .
He says there are five million consumers of synthetic drugs , a number which is far from marginal .
He speaks of the particular social situation of these consumers .
Daniel Cohn-Bendit has just mentioned it .
The rapporteur also notes the little information we have on the levels of danger of this phenomenon .
This seems important to me .
He speaks , and this is important , of the simplicity of producing these drugs .
He also mentions the fact that some states have already established , aside from a system of legalization , controls on the quality of these forbidden products .
However , we do not agree with the report 's conclusions on the measures to be requested of the Commission , the Council and the Member States .
You cannot reasonably envisage having five million policemen , one in each kitchen , one in each attic , one in each cellar , for this is where these drugs are made .
We know that these drugs are easily transportable and that they are not detectable using the means normally used to detect other drugs .
Yet the rapporteur proposes penalizing the consumers and the producers - who are often themselves consumers - along with completely ineffectual methods of combating organized trafficking .
Let us say it again , is it not because our friends in the Group of the European People 's Party or others in Very New Labour , or the Scandinavians have realized they have lost the first war against traditional drugs that they must invent a new war , one which is already lost , moreover , since there are already five million consumers of synthetic drugs ?
What rapidly needs to be considered , in terms of prevention and in terms of information , is the creation of a legal system which will restore the Member States ' ability to control this phenomenon .
Because if it is a question of finding new wars then I invite Mr Pirker and my friends in the Group of the European People 's Party to make war on parachuting , with a mortality rate of one in every 80 000 jumps .
Ecstasy and synthetic drugs have a mortality rate of one for every 3.4 million times that Ecstasy is taken .
They should therefore begin to consider the fact that those who want to pump up their adrenaline by parachute jumping are far more dangerous to society and themselves than those who take Ecstasy .
I think we should start to see things from this perspective , to see them rationally , whilst endeavouring to bring back under the control of our Member States a phenomenon which , as five million consumers show , is currently completely out of control .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Pirker 's report clearly and meticulously describes the worrying phenomenon of the consumption of new synthetic drugs .
I would like thank him for this .
It seems that almost five million young people are taking drugs within the European Union .
These drugs are now even considered as a normal recreational activity in clubs and discos .
Apart from the fact that we know these drugs can have a harmful effect on health as well as self-control - heart problems , increased blood pressure , hallucinations , depression , aggression and so on - , it is also difficult to fight against these drugs because they are constantly changing and easily produced .
It therefore seems clear that we must fight them by using all the measures at our disposal , preventive , curative and also punitive , and to assure better cooperation between Member States in this fight .
It is the duty of the European Parliament to be the best advocates , the best defenders of true liberty , real liberty , that is to say , responsible liberty , the exercise of which increases human dignity .
It would be absurd for this Chamber , in one way or another , to encourage the free consumption of substances whose primary effect on the consumer is the loss of self-control , which is one of the conditions of the dignity of free human beings .
This is why Mr Pirker 's report , by recommending both preventive and punitive measures - which in themselves may have a preventive and pedagogic effect - seems to us balanced and worthy of support as it stands .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to mention a recent experience .
I was in Turin last weekend where there is a footpath alongside the river Po , which is known as the junkies ' footpath .
The sight of the degenerate youths who hang around there is enough to compel anyone to carry on the fight to free our society from drugs .
Mr President , I too wish to congratulate Mr Pirker on his excellent report , which was very thorough but also very specific .
The report indicates that the traditional subdivision between light drugs , such as marijuana and hashish , and heavy drugs , such as heroine , is not the most realistic subdivision .
The increasingly more extensive and varied circulation of synthetic drugs has completely revolutionized the narcotics scene .
Synthetic drugs are being used more and more by very young people , they are the ones that are most in fashion , but they are also the ones whose long-term negative effects on health are not yet fully known .
We need a wider and stronger initiative to provide information and prevention and particularly a commitment on the part of the Member States to suppress the manufacture and trafficking of these new substances .
Consequently , from my point of view , we need to contest the logic of those against prohibitions firmly for , with regard to synthetic drugs as well , they say that legalization would limit the harm , at least by eliminating illegal profits , as if the problem of drug dependency were only a problem of public order .
In the campaign against drugs , resigned acceptance is unacceptable as it can often cost lives .
As pointed out in the report on the 1996-2000 common campaign against drugs , the only way to actually reduce drugs trafficking is to try and remove the causes establishing demand .
We therefore need to give young Europeans specific answers to their unease and their problems , offer them new opportunities , work , culture and solidarity .
But certainly not legalization !
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Pirker for the splendid work he has done in preparing this very important report .
The question of the control of synthetic drugs is a vital one for the future of the struggle against the whole drugs problem .
If the problem is not tackled seriously , the drug users fraternity , as a result of the existence of synthetic drugs , will extend to those outside the so-called marginalized group .
The protective barriers that prevent a normal young person from becoming a user of synthetic drugs will weaken if drugs are easily and cheaply available and if they are perceived as being a part of modern youth culture , as they are in many countries today .
Give the Devil an inch and he will take a yard , because using synthetic drugs is a step on the way to becoming a user of harder drugs .
The issue of the fight against synthetic drugs , which was raised by the Dublin European Council , needs concrete proposals and prompt combined action .
One particular problem is the control of the trafficking of synthetic drugs in its early stages , as such drugs can be manufactured quickly and close to their markets .
Surveillance operations must be quick to react in the same way all over Europe .
Central to the matter is the creation of a real-time data system which can be used by customs , the police and the judicial authorities , into which up-to-date information on new synthetic drugs that have appeared on the market can be fed .
It will be important to undertake a survey on what kind of technical solutions and systems already in place could assist in the creation of such an operation .
Furthermore , an alliance with eastern European countries in this matter right from the start would lend the process credibility and increase cooperation in such a way that the principles of free movement may be safeguarded .
Mr President , let me , at the outset say that our group is entirely in favour of Mr Pirker 's report .
Some months ago there was a move in this House to legalize cannabis .
Now we are suggesting that LSD and Ecstasy are consumer products that should be distributed like sweets .
Perhaps we should hand out landmines to everyone in the House , because it is not dissimilar to saying that drugs are not dangerous .
In my own city , Dublin , we have seen whole communities devastated by the scourge of drugs .
I am not saying that Mr Dupuis , the Greens and the Socialists are not right to open up the argument .
On the contrary .
They are quite right to put their side of the case so that we can reply to it .
While I welcome the debate - I welcome both sides of the debate taking place in this House - I say to the Greens that I am very disappointed at the type of amendments they have put down in the House supporting the regulation and free distribution of drugs .
The overall objective of nearly all the amendments is undeniably dangerous .
Where the Pirker text puts the case for enforcement penalties for trafficking , pushing and consumption of synthetic drugs , the Greens seek to delete the reference to consumption .
They also want these drugs to be regulated .
In other words , they should be available and capable of being sold in machines , supermarkets and other outlets .
I recommend to the House Mr Pirker 's report without reservation .
I thank him for his efforts .
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Pirker on his good report and I agree with much , if not all , of it .
To Mr Andrews and others I would like to stress that the Green Group is not unanimous in its view on drugs , there are differences of opinion .
That the fight against drugs will be built on cooperation and will is something on which we probably all agree .
What , however , we do not agree on is the harmonization of criminal law , for example , and whether that should be desirable .
This is , in my opinion , a matter for the separate Member States .
I consider it impossible that Article 129 be used as a basis for harmonizing laws and policies on drugs , and so obviously does the Commission , too .
I am afraid Mr Pirker belittles the addictive nature and dangerous effects of the synthetic drugs and also the social exclusion they prove to lead to .
Nor do I agree that synthetic drugs are mainly to be found only in music circles .
Our objective here in Parliament and in the Member States must be a drug-free society .
I hope Parliament will repudiate the amendments which , directly or indirectly , plead for legalization .
Mr President , I have to say that I was very pleasantly surprised by the work of our colleague , Mr Pirker , because this Parliament 's reputation in the field of policies to combat drugs is evidently determined more by a minority in this Parliament which shouts the loudest .
Members will remember that only a few months ago here in the Hemicycle , a report was blocked with great difficulty , which wanted to install a far-reaching policy of tolerance , along the lines of the Dutch model , for drugs which are ten times more dangerous than the synthetic substances we are discussing today .
Mr Pirker , in contrast , very rightly describes the enormous risks associated with all kinds of drug use , confirms the serious criminal nature of drug trafficking and proposes a number of preventive and repressive measures . The report rightly argues that repressive measures must not only be passed but also actually implemented .
That seems obvious but it is not .
I would also like to add something to the report before us .
I want to point out the essential role of the traditional family in the prevention of drug use .
I remain convinced that a great many of the serious evils of our society today can be ascribed to the decline in the role of the family as the cornerstone of society , as protector , place of learning and example to children .
Perhaps the Commission should come up with a recommendation to file a complaint against putting the family in many Member States at a material , moral and even fiscal disadvantage .
Finally , of course it is extremely difficult to put in place a healthy form of cooperation between sovereign Member States on combating drugs while a number of Member States , principally the Netherlands and now unfortunately by own Member State , Belgium , has put in place a policy of tolerance of drug use .
Mr President , I have just been considering the dangers which would be posed to society by parachutists who are on drugs .
After all , Mr Dupuis did mention parachutists .
But on a more serious note , I should like to give my most sincere congratulations to the rapporteur on his report .
It always reassures me to know that reports on this particular issue are being dealt with by the rapporteur in question , because I believe that his involvement guarantees that our children will not be put at risk by misguided liberalism .
The particular characteristics and side-effects of the synthetic drugs described in the report - and particularly the tendency of leisure addicts , if I can use the term , to seriously underestimate the effects of their habit - account for the special threat which they pose .
The fact that these fashionable drugs are being distributed for profit as part of a new organized-crime network means that the measures being proposed in the report , and particularly those aimed at an effective system of prevention , have now become a matter of urgency .
We shall accept the report for all these reasons .
Mr President , on the whole I do not have too many problems with the Pirker report .
It is important that we do not fall into the trap of giving some form of social approval to any form of drug-taking .
Having said that , hopefully almost all of us now recognize that a purely punitive approach will not work - indeed is not working - and that we need to do a great deal more in the fields of health care , education and trying to wean young people away from the drug culture .
I have one particular difficulty with the Pirker report : it is far too optimistic , far too ambitious to think that we can , at this stage , harmonize or integrate in any way the drugs legislation in the Member States .
Just imagine trying to reconcile the approach of the Netherlands , for example , with that of Sweden .
It just will not happen .
That is why I think we have to let each Member State deal with this issue in its own way .
Of course there should be a coordination of activities ; of course there should be cooperation .
But Amendment No 21 in the name of Schulz and d 'Ancona , which says that it is impracticable at the moment to talk of harmonization , is a sensible amendment .
If that is carried I do not have any great difficulties in supporting the report .
But I am against Amendments Nos 19 and 22 which do not help very much in this situation .
This is a very serious issue .
I wish this report could have been dealt with at the same time as the d 'Ancona report , in a broad ranging debate .
But there it is .
The report is before us this morning .
With the qualifications I have mentioned , we should support the line indicated .
Mr President , Mr Pirker 's excellent report deals with one of the most important problems we have to wrestle with in Europe today .
We all know how synthetic drugs are now spreading like wild fire among the young people of Europe .
The trend is equally clear in all the Member States within the EU .
That is something we could clearly see already in 1995 at the conference on drugs , jointly arranged by the Commission , the Parliament and the Spanish Presidency .
The two latest reports from the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in Lisbon have also confirmed our worst fears .
No-one can any longer doubt the fact that synthetic drugs have become one of the gravest threats to young people 's lives and health in our Member States .
The reality behind the figures is frightening .
We are talking about a conscious campaign here run by powerful international criminal forces .
The purpose is clear : to create widespread drug addiction among a new generation of young people .
New preparations are handed out free of charge outside schools and youth centres to attract beginners to start and experiment .
The effects are dedramatized and minimized .
The tactic is to associate synthetic drugs with a new and attractive youth culture , to associate them with dancing , music and a strong feeling of togetherness .
Gone are the unpleasant needles , the nasty smelling pipes and the give-away smell of smoke .
The strategy has so far been effective .
The EU Heads of State or Government raised the problem at the Dublin Summit in 1996 .
Immediately thereafter I and my officials brought a number of proposals forward for concrete action .
One of our starting points was that it takes too long today to ban new substances that keep appearing .
UN conventions are quite simply not enough .
The result is that it becomes difficult for prosecutors and the police to work effectively .
Another starting point was that the input from the Member States in this area needs to be better coordinated , not least making use of one another 's resources and expertise .
The conclusion was that improvements were needed on three points . Firstly , we have to create a more effective system of exchange of information between Member States .
Secondly , we need to be able to make joint and scientifically based risk assessments .
Thirdly , we must see to it that synthetic drugs are banned rapidly in all Member States ; it is not good enough for one or two Member States to act ; joint action is needed .
This is also the significance of the joint action adopted by the Council of Ministers on 16 June 1997 .
It has been extremely heartening to see how intensively both Europol and the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in Lisbon have worked to implement this decision .
The result today is that we have a well functioning information system .
Before the end of the year the first joint scientific analysis of a new form of Ecstasy , called MBDB , will also have been completed .
Then the Council of Ministers will have one month to take appropriate measures .
In Mr Pirker 's report there is a recommendation to include too the central and eastern European countries in this work , a thought I support wholeheartedly .
During my travels in many applicant countries , it has been repeatedly confirmed to me that the manufacture of and addiction to amphetamine , methamphetamine and Ecstasy is rapidly spreading there as well .
It is therefore , without the slightest doubt , in our own interest to include these countries as soon as possible in the fight against drugs .
The idea to associate the applicant countries with the decision on a joint action to combat synthetic drugs will also be discussed at the Council meeting at the end of this month .
My hope is that we will be able to go further still .
I am in the process of identifying all the agreements reached by the Council of Ministers in the sphere of the third pillar , and to which the applicant countries can affiliate themselves more or less straight away .
Another point that Mr Pirker raises in his report deals with the control of chemical precursors .
This is a question I also mentioned in the 1996 communication on synthetic drugs .
I then pointed out the need for reinforcing the control of chemical base elements , used in the manufacture of the new synthetic drugs .
I can mention here that the Commission has already put forward amendments to the two directives which today regulate the manufacture and trade of these base elements .
These amendments have , by the way , already been forwarded to the European Parliament for opinions .
Mr President , that the EU now takes up the struggle against synthetic drugs is of great importance for our international credibility .
Combating drugs will , as you know , be high on the agenda of the United Nations ' special session on drugs in June this year .
Today a frighteningly large proportion of the manufacture of amphetamines , methamphetamines and Ecstasy takes place within the EU circle .
It is therefore about time we swept our own front doorstep clean .
The special session in New York in early June is , to my mind , one of the most important of this year 's UN meetings .
The Council of Ministers is busily preparing for it , and , as you will know , the Commission has contributed to that work with a communication presenting our thoughts and ideas .
This communication is at present being scrutinized by Parliament , I hope .
I shall be present myself in New York together with my colleague , Commissioner Marin .
The Commission would welcome the presence of Parliament , too , at this important meeting .
We are therefore in the process of looking into the possibility of including representatives from the European Parliament in the delegation from the Commission .
As far as I understand , the prospects for this look good .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Preliminary draft general budget for 1999 ( presentation )
The next item is the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 1999 .
Mr President , on 29 April the Commission adopted the preliminary draft general budget for 1999 .
On the basis of its orientations of January and the results of the budgetary Trialogue , the Commission proposal totals 97 billion euros for commitments and 86 billion euros for payments .
The 1999 PDB is the first to be denominated in euros .
Compared to the Community budget for 1998 , these totals represent growth rates of 6.5 % for commitments and 3.4 % for payments .
To establish the preliminary draft budget for 1999 , the Commission has had to reconcile two contradictory objectives : on the one hand , to respect the commitments of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1993 and , on the other hand , to maintain a rigorous budgetary orientation .
As a result , the 1999 budget draft proposal is characterized by a high and inevitable growth rate for structural actions which is more than 16 % in commitments and 9 % in payments .
All other categories taken together are proposed to grow by only a half percent in commitments and payments .
At the same time the Commission proposes a supplementary and amending budget for 1998 .
It would permit a reimbursement of ECU 1.3 billion to the Member States on the basis of the underspending of 1997 and higher estimates for traditional own resources .
Taken into account in this reimbursement is additional expenditure for the Social Fund to the amount of ECU 450 million , for PHARE ECU 150 million in commitments , and for humanitarian aid ECU 150 million in commitments and ECU 100 million in payments .
The preliminary draft budget for 1999 marks an end and a beginning : it is the final PDB within the framework of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1993 , and it prepares the ground for Agenda 2000 which should permit the historic enlargement of the Union to central and eastern Europe , even in today 's more rigorous climate for public expenditure .
In the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1993 , the European Parliament , Council and Commission adopted two principal financial priorities for the Community until 1999 .
Firstly , to reinforce fundamentally financial support for the economic and social cohesion of the Union in the continuity of the 1988 Agreement , giving full relevance to the Maastricht Treaty ; and , secondly , to strengthen in particular the financial means for external cooperation .
Following the ambitious decisions of the European Council of Cannes , this effort was mainly directed at the central and eastern European countries as well as third Mediterranean countries .
It was also clear that the agricultural reforms decided in 1992 would require a substantial budgetary effort , but should permit stabilization of spending requirements in the medium term .
With the 1999 Community budget these objectives can be achieved .
With a final major effort , the full amount of funds for structural actions will have to be made available .
In 1999 prices , and including the effects of Community enlargement , these will represent 208 billion euros .
In 1999 the share of structural actions in total commitments will , for the first time , be virtually the same as for agriculture , at a level of 40 % .
The final effort for 1999 is certainly considerable .
For external cooperation , the amounts proposed for PHARE and MEDA are as decided at the Cannes Summit .
Taking into account the supplementary budget for PHARE in 1998 , the promises made by the Heads of State and Government will be fully financed .
The new orders of magnitude for the financial support of the eastern and the southern neighbours of the Union have required fundamental changes in the management of these programmes and the organization of the Commission .
To mention just a few examples : the new orientation of PHARE ; soon , the new regulation for cooperation with the former Yugoslavia ; and , on the organizational side , the creation of the resource directorates and the imminent launch of the common structure for external programmes to streamline the administration of the external operational activities .
These measures should improve the conceptual and organizational underpinning of the external cooperation programmes in the future .
With regard to the common agricultural policy , financial requirements have grown by one-third since 1992 , in particular to finance the first round of reform .
But they should remain stable in 1999 for the third year in a row .
While the objectives of 1993 in the Interinstitutional Agreement can thus be achieved , they will require considerably less Community resources than expected in Edinburgh .
The preliminary draft budget for 1999 has been established at 1.11 % of Community GNP .
Compared to the ceiling of total payments in the Financial Perspectives of 1.24 % , this represents virtual savings of some 11 billion euros for the Member States in 1999 alone .
It is certainly true that the resources from the new Member States from 1995 , favourable world market conditions for some agricultural products and a maximum effort to avoid over-budgeting in payment credits have significantly contributed to this result .
But , nevertheless , it is also undeniably the fruit of a deliberate change in budgetary strategy .
The Commission and the budgetary authority have succeeded in bringing the Community budget in line with the budgetary efforts of all Member States in the run-up to Economic and Monetary Union , while respecting the main priorities of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
In 1998 the growth of the Community budget in payments is 1.4 % .
Including the supplementary and amending budget it would be 2.1 % .
At the same time public expenditure in the Member States grows by 3.2 % which means that Community spending is below the average of the Member States .
For 1999 the currently available projections indicate a growth rate in public expenditure of some 3.6 % in the Member States .
The 3.4 % proposed in the preliminary draft budget is therefore ' roughly in line with the growth of national budgets ' , as the European Parliament called for in its resolutions on the guidelines for the 1999 budgetary procedure .
Another illustration of the change in budgetary strategy are the margins under the Financial Perspectives for internal , external and administrative spending .
These margins are possible through a policy of clear priorities .
In Category 3 , internal policies , the emphasis is again on employment and growth-creating expenditure : the employment and growth initiative of the European Parliament , the Fifth Research Programme and the reinforcement of the trans-European networks .
Category 4 , external action , focuses as mentioned before on the conclusions of the promises made at the Cannes summit .
The new proposal for the ACP banana products has also been taken into account .
It is proposed to roll over most external cooperation programmes but an effort has been made to integrate some reconstruction and rehabilitation programmes into the appropriate geographical programmes .
With regard to administrative expenditure , the Commission request is for no more than the final 110 posts connected with the last enlargement .
Internally , the Commission is repeating last year 's exercise of forming a pool of 1 % of all posts of each department and DG for potential redeployment .
Additional measures have been taken to reduce the number of vacant posts .
Excluding pensions , the Commission 's administrative appropriations would need to grow by just 1.3 % .
For the other institutions the Commission estimates an equally strict approach .
Given the growth of pensions for all institutions of 6.7 % , this would allow growth of expenditure in Category 5 to be limited to under 2 % .
Finally , I would draw your attention to the fact that in the context of the 1999 preliminary draft budget , the Commission has confirmed its intention to propose an additional 100 million euros for the PEACE Community initiative .
The Commission expects that the necessary appropriations can be found in the general reprogramming of the Community initiative which it will propose during the budget procedure .
Thank you , Mr President and thank you , Commissioner Liikanen , for your thorough presentation of the preliminary draft budget for 1999 .
I also want to thank you for having presented your preliminary draft earlier than expected , which means we can work on the budget ahead of schedule this year .
This will allow us to hold three-way talks with the Council on 17 July , instead of at the end of that month , and means that this Parliament and the relevant committees do not have to panic about the first reading .
I also want to say that , in broad terms , this Parliament has already expressed its priorities for the 1999 budget and although we agree that it has to be a rigorous budget the Union 's commitments should not be compromised just for the sake of the endof-year figures .
In any case , Commissioner , this is not the time to start a debate .
So I will content myself with thanking you for your presentation and pointing out that there are some details we cannot go along with , on which the relevant committees will have to state their opinion .
All that glitters is not gold .
There is one point I would like to stress : you know very well , Commissioner , that your supplementary and amending budget does not solve the problem , in this 1999 budget , of the discrepancy between commitments and payments .
I hope a solution will emerge during the deliberations .
Otherwise , Commissioner , thank you for your collaboration and I hope that between us all - yourselves , Parliament and the Council too - we can steer this budget to a happy conclusion .
The debate is closed .
Tobacco advertising
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0150 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products ( C4-0034 / 98-00 / 0194 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Christian Cabrol ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are today going to give an opinion on the common position of the Council with regard to the proposal for a directive on - and I would like to emphasize the title - the approximation of national legislations relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products .
Firstly , to cut short any discussion on the subject , I would like to say that this directive has a firm legal basis in Article 100a , since , as its title indicates , its aim is to remove the profound differences which exist between the legislative provisions of Member States , profound differences of a nature which would hinder the freedom to provide services in this domain and cause distortions in competition impeding the functioning of the single market .
I would therefore like to repeat that there is no problem with regard to the legal basis of this report .
This was , moreover , confirmed by Parliament 's legal service in an opinion dated 27 March 1998 , although even the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights would have had us believe otherwise .
Article 100a was , furthermore , confirmed as the appropriate legal basis by the European Parliament at first reading and has been questioned by none of the institutions participating in the subsequent legislative process .
The adoption of amendments challenging the legal basis would make an absolute nonsense of this second reading and I would like to request formally that they be rejected .
Secondly , I would also like to stress that Article 100a is absolutely appropriate in this case for , in paragraph 3 , it explicitly provides that the European Commission , when proposing measures relating to the operation of the single market and touching upon issues of consumer health and protection , must take as its basis a high level of protection for those consumers .
That is thus the case with this directive which , in order to do so , brings currently divergent national measures into line , through a ban on direct and indirect advertising of tobacco products in order to obtain a high level of consumer protection .
For tobacco kills : 500 000 people pay the price every year in the European Union , be it cancer of the mouth , the airways , the lungs or the bladder , be it diseases of the heart or arteries , or illness through passive smoking , for example , children suffering from chronic respiratory conditions because their parents smoke .
Tobacco advertising encourages smoking and creates this senseless mortality rate .
To encourage people to smoke is truly inciting them to murder , all in the name of the financial interests of the tobacco producing firms .
Thirdly and finally , this common position will be satisfactory to Parliament in that it takes on board the majority of amendments proposed at first reading .
The text is clearly not perfect , but it does make considerable progress in this field .
Whilst banning direct and indirect tobacco advertising , it leaves to Member States , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the task of regulating certain areas and provides a deadline of three years hence for national provisions to be imposed .
It also provides extended deadlines with regard to the press and sponsorship .
In its current state it is thus the best compromise possible , allowing time for all the necessary economic adjustments , of which I am well aware .
As you know , this text is the result of very difficult discussions which have lasted nearly ten years .
That is why , in order to avoid opening up new discussions which might risk breaking this fragile balance and might delay unduly , even postpone sine dia this directive , we have requested that it be adopted without amendment .
Yet , in spite of this recommendation , this common position is the subject of a veritable flood of amendments .
Make no mistake , ladies and gentlemen , although some of these amendments have been made in good faith , out of concern for improving the common position - which risk ruining it however - the majority of these amendments have been submitted by experienced parliamentarians , fully aware of what they are aiming to achieve , under the influence of certain pressure groups , and in no way - and I have proof of this - supported by public opinion in their countries .
In reality , their amendments are merely pretexts to make this directive fail by means of successive procedures .
Such a thing is unacceptable .
This attitude on the part of Members is incomprehensible , especially given that they are so demanding when it comes to defending air or water quality , lack of which can certainly be dangerous , but a lot less so than tobacco consumption .
So , ladies and gentlemen , let us not stand guilty of this mass homicide in the face of history but let us adopt this common position as it stands in order to obtain commercial regulation of - and I will emphasize it once more - advertising , which needs to be uniform throughout the European Union , so that incitement to such self-destruction , such absurd self-mutilation , will finally come to an end .
Mr President , as a non-smoker I have others who smoke to thank for my cough .
I agree with Professor Cabrol 's passionate plea to drive back tobacco .
He argued the case before the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection for a general ban on tobacco to be proclaimed on the grounds of public health .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights did not talk about tobacco .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights did not talk about public health .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights asked itself whether a total ban on advertising would further the operation of the single market , yes or no .
It is obvious that a ban on cars or alcoholic drinks is the antithesis of furthering the operation of the single market , so Article 100a is not the right means .
The German Bundestag has already decided to bring it before the Court of Justice ; not Parliament , not the Commission , not the Council , but the Court of Justice , which always follows the rule if there is a special article in the Treaty on the subject .
That will also be used and not a general article .
In other words , if this directive is accepted , the Court of Justice will reject it because there is no legal basis for it .
There is a basis .
Since Maastricht , there has been Article 129 which calls on us to promote public health and the route for those who want to ban tobacco is Article 129 of the Treaty .
There are more victims of car use , innocent third parties .
If people want to reduce the use of the car on public health grounds by banning advertising which restricts trade and hinders the operation of the internal market , they should do so on the grounds of Article 129 .
Professor Cabrol will get my support on that , but this is absolutely the wrong method .
That is why it is being referred back to the Commission .
The Council 's legal service has also said no .
Mr President , on Parliament 's own initiative , we have spent nearly nine years , during one presidency after another , trying to ban direct and indirect advertising of tobacco products within the Union , together with the sponsorship of sporting events .
The damage tobacco does to the health of both active and passive smokers is only too well known , and we Members who have spent nearly a decade on this attempt have repeated them endlessly .
Tobacco kills , as Professor Cabrol said .
Its consumption is linked to 30 % of all cancers .
It is also the leading cause of premature death : more than half a million people die in the Union every year because of this fatal habit which has been promoted for years .
Additives have even been added in a criminal fashion to increase addiction among adolescents and children , some of them just five years old .
That is really monstrous , Mr President .
I am not even going to mention those irrational arguments based on suspect reasoning , such as saying that cars are dangerous too . What we are talking about here today is protecting people 's health and life , not luring them , as the tobacco companies do , towards a process of disease and sorrow for the sake of private financial interests .
There is no doubt that direct and indirect advertising and the sponsorship of sporting events have played and continue to play an important role in the promotion of tobacco consumption among young people . We all know that .
But there are too many financial interests behind it , as was made patently clear by the scandalous attempt at an agreement on the part of the North American tobacco companies .
The common position we are now considering is a first step .
It is the result of a compromise which has not been at all easy . It goes in the right direction , and as such we welcome it , although cautiously too , because it is hard to see why we should continue to allow sponsorship until the year 2006 , or why in some regions there should still be subsidies for tobacco products which do such serious damage to health .
Nevertheless , it is still a worthwhile first step in our anti-cancer strategy , and we will vote in its favour .
I do not want to end my part in this historic debate , Mr President , without congratulating the rapporteur , Professor Cabrol , and the presidency , both the current one as well as the previous Luxembourg Presidency . Their work has enabled us to reach this agreement , within the single market , despite the biased interpretation from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which also happened , Mr President , at first reading .
Mr President , we are today confronted by a particularly political subject which quite simply places the defenders of the tobacco industry in opposition to the defenders of public health .
Within this Parliament , I would wish our main priority to be that of the defence of public health .
As a woman , I shudder when I see young pregnant women smoking .
We all know very well that smoking whilst pregnant is especially harmful to babies , who will be born with a low birth weight and size .
Who is tobacco advertising aimed at ?
It is aimed quite simply at young people , because the tobacco industry needs to replenish the number of smokers in the population .
So young people are targeted , knowing full well the impact that advertising will have on impressionable youngsters , who are looking for role models and keen to assert their personality .
Once they are hooked , we know that they will never manage to stop smoking and we know that then , advertising will no longer have an effect on them .
Given this situation , what do Members under the influence of the tobacco multinationals do ?
They put forward legal arguments .
They invoke Article 129 , which permits only measures beneficial to public health to be taken .
Well , you cannot ignore the facts .
If the legal basis of Article 100a is not applied , we will end up with a distortion of competition since there are enormous differences in national legislations concerning tobacco advertising and sponsorship within the internal market .
These disparities will create hindrances to the free circulation of goods , especially for advertising agencies .
With regard to health , Article 100a enables a high level of protection to be introduced , and that is what we want .
Furthermore , I reject the argument that we are going to kill the funding of large sporting competitions or the activities of small sports associations .
Such arguments are insulting to all sponsors except the tobacco industry , who make enormous efforts to finance these competitions .
Let me quote , for example , the large sailing competitions and the name of Fleury-Michon .
A large majority of the citizens of Europe , including those in Germany , are in favour of a ban on tobacco advertising .
They expect Parliament to take a political decision .
So I say to my colleagues who have done all they can to harden the position of the text purely so that it will not be approved : yes , I know that a number of German political meetings are sponsored by the tobacco industry ; yes , I know that Germany thought the Council would not reach an agreement , that it commenced negotiations on this directive only belatedly .
It is this strategic error that Germany is now trying to repair by whatever means necessary .
I deplore the fact that my group , the Group of the European People 's Party , has judged it wise to give speaking time to a greater number of Members in favour of tobacco advertising .
I find this somewhat petty-minded , quite apart from the fact that it gives us a bad image .
Let us all vote as free individuals , voting in the interests of our citizens , the citizens of Europe .
There is an article in " Le Monde ' today , which is a serious newspaper as I am sure you all know , which states that according to the WHO , the only cancer which is likely to develop in the future is lung cancer , simply because of an increase in the number of smokers .
The WHO furthermore specifies that tobacco kills 3.5 million people throughout the world every year and that this figure will reach 10 million by the year 2020 .
That is why , whilst leaving you to reflect on these figures , I propose that we follow the advice of the rapporteur , Mr Cabrol , and vote for the proposal as it stands , without amendment .
Mr President , Mr Cabrol , ladies and gentlemen , allow me firstly to congratulate Mr Cabrol on his tenacious and sincere commitment to the banning of tobacco advertising and for his report , which clearly recommends approval of the Council 's common position on the proposal for a directive on the approximation of laws , regulations and administrative provisions of Member States relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products .
I would like to assure him of my full support . On behalf of the many direct or indirect victims of tobacco , as Mrs Grossetête has just said , and the 13 000 European doctors - ten of whom are Nobel Prize winners - who have signed a petition in favour of this directive , may I thank him for the courageous position he has taken , which we must follow .
We must be perfectly clear that tobacco kills 548 000 Europeans every year , more than road accidents , alcohol , murders , drugs and suicides put together .
It has also been noted that tobacco advertising has a considerable influence over the behaviour of young people , encouraged to smoke in order to identify with an unrealistic lifestyle .
But it is young people , the life 's blood and future of Europe , whom we must protect and inform so that they can consciously and freely make their own choices in life .
In the face of this living reality , the legal arguments being advanced by the tobacco industry through a skilfully orchestrated lobbying campaign seem intended to evade the debate on the substance of the matter by replacing it with a debate on procedure .
For , let us make no mistake , ladies and gentlemen , it is a political decision that we have to make by voting for the Cabrol report .
Let the Court of Justice decide on the issue of a legal basis , if it is referred to them . That is their right .
But we in the European Parliament , the voice of the people of Europe , cannot let this opportunity to defend a healthier Europe , so close to the hearts of our citizens , pass us by . It is an opportunity to defend a voluntarist and pragmatic vision of Europe and - it will do no harm just this once - to ensure that a political decision prevails over administrative circumspection .
Mr President , our group supports the positions of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and Mr Cabrol - which are the same - in the sense that we reject all the amendments which could weaken the Council 's common position .
Some amendments , while presented with the best of intentions , can only have the effect of changing the Council 's position . And 37 Members in the Committee on the Environment voted in favour of this report 's proposal , proving that members of all the groups support the Cabrol report in its present form and the Council 's common position .
It is very clear that there are all sorts of pressures .
And it is also very clear that the use of the legal basis is a subterfuge to try to invalidate the Council 's common position .
When people say we should use Article 129 , they forget that , according to that article , it is not possible to adopt measures to harmonize the Member States ' legal and statutory provisions .
So it is just a subterfuge ; so much so that we think there has been an attempt to devalue the position of the Council and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
We also agree with the recommendations Mr Cabrol makes at the end of his report , where he requests that this measure - the banning of advertising - should not be the only one .
We have to look again at tobacco labelling and the addictive nature of additives . There should also be moves towards the upwards harmonization of the taxes on tobacco consumption .
A little while ago , there appeared in the Spanish press a report that in 1983 a tobacco company - I do not want to mention names , but it is the foremost cigarette manufacturer in the world - got one of its laboratories to do a study into the addictive effects of nicotine .
When the scientists presented it with the results of the study , which clearly showed that nicotine is addictive , the company destroyed the study and dismantled the laboratory .
So they are fraudulently misleading people , especially young people , who enter the world of tobacco without really knowing what they are getting into .
We are in favour of Mr Cabrol 's report , so we are going to support it here in this Chamber .
Mr President , the Greens are certainly not in favour of prohibitionist or repressive measures with regard to substances such as tobacco , which are consumed for personal pleasure by a large number of people .
However , when faced with a significant cause of tumours , respiratory conditions and cardio-circulatory diseases - around 500 000 people die in the EU every year as a result of smoking - , we need to adopt serious preventive measures .
In particular , we must try to change people 's attitudes and give them more information . On the same subject , it is quite absurd that the EU should spend money on such preventive measures if it then risks being thwarted by direct or indirect advertising and sponsorship .
Having said that , we feel the common position could certainly be improved and the date on which the ban on sports sponsorship comes into force - 2006 - is too distant for many who are concerned by the serious consequences of active and passive smoking .
However , we are aware of the difficulties this proposal has encountered over around nine years and would like to answer the numerous requests made by ordinary people , consumers , associations combating cancer , medical workers and organizations dealing with the prevention of tumours and respiratory diseases , including UNICEF , the European office of the World Health Organization , the International Agency for Cancer Research based in Lyons , and the European Society for Respiratory Diseases .
These are just a few examples to help you understand the extent of the problem , but I could also mention the hundreds of doctors committed to this cause .
To answer these requests , the Greens consider it advisable to accept Mr Cabrol 's invitation to approve this common position without any amendment and without amending the reference article of the Treaty .
We therefore support Mr Cabrol 's report .
Mr President , we all agree that we must protect our young people against the damaging effects of tobacco .
We all agree that we must thus oppose the flood of tobacco advertising .
We therefore have no problem in voting for the text of the common position .
Having said this , we must be careful , for I fear that this virtuous attitude of protection of the young , although widely shared , fits too well into a moralistic , repressive , prohibitionist , politically correct trend which , in the name of modernity , follows the example of the United States of America blindly , although they themselves lag far behind in dealing with problems in society .
So instead of bans , let us take a different attitude , a more difficult , more determined , more modest one , too : one of educating the youth in our countries .
Pleasure is not forbidden .
Tobacco , bungy jumping , motocross , caffeine , cannabis , alcohol , all of these are dangerous .
But they should all form part of an ongoing educational effort on our part .
We must help our youngsters along the difficult path to knowledge .
Prohibition creates delinquency .
Let us beware of a society in which there are so many bans that everything which has not been banned is therefore compulsory , and that 's how all of society 's problems are solved .
Mr President , it seems we are reaching the end of a process of almost ten years ' tug-of-war .
The ban on advertising tobacco products is almost a fact , at least provided the ship does not come to ground after all here in Parliament , in the Council , or perhaps even in the Court of Justice .
The concept of subsidiarity has played an important part throughout this debate .
That is a principle that I have a soft spot for , so at first sight a ban on tobacco advertising is indeed a matter which should be left to the Member States themselves .
However , if you opt for the economic point of view , things turn out differently .
Advertising is a completely normal economic activity .
It must not be confused with freedom of expression .
If we once start on that , we would have to start counting advertising as one of the fundamental human rights .
Noone would be very keen on that .
Advertising , therefore , is a form of service which can sometimes become an undesirable form of service .
That is why this economic activity also has to be subject to boundaries .
Just as industrial operations have to be confined within a framework of environmental legislation , so advertising is also subject to regulations .
Of course , it is always the case that , on the one hand you are serving public health , and on the other hand you want to prevent unfair competition .
In the case of the ban on sponsorship and advertising of tobacco products it is obvious , of course , that this serves the interests of public health , and that is no small goal either .
Half a million deaths in the European Union as a result of addiction to smoking is not nothing .
This law on advertising is , to use that lovely expression , a way of creating a level playing field for the advertisement of tobacco products .
I take the view that this common position is rightly founded on Article 100a and I will vote for it .
I will not support any of the amendments .
Even the amendments tabled on behalf of the I-EDN group should be rejected .
If this directive is adopted , the European Union will be giving a clear signal that the free market economy is important but that it is subject to limiting conditions .
Mr President , six years after these proposals were last debated and overwhelmingly endorsed in this Chamber , today we have both new and old voices arguing again over principles and even more over technical issues .
May I suggest that we pause for a moment .
Let us simply ask why rather than how we are doing this .
We are seeking to phase out the advertising of tobacco products , because this is an action which will make a real difference between life and death for some European citizens , particularly those who are most vulnerable .
So let us not fling statistics about like insults at a football match .
One unnecessary death from smoking is one too many if we can prevent the deceptive peddling of the products which may cause it .
Let us not claim threats to personal or press freedoms .
One baby breathing in killer smoke has no freedom to save itself .
The arguments about cars , alcohol or even about sweets being banned next all founder against the reality of the effects of passive smoking , and we have plenty of other safety measures for those products .
Similarly , let us not set jobs against health .
Listen to and see the agony of a doctor who has to tell a non-smoker that she has cancer because she breathed the smoke of someone who thought that smoking looked cool on a screen or on a page .
That is a very different agony to a redundancy notice in an industry where profits often exceed the wealth of states .
Instead let us thank those who have worked to create a modest , serious , legal and practical measure with an important impact , one which will help others to create even more effective measures in future .
We should be proud and grateful to the Commissioners and the officials , our own rapporteurs and ministers and the campaigners and the doctors who have fought for this moment for their determination and courage to do the right thing .
Let the producers and the promoters and their armies of lawyers and apologists also ponder for a moment their shame , their deceit and the destruction they have caused .
Future generations will come to wonder how they have flourished for so long .
Tomorrow our votes for Mr Cabrol 's brave and accurate report , for the common position without amendment , will literally bring a breath of fresh air for future generations of European citizens .
So this is that rare incisive moment in a frantic world : it is a market measure which will help save lives .
We should celebrate it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the control of smoking in Europe is undoubtedly one of the greatest challenges that we face .
This is something which we should all become involved in .
My colleague said just now that we were again discussing the ban on tobacco advertising six years after our first efforts in this area .
Well , I would like to inform him that , as budget rapporteur , I have tried six times in the last six years to cut ECU 2bn from the tobacco subsidies in this budget , which is an area in which we do have appropriate powers .
I have never been so isolated in this House - not even now - as when I was seeking support for this idea .
And when I was trying to change the system of tobacco subsidies , I got precious little support from those who have been making grand speeches on the subject here today .
No , not everyone , but the majority !
Ladies and gentlemen , every day we spend ECU 5m on subsidizing European tobacco which not a single person in Europe wants to smoke !
And then they have the nerve to sell this tobacco outside Europe , notably in the Third World .
In the same breath , we are raising tobacco taxes from the citizens of Europe - 20bn alone in my own country , for example !
And then we think we can simply decide not to accept advertising for this product .
I once talked this over with my children , who are aged between 13 and 20 .
They simply could not understand this behaviour .
That is why I think this report is tackling the problem the wrong way .
We all agree about the objectives .
What is more , we all have the same fears , including me .
But if we are to pursue our objectives , then we shall have to adopt a different approach .
What does indirect advertising , by way of a Benelux news agency , have in common with a tobacco firm in Europe ?
Can we really ban indirect advertising so easily ?
I do not believe that it will be as simple as this .
If it were not to go beyond tobacco , then I would understand this approach .
But , Mr Flynn , you demonstrated the domino effect some while ago , because the next directive on banning car advertising has been lying in your office for quite a while .
We shall soon be discussing the subject of alcohol , and so on , and so on .
I believe that we must take a more global approach to this subject .
If we really want to tackle the problem , this proposal is too simple in its structure .
We need a concerted campaign to give real protection to our young people , to change our consciousness , to make real progress in reducing subsidies .
And we need a standard of behaviour towards non-smokers .
Of course we need this .
I get the impression that there are many people who believe that they can make progress by throwing the baby - and a cleanly-washed baby at that - out with the bathwater .
But in doing this they would not even be washing their own hands of the matter !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have read with great care the report by the venerable professor , Mr Cabrol .
I do not disagree with the scientific evidence in the report concerning the harmful effects of smoking on people 's health .
Besides , I am a smoker and I am aware of them more than anybody else .
However , I have reservations about the following points : firstly , tobacco , as Mr Florenz quite rightly said , is a product which is subsidized by the European Union , circulates freely and the products of which are manufactured freely .
I therefore wonder how strong the legal basis is , which Mr Cabrol mentioned .
Or perhaps Parliament will find itself in the difficult position of seeing advertising companies claiming vindication when they seek justice from the European Court of Justice .
Secondly , the best way to reduce smoking is not to increase tax or to ban advertising but through health education , which must take place in schools from the first year of primary school .
And I have not heard a single word spoken about this today in this Chamber .
Thirdly , I do not accept the claim of those colleagues who said that whoever has reservations concerning the report has no interest in public health , because many of those colleagues have given their support to the free circulation of soft drugs , as if soft drugs did not constitute a danger to public health or to society .
Mr President , this directive is unsound for three reasons . The first of these is its legal basis .
As all the previous speakers have demonstrated , this initiative is based on the risks of tobacco addiction for health and thus this directive should have Article 129 of the Treaty as its legal basis .
This article allows only for measures of encouragement rather than binding measures of harmonization , and so the directive could not have been presented in its current form .
The Commission thus chose Article 100a as the legal basis , that is , harmonization of the single market .
But the directive is absurd since , on the one hand , it wants to remove all barriers to competition whilst , on the other , it allows each country to implement the provisions of the directive either immediately or not until the year 2006 .
If the market needs to be harmonized , then all the countries must be put on an equal footing and we cannot thus ban the sponsorship of sports and cultural events by the tobacco industry in one country whilst a neighbouring country still permits it .
This is , in itself , a distortion of competition and the ultimate irony is that it is a directive which is allowing this .
Secondly , as regards the substance , it is not acceptable to ban the advertisement of a product which is freely available for sale and which , moreover , is authorized and financed by the European Union .
Thirdly , there is complete chaos and total hypocrisy within the European Union with regard to the fight against addiction .
Tobacco advertising is cracked down on ferociously , smokers are endlessly bullied , and yet at the same time many Member States , including my own , show laxity in the fight against drugs by authorizing individual consumption even , and especially , amongst the young .
So it is dangerous to smoke a cigarette but to smoke a joint is evidently good for your health .
In reality , this directive is riding the waves of fashion and easy virtue .
It is time that the Commission had the courage to define a reasonable and appropriate policy for fighting addiction in all Member States .
As it stands , this directive authorizes nothing but disorder in sporting events over the next six years . My own region , which is the home of the Francorchamps circuit , will feel the full force of the disastrous economic consequences of this directive and , what is even more serious , as statistics from countries where tobacco advertising is banned show , tobacco consumption will not be reduced .
It will thus be a failure both economically and in terms of public health .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mr Cabrol on his guidelines for bringing into effect a ban on the advertising of tobacco .
At the same time , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Flynn on the common position taken by Council .
I earnestly hope that the Council 's common position will be approved as it stands .
It is often claimed that there is no researched evidence as to how the anti-smoking lobby and a tobacco advertising ban leads to a reduction in smoking .
We Finns are very experienced in this matter , however ; an advertising ban is an effective means of reducing the consumption of tobacco .
Research undertaken by the International Union Against Cancer has succeeded in showing that banning tobacco advertisements has reduced tobacco consumption in Finland by 37 % .
It has also been noticed that , in a general sense , educational programmes that started in the 1950s show up clearly in statistics : figures for lung cancer in men have fallen dramatically.This is without doubt an indication that an advertising ban is necessary and that it will have far-reaching significance for the issue of public health .
Mr President , Commissioner , you cannot base health policy measures such as the ban on tobacco advertising on Article 100a because that is expressly forbidden in Article 129 .
That is the legal position .
That is why a majority of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights considered that the Community had no regulatory powers whatsoever in this matter .
Of course , that is going very wide of the mark .
The Union does have powers in relation to crossborder advertising , and it should make use of them , and in my opinion this should include tobacco advertising as well .
But an outright ban , or a ban on free gifts in the Member States , is not covered by Article 100a .
This is why the Commission ought to act under Article 129 ( 2 ) to see that a ban is imposed in the countries concerned - insofar as that is possible - in the interest of public health .
Anyone who does not want to lose the case before the European Court of Justice should at least vote for Frau Roth-Berendt 's amendments .
Mr President , it is quite clear that this House has to support this common position or nothing .
I have heard sophistry from various sides of the House questioning the legal basis which is to my mind just a diversionary tactic , questioning the tobacco subsidy in Greece , etc .
It is quite clear that this is the moment of truth when we have to stand up and be counted .
There is a tremendous amount of interest in this debate and this vote today .
I have had a full mail bag , as I am sure many Members have from all parts of their constituencies and their countries .
If I could just quote a professor of medicine who said in twenty years she has never taken up any political activity or lobbying but she is moved to write today to plead because she feels very strongly that advertising bans can reduce the number of people taking up and continuing smoking .
She goes on , ' I was very disappointed with Mr Blair 's decision to exempt motor racing from the tobacco advertising ban , as large numbers of individuals , particularly youngsters , watch this sport ' .
I think that there are two important things to note here .
Certainly , I think that the British Presidency is shameful in diluting the impact of this common position but nevertheless it is that position or nothing .
If we do not vote for the common position , we are saying to young people , yes , it is OK , it is trendy to smoke .
I think that if we support this ban , there will be quiet relief right across Europe .
If we reject it , the people celebrating will not be those in the cancer wards - they will be those in the board rooms of the tobacco companies .
Mr President , the text we are currently discussing is the result of nearly ten years of conflict .
As Mr Cabrol highlighted in his report , each year more than 510 000 people die in the European Union because of tobacco addiction .
It is thus necessary , as I have already explained in previous speeches , to limit tobacco advertising and promotion . However , it has to be done intelligently .
Let us thus commence this work by applying Article 129 of the Treaty , which stipulates specifically that , " The Community shall contribute towards ensuring a high level of human health protection by encouraging cooperation between the Member States and , if necessary , lending support to their action ' .
As a former member of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE , I would like to state that I wish the Commission had also applied Article 129 in that particular case .
But that is another story .
With regard to tobacco advertising and sponsorship , strict European regulations are required , which should be applied to all Member States .
A large number of sporting events , for example , are retransmitted throughout European territory . We must not witness a relocation of advertising towards those Member States with more lenient regulations .
In France , for example , there is already restrictive legislation with regard to tobacco and alcohol advertising .
But what do we see nowadays ?
Advertising for French brands at European sporting events in which a French team is competing , in another Member State , of course .
This cannot go on any longer , for no-one understands a Europe which lets itself be used for the sole benefit of a few companies .
I would , however , like to add that this directive is just one step in the fight against tobacco addiction in the European Union .
It consequently needs to be placed within the framework of a more general approach to tobacco consumption , which includes both regulations regarding the labelling of products incorporating additives , and the limiting of their use to the harmonization of excise duties , in order to avoid fraud and illegal trafficking .
Let me take this opportunity of reminding you that I am opposed to any reduction in European tobacco production .
The European Union is a strong importer of tobacco , and of high quality tobacco .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , those of you who have known me for many years know that there can be no possibility of me being put under pressure , as Mrs Grossetête or Mr Cabrol seemed to think , for I am a free-acting Member of this Parliament .
Everyone who knows me is also aware of the fact that I prefer to speak freely and unambiguously .
If the views which I am advocating today in this House are not popular , then this only shows that I am speaking out of personal conviction !
I share your opinion that cigarettes are dangerous , and I do not want to argue over the legal aspects of this today , even if I do believe that we shall be making fools of ourselves in the European Court of Justice .
But that is not my concern .
Nor is it my concern that there are tobacco subsidies .
What is my concern is the question of how we can allow a dangerous product to be legally produced if we believe that it is so dangerous .
If we are convinced that cigarettes are dangerous and lethal , we ought to have the courage to ban their production .
If we do not have the courage - and none of you has - then we have to think hard about what we should do about legal products which are legally produced , and which are allowed .
How can we restrict their sale if we believe that such restrictions are necessary ?
I share the view of some of you that dangerous products ought to be subject to restrictions .
I think we should declare that cigarettes may only be sold in certain places .
We can say that no cigarette machines are allowed .
We can say no advertising in young people 's magazines , or wherever .
I am on your side as far as that is concerned .
If you want to say that a certain risk level is to be associated with a certain type of product , and that this will determine how the product can be marketed - in terms of the type and amount of marketing used - then such a risk hierarchy is possible , and it will get my support .
But then we also have to introduce a similar system for alcohol , Mr Flynn !
I cannot wait to see how you will argue against the advertising of Guinness and whiskey in Ireland , because I can give you any number of reasons why whiskey is dangerous , and lots of other things too !
Those of you who are saying today that a ban on tobacco advertising will at least stop someone somewhere from taking up smoking should take a look at what is happening in the former Eastern bloc countries or in Greece .
There are just as many young smokers there , even though there is no advertising .
There were just as many smokers in the Eastern bloc states even when advertising was not allowed .
If we want to be logical , we must allow restrictions and back these up with educational campaigns .
Mr President , nicotine is regarded as a highly addictive drug .
The reality is that very few young people kick the habit of smoking during their lives .
It has become well documented that if people do not start smoking before the age of 18 the chances are that they will not become smokers at all in later life .
Therefore , there is a degree of urgency from the perspective of the tobacco manufacturers to lure and corner the teenage market with innovative and inviting forms of advertising relating to various cigarette products .
In Europe alone , tobacco manufacturers spend a total of £ 320 million a year on tobacco advertising .
I firmly believe that our young people need to be protected from the scourge of smoking .
The banning of the advertising and promotion of tobacco products within the Union is a positive step in the right direction , so that this very important social objective is achieved .
European governments and the EU institutions must now focus their attention on promoting health education in schools in the area of making young people aware of the dangers of smoking .
The appropriate financial resources must be made available to facilitate this process .
The attention of European legislators must also focus on the need to secure more financial resources for greater medical research into cancer prevention and into the health consequences of passive smoking .
The facts speak for themselves in this regard : over half a million people die in the Union as a direct consequence of smoking each year .
In my country 6 000 people died in 1997 as a direct consequence of smoking .
Decreasing the usage of cigarettes in the Union serves only a positive function in terms of protecting the health of all our citizens .
The report today must be supported as it is a real and positive step in the right direction .
Mr President , I am very grateful to you , but we were upstairs in the Conference of Presidents meeting on the topical and urgent debate and the sun was shining on the screen .
I think that is why I was rather late seeing my name .
Please accept my apologies .
May I begin by saying that , after some hesitation , I personally , and that also goes for a large proportion of my group , and certainly for a large proportion of the Dutch CDA delegation , will support the proposal to limit tobacco advertising .
I think , and many agree with me , that we have to do anything we can to reduce tobacco consumption .
That does not take away the fact that the ban on tobacco advertising , as proposed , brings a lot of problems with it .
I would have preferred it if we could have made do with a code of conduct , which operates very well in a number of Member States .
Having said all that and having clarified our position , I say that the common position lacks cohesion .
The common position , when you read it through , is simply the result of a political compromise .
So I ask myself what possible ways does the European Commission envisage clarifying a number of points either through implementation decrees or through the Council .
I would mention , for example , paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 3 , which are to do with indirect advertising .
I think the way the texts are worded at the moment do not make the issues abundantly clear anyway .
All I want to do is ask Commissioner Flynn : how do you think people can deal with what is currently on paper in this position in a decent manner ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that it goes against the democratic principles of this House to criminalize someone who holds a different view by referring to the influence of lobbyists .
That is a form of character assassination that we can well do without .
I claim the right - despite the risk that as a non-smoker I shall be denounced as a paid agent of the tobacco lobby - to assert that it is the job of the state to protect consumers , not to patronize them .
As regards controlling the contents of cigarettes in respect of toxicity and addictive effect , and restricting sales to young people , the state should intervene and should also try to protect young people .
But the state 's role cannot be - as in George Orwell 's book " 1984 ' - to patronize its citizens and to protect them by laying down what they can and cannot do .
Mr President , despite the legal guidance underlying the proposal , its actual legal basis is still in question .
I do not believe we can resolve this matter by returning the proposal to the Committee on Legal Affairs .
That is still made up of politicians .
No , the matter must be adopted so that it can proceed and be finally determined by the Court of Justice , and I suggest that is where the tobacco industry should present its legal opinion .
I would be amazed to find that the tobacco industry is alone among commercial activities failing to make contact with new customer groups through its advertising .
However , the lobbyists inform us that that is the case .
They maintain that they are only endeavouring to persuade established smokers to change brands .
But really , established smokers are not infantile enough to be swayed by lively , youthful advertising .
There is already legislation banning tobacco advertising on television .
Thus , it stands to reason to ban tobacco advertising in other media .
Tobacco is manufactured legally like many other products that cannot be given unrestricted coverage - medicines , weapons and poisons , for instance .
Tobacco is habit-forming and harmful to health , and it can have catastrophic consequences on the individual , costing society dearly in terms of health outlay .
That is one of the reasons why I have always been against EU financial support of tobacco production .
We do not subsidize imported tobacco , after all .
ECU 1 billion towards tobacco production and a mere ECU 11.2 million to combat cancer !
Half a million people are dying of smoking-related diseases while the EU supports 135 000 tobacco producers !
Mr President , the proper functioning of the internal market requires harmonization of laws on tobacco advertising , and that this harmonization results in far-reaching prohibitions is in line with Article 100a of the Treaty , whether you like it or not .
Since we know that more than half a million people die every year in the European Union as a result of addiction to nicotine , that smoking is a definite danger to public health , and that tobacco advertising and sponsorship are certainly not only about promoting brands but also about encouraging smoking and getting young people to start smoking , as we know , then we have to make a stand against this advertising in a directive on approximation .
We know that , so what could hold us back ?
We must certainly not be held back by the legal technicalities which some colleagues are using to knock up legal constructions which have only one purpose : to topple the directive .


I respect their legal expertise but have to say that they have not convinced me to depart from my legally founded political conviction for three reasons : firstly , Article 100a is fine as a legal basis , so we do have the necessary powers ; secondly , there is no valid reason to demand further consultation ; and thirdly , there is very little scope under the regulations for amendments .
Mr President , we can only come to a different decision if we no longer take our own legal services seriously .
I refer to the opinion given by the legal adviser on 1 April this year . The same is true if we disregard our own vote of 2 December 1993 and act as if we have not yet incorporated the Treaty of Maastricht , and as if we want to send a signal to the world that Parliament does not see the resemblance between its own amendments and the common position , nor do we recognize the difference between minimal and radical amendments to the text .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us continue to take this seriously .
Let us take a deliberate stand for public health by approving the common position and follow the recommendation of the rapporteur in that sense .
We have the opportunity now , later we may not .
To colleagues who advance as arguments the subsidies to tobacco growers or the right to vote in drugs matters , I say : because people behave stupidly twice , or fail twice , does not mean that you have to behave stupidly a third time , or that you should not continue to fight to get a third chance .
Mr President , ten years ago , I represented Italy at a WHO Conference held in Lisbon , entitled " Tobacco or Health ' .
On the last day , a journalist responsible for leading the debate between delegates from different countries on the subject of measures to be taken to reduce the use of tobacco , solemnly began by reading the list of political victims of the fight against smoking , in other words , the ministers who had lost their jobs and never regained them , because in their countries they had promoted laws to ban advertising or to ban smoking in public places .
We know that these and other threats have achieved the desired effect , and it is also true that this directive has been waiting for years to be approved .
This is therefore a great day and we should ensure that the approval of this directive is not delayed and that the efforts of the Commission , the Council and the Presidency are rewarded .
Other measures will have to be taken , as the rapporteur rightly suggests : tax increases to discourage consumption ; health education , because many young people believe that smoking does not do any harm and many adults , including teachers and doctors , set them a bad example ; control of cigarette vending machines , etcetera . The objection will be raised that Italians , Spanish and Greeks in general want to continue supporting the European tobacco growers .
That is true , but it is not a contradiction : why should we penalize our own economies in favour of producers from other continents ? We know that Europeans smoke mainly American tobacco , and the products currently spreading throughout developing countries are not our own .
For the same reasons , we are not prepared , nor do we ask , to penalize European producers of beer or alcohols . The problem is education , dissuasion and non-promotion .
We need to prevent people taking up smoking and continuing to smoke . The same applies to alcohol and all other drugs .
Mr President , I speak as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and spokesman for the Group of the European People 's Party on matters involving a conflict of legal basis . And in committee , I voted along with all my colleagues from all the political groups , in a majority decision that this is not the right legal basis .
The first thing I want to do is speak out on behalf of them all against this Manichean approach . It is not a question of being in favour of health or against it .
We are in favour of health and in favour of life .
And we know perfectly well that in all the Member States of the European Union there is a tendency towards restricting tobacco advertising .
But first and foremost , Mr President , we are in favour of the rules on coexistence established by the Treaty , and of respecting them .
Mr President , obviously it cannot be said that this is a minor technical matter , that we are attempting subterfuge through a question of procedure .
There is indeed a technical question , but it is a different one : it is a problem of venire contra factum propium on the part of Parliament itself , which twice pronounced itself in favour of using Article 100a as the legal basis , even in December 1993 after the Maastricht Treaty .
The approach taken by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has been strictly political rather than juridical - juridical too , but strictly political .
And the reason for that approach lies in simple questions such as the following . What are the objectives of the proposed measures in relation to the Community 's obligations ?
Health , we are all agreed .
So we must act accordingly .
Does the proposed action relate to a matter of exclusively Community competence or of shared competence with the Member States ?
I think the answer is fairly clear here too , at least it was to us .
What is the Community dimension of the problem , and what measures have been taken so far ?
What is the added value of the action planned by the Community , and what would be the cost of an alternative action ?
What type of measures can the Community take ?
And lastly , is it necessary or possible to have a uniform set of rules which also prohibit ?
In other words , what we are doing here is harmonizing the free movement of services which are not going to move because they are not going to exist .
Or , in accordance with the Treaty , do we need to establish a measure - which may be a measure which affects all the Member States - but a measure based on Article 129 ?
Mr President , this is one of those situations where the Brussels leviathan is being told to do something we cannot often do at Member State level .
We know from experience that that is a bad method which only causes complications .
The complications arise because , in the last analysis , we can spend ten years debating this problem , but it is very likely - and this is up to the Court of Justice - that this directive will be repealed within two years , which means we shall have wasted our time .
I think it would be better to tackle it Treaty in hand and adopt , with the correct legal basis , measures appropriate to the objective being sought .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that Parliament will approve Mr Cabrol 's report .
It would be a significant political act which meets the aspirations of our people .
I believe that the issue of tobacco is one of the biggest issues for public health on this planet .
Furthermore , the Director-General of the WHO indicated , at the time of the publication of their annual report , that the fight against tobacco addiction was one of the main priorities of the World Health Organization .
Europe must therefore play a full role .
Of course , there are many actions necessary , and we cannot be satisfied with merely banning advertising .
I am thinking of the price of tobacco , taxes on tobacco and health education .
Many of my colleagues have insisted on these points .
But the banning of advertising is an essential step , which is all the easier to take as we have a legal basis for it : it is in the name of the free market that we can ban advertising , even if our objective is first and foremost one of public health protection .
With regard to the issue of a ban on advertising , I would like to sound the alarm , for some of our colleagues consider that we should go further . They consider that since we subsidize tobacco , we do not ban the product and hence we should not ban its advertising .
Tobacco , in itself , is not a banned product and no one here would want it banned .
This is , firstly , because all prohibitionist policies have proved themselves to be ineffectual and secondly because , by nature , there is no foundation for a ban .
What should be banned is the abusive use of tobacco , and for this we must base our action on the individual responsibility of enlightened citizens .
Advertising deceives the enlightened citizen .
It gives no information about the risks tobacco causes or about tobacco abuse . On the contrary , it projects a positive image with the aim of increasing tobacco consumption .
I thus think that the method chosen is the right one .
In fact , in France there is already a similar law in force which covers alcohol as well .
It has proved effective .
All surveys made of young people show that there has been a considerable increase in awareness about the risks and the need for behavioural change .
I hope the European Union will follow us with regard to this issue .
Mr President , this topic always raises fairly schematic and sometimes radical positions .
I believe that , once again , Parliament , just like the Community institutions in general , risks losing an opportunity to assume a balanced attitude in which , while trying to face serious problems such as the health of the European citizens , it is also trying to understand the social and economic implications of the acts to be decided on .
In my opinion , the proposal we are discussing does not have this balance , in the sense that it does not take sufficient consideration of the practical consequences of the space occupied by sponsorship and the use of marks that refer to cigarette brands in economic and industrial activities .
I come from an area where the impact of tobacco production and sponsorship is already of great significance on an industrial scale , from an area where tobacco is produced , where there are large companies in the textiles and clothing sector that use marks that refer to cigarette brands , in which F1 and motorcycle Grand Prix are held , for which it is not easy to replace the sponsorship of tobacco brands from one day to the next . I therefore believe that we need to deal with these problems as well .
We do not have any unions asking us not to approve this directive because they know there will be serious consequences for employment , possibly fairly soon .
So why not deal with the fundamental problem in a balanced way ?
By assuming a drastic generalization and extension even where there is no prohibition from direct advertising , but allowing the Member States the possibility , through recommendation , of using even more restrictive criteria in indirect advertising and sponsorship , that take into account the specific impact of this phenomenon on employment and on the social sector , from this point of view .
I think we need to act in this way .
I am therefore in favour of referring the matter to the Council of Ministers , as this might be the simplest solution , so that it can examine the proposal better , to provide it with the legal basis it does not have at the moment , or in some other way .
My aim is this : subsidiarity with regard to indirect advertising and sponsorship .
Mr President , the European Union has a common fisheries policy .
I am also on the Committee on Fisheries , and I was amazed to discover the other day that the European Union spends more on tobacco production than it does on the fishing industry , and that , even in countries like Portugal , which are largely dependent on it , fishing only gets 40 % of the financial contribution that is provided for tobacco .
This is a serious anomaly , if we also stress what is happening in the field of public health , because it makes no sense to keep on investing in the public health area while at the same time increasing tobacco production subsidies .
So there is a clear message here . Let us go on gradually reducing production subsidies and adopt the common position of the Council in relation to the prohibition of tobacco advertising .
There are existing , although limited , examples that show that a 14 to 37 % fall in consumption can be achieved through the use of advertising restrictions .
Yes , because the tobacco habit causes 540 000 deaths a year in the European Union , and if we limit this discussion to a legal point , academically interesting , though it is , we are mounting no more than a lightweight assault on an industry which has powerful resources to defend it .
To change the Council 's position or refuse to approve the directive through lack of Community powers would mean taking public health back to national level which , when all is said and done , runs contrary to the meaning and purpose of the Treaty itself .
The reference to subsidiarity is a desperate attempt to condition the opinion of the national authorities , when at the end of the day the Council 's position represents the guidelines for those same authorities through their Health Ministers , who want the guidelines to be a way of bringing in laws regulating the tobacco market and demanding a high level of consumer protection .
This is why we cast our vote in support of the Cabrol report .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying how much I resent and reject the idea that anybody who stands up in this Chamber and speaks against , or raises questions about , this directive is being manipulated by the tobacco industry .
I am not , and I do not think Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi was , and anybody else who has objected to the directive ought to be given the benefit of the doubt and allowed to voice their doubts without being accused , as I say , of being somebody who is simply speaking on behalf of the tobacco industry .
I am in favour of ending tobacco advertising and sponsorship .
I would also like to end the subsidization by the European Union of tobacco .
One of the interesting things to come out of this debate is that the European Union spends three times as much on subsidizing tobacco production as the tobacco companies spend on advertising their products within the European Union .
The question for people like me who want to see an end to tobacco advertising is : will the directive work ?
The real answer , I suspect , is no , it will not , because it will end up in the Court of Justice with a lot of doubts and , possibly , no directive at all at the end of it .
There is clearly a legal problem .
This is something which the British government is ignoring in the Presidency of the Council of Ministers because it wants an easy victory .
It would have been possible for Mr Blair to have introduced a ban on tobacco advertising and sponsorship in the United Kingdom but he ran into political trouble .
He has therefore run to Brussels to get himself out of it and , as I say , to get what he thinks is an easy victory .
There is a clear problem with qualified majority voting .
I do not like the idea of introducing a ban which is introduced by a very narrow majority .
However , if you want a directive , then you will not really be able to get one under Article 129 , because the Member States will never agree .
If you want a recommendation , that will not ban tobacco advertising either , because you cannot square a recommendation with the idea of common rules for the internal market .
The answer is two things .
One is to go for a code of conduct on tobacco advertising , as some have asked , but that probably will not give you a universal ban on advertising : it will leave it up to each Member State to do what it wants .


Or you can do what effectively we are doing : we are saying ' yes ' to this directive and we are leaving it to Mr Flynn to tidy it up , because , as we have discovered in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , there is a lot wrong with this directive : it does not deal very adequately with the idea of the use of established brand names on existing goods ; it does extraordinary things about world sponsorship .
You are looking at Mr Flynn over there as the man who is effectively being asked to do the business that MEPs will not do because we are being subjected to emotional blackmail .
I apologise to the interpreters .
Mr President , a ban on the advertising of tobacco and tobacco products is all about public health on a large scale and the prevention of diseases , and I think this is the direction a common European Union common health policy should be taking : more for its causes than for its effects .
Has advertising any importance , then ?
I wonder why vast amounts of time and money are spent on advertising if it is not important .
Tobacco advertising has an impact just like any other , and tobacco advertisers are very clearly endeavouring to increase consumption , which means to increase the number of people who smoke .
Can advertising be targeted at just one group ?
Can the young be unaffected by advertising ?
I do not believe so , and when we learn the results of surveys on whether young people are more vulnerable when it comes to advertising , this claim will be even harder to justify .
Advertising that stirs the imagination is what young people are especially exposed to , and the tobacco industry purposely uses this sort of advertising especially in the sponsorship of events , where the aim is to achieve an image of a jet-set lifestyle .
Advertising prohibition has had an impact .
Owing to an advertising ban , Finland has seen a fall in tobacco consumption over twenty years by 37 % .
The ban has been significant , especially for the young : before the ban 35 % of 15 to 24 year olds smoked , a figure that fell to 23 % after the ban .
I do hope that Parliament will show a sense of responsibility and approve Mr Cabrol 's report without amendments .
We now have an opportunity to bring into effect a Europe-wide ban on the advertising of tobacco products .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not regard the ban on tobacco advertising as the right means for protecting public health .
The general opinion envisages not only a total ban on the advertising of tobacco products but also a total ban on indirect advertising , for example for Camel boots or Davidoff cosmetics .
The only exceptions apply to Greece , which was the price paid for Greece 's agreement and thus for achieving the necessary majority in the Council of Ministers against the votes of Germany and Austria , with Denmark and Spain abstaining .
A ban is the strictest of all conceivable instruments in a liberal economic system .
Before legal requirements of this kind are enacted , they must be considered in the light of whether they are really suitable as a means for achieving the declared objective , namely the protection of public health .
A ban on tobacco advertising gives rise to hopes and expectations which cannot be fulfilled .
No-one can dispute that smoking is harmful and often leads to death .
That is why it would be logical , and here I agree with Mrs Roth-Berendt , to ban the manufacture of harmful products such as cigarettes .
In a liberal economy , advertising does an important job in providing information , and it is a potent instrument for effective competition .
It ought , as a matter of principle , to be possible to advertise products which are legally manufactured and distributed and legally consumed .
A total ban on tobacco advertising is an attack on the liberal economic system .
Once this first domino falls , the rest will follow .
I should like to ask Commissioner Flynn if it is true that there is a Commission document which states that motor vehicles are freely available industrial products which are often prove lethal .
Because there is no European legislation in the context of health policy for such far-reaching interventions , even under the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Council and the Commission often resort to the harmonization instrument known as competition , despite their own better judgement .
We want to construct an internal market , and we want to make a political decision as to who is permitted to advertise freely offered products , and who is not .
This proposal has exactly the opposite effect .
We await with eager expectation the predictable complaints from Member States to the European Court of Justice .
Mr President , I do not usually respond to Mrs Jackson but can I just remind her that this discussion about tobacco advertising has been going on for more than ten years and we were not reconsulted on this until February last year .
Mr Blair , who she suggested has come running to Brussels , has been Prime Minister of the United Kingdom for a much shorter period than that .
What we are dealing with is a European directive .
Can I congratulate Mr Cabrol on the work that he has done on this .
I personally would have gone a lot further and I would in normal circumstances have preferred to have gone to conciliation .
It is only the effective persuasion of the rapporteur which makes me think that we should accept the common position and I shall vote accordingly .
Can I also say , again in domestic terms , that the impression was created in the United Kingdom in the English language press that a decision was made about the ban on tobacco advertising by the UK Prime Minister and by somebody who is responsible for Formula One .
Can I just remind the English language press that what we are considering today is a European Council and a European Parliament directive , and as always in codecision , even at second reading , this Parliament has the final word and so it should .
I would like also to say that in considering my position not only have I consulted industry but I have also consulted the trade unions .
I wish we had not had the argument about the legal basis .
I cannot believe that it is right that the Legal Affairs Committee should come in on this occasion and give a different view and that the Environment Committee , which is the lead committee in these circumstances , should be dissuaded from taking the view that it took on the first reading .
I shall support this and I shall support it unamended on the second reading .
I hope that by the time the afternoon is over we shall see a ban on tobacco advertising within the Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have every respect for those who oppose smoking and want to ban the advertising of tobacco products .
But we are not here to decide on our convictions or on a political resolution , we are here to decide on a European legislative proposal , something which is to become European law .
The European Union is a community in law .
It can only make laws if it is empowered to do so in the Treaty .
In the view of most people who have dealt with this matter , there is no legal basis in the Treaty for this directive .
So the Union is taking upon itself a right that it does not possess .
This was made clear in the expert opinion delivered by the Council 's Legal Service in 1993 , which states that the Legal Service concludes that the proposal for a directive cannot be accepted either on the basis of Article 100a or on the basis of any other Article of the Treaty .
This opinion has never been revoked .
That is why , in legal terms , this directive rests on shaky foundations .
It could be based on Article 100a only if it concerned harmonization .
But it does not harmonize , it bans .
It is also clear from the procedure that we are dealing here with a health directive .
That is why , quite logically , the Commissioner for Health is sitting here and defending it .
That is why the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has taken the lead in Parliament , rather than the committee on competition .
In short , if this directive becomes law , then we as a Parliament will be doing exactly what we are always reproaching the Commission for doing , namely laying claim to powers which are a matter for the Member States .
That is why we should reflect on this very carefully !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in spite of the legal difficulties which may arise from the approval of this proposal for a directive , which seeks to do away with direct and indirect advertising of tobacco products , I have to say I agree with the premises on which it is based .
Tobacco consumption continues to be one of our greatest public health problems . It is responsible for over 500 000 deaths a year in the European Union .
Nearly 50 % of all deaths from cancer among men aged between 35 and 69 are due to the effects of tobacco , not forgetting the part it plays in aggravating acute and chronic cardio-respiratory disease .
Nevertheless , to ensure that the measures proposed here are rendered more effective we must include them in a wider strategy , and of necessity that means preventing tobacco consumption by means of campaigns drawing attention to its harmful effects - essentially directed at the younger age-groups - and by discouraging tobacco-growing in member countries of the European Union by paying producers subsidies that will enable them to grow something else instead .
Mr President , I have a point of order .
Literature is being distributed outside the Chamber on the biopatents directive .
An attempt is being made right outside this room to influence our voting behaviour .
I would ask you to check whether this is permissible under the Rules of Procedure .
I for one doubt it !
Thank you , Mr Nassauer .
The Chair notes the point and will have it checked .
Mr President , I give far greater weight to the pleas of doctors for the health of their patients than to those of tobacco companies trying to justify their deliberate targeting of their advertising to attract new young customers to an addictive substance to replace the hundreds of thousands of customers they kill every year .
I need no lectures about subsidies to tobacco producers , having consistently opposed them since election to this House .
I also reject pleas from companies advertising other products using the same brand name as major cigarette brands .
Here are depicted beautiful , young , cool and trendy people alongside the logo of a cigarette brand .
Why do they not use an independent logo to promote their goods - a logo not associated with a product that kills ?
It is absurd to claim that the rules of the Community demand that young people should continue to be targeted in this way through sports sponsorship and through trendy designer products .
The Treaty of Rome says the Community exists for the well-being of its citizens .
The health of our citizens must take precedence over the profits of multinational companies .
Mr President , I think that this is a very noble initiative and it shows Europe at its best .
It shows us standing up for the common good and rejecting the very well-financed , and at times , almost threatening campaigns of the tobacco lobby and of the medium moguls .
I would agree with Dagmar Roth-Behrendt and others who have spoken here , that adults have free will to take up smoking or to take up drinking , but it is deplorable that young people are encouraged to take up smoking as the result of billboard advertising and advertising generally .
Tobacco advertising tends to glamorize smoking , but there is nothing glamorous about smoking , about cancer , chronic bronchitis and all the other tobacco-related illnesses that kill many millions each year .
Our next step must be to convince young people , especially young women , not to go down this road .
I know from the very impressive representations that I have received from the medical profession - and I want to thank them for that - that more young women are actually suffering now from lung cancer .
So Mr Flynn , our Commissioner , is to be congratulated and I would urge Members to vote in support of the common position .
Thank you , Mrs Malone .
I would ask Members to take their seats and at least make it possible for Commissioner Flynn to be listened to with the respect due to a Commissioner .
Mr President , I would like to thank all those who have contributed to this very important debate today .
The discussion on the proposed directive on tobacco advertising is very significant indeed and there is very big public interest in that discussion here in Parliament today .
It comes after a long period of reflection in Council which finally reached a common position on 12 February .
The text of the common position fully reflects the spirit of the Commission 's proposal so the Commission was able to accept it as it stands .
In the Commission 's view the common position represents the most satisfactory arrangements possible to deal with the complex issue of tobacco advertising in the internal market context .
As several Member States have already introduced national restrictions or bans on tobacco advertising , practical problems of application have arisen as the possibility of internal market border checks disappeared .
Therefore , as with many other sectors of economic activity , a common solution needed to be found .
Article 100a of the Treaty obliges the Commission to take a high level of public health protection as its basis when making internal market proposals .
I regard the reference to seeking an alternative legal basis as something of a red herring so far as this proposal is concerned .
I would remind Members of Parliament that this legal basis has already been used in the case of existing directives on tobacco labelling and on tar content .
It has also been used to ban TV advertising and indirect advertising .
It has been used to ban the marketing of oral tobacco .
It has been used for the advertising of other medicinal products and it is in accordance with decisions taken by the European Court on other issues .
It certainly follows the latest advice given by the European Parliament 's legal service .
Some Members made reference to Article 129 , but I say that article specifically excludes any harmonization of the laws and regulations of the Member States .
Article 129 is not a suitable legal basis and it must be rejected on that account .
Furthermore , a total ban on the advertising of tobacco on TV was , as you all know , agreed in 1989 .
Associated with this principal objective of an internal market nature , the Commission has had to take a high level of public health protection into account .
This is demanded of us by our obligations under the Treaty .
This brings me to the smoking prevention issue which was the subject of a communication in December 1996 .
The proposed restrictions on tobacco advertising should be seen as part of a more general approach by the Community to address what is undoubtedly the number one preventable cause of death and disease in Europe today .
I should like to put that on the record just once more .
The question of subsidies to tobacco growing has been raised .
I have always been against giving subsidies to tobacco growers ...
... and I look forward to the day when we can stop it .
I was not able to get full agreement but I was able to achieve some progress in that regard .
I look forward to the not too distant future when the whole matter will be reviewed again and when the subsidy to tobacco growing , as part of the policy of this Union , will cease .
I do not have to remind Members of the enormous health impact of smoking .
The World Health Organization estimates the yearly death toll from tobacco at more than half a million European Union citizens - so many victims of cancer because of the consumption of tobacco , be it smoking or passive smoking .
The question for this House is : Can this House do something at European level to reverse that trend ?
They can , by voting to support this common position and voting down all the amendments , which are only a way of getting around the situation and making it more difficult to achieve the purpose we are all supporting .
Mr Needle made a very telling point when he said that the House has a rare opportunity .
This is a moment of truth for all concerned who support what this proposal seeks to achieve .
And do not forget that industry itself is on record as saying that it sees the 14 to 24-year-olds as tomorrow 's cigarette business .
That is what advertising is all about : attracting young people to the habit so that they can maintain their market and maintain their profits .
We have to put an end to that here .
Advertising of products causing such suffering and so many deaths is clearly unjustified as many Member States have already decided .
To act now at the Community level is , I believe , timely , necessary and entirely proportionate to the problem .
By adopting this measure the Community will remove an incentive for young people to begin a habit that will bring illness and premature death .
This initiative of removing the encouragement to smoke is even more vital if we remember that most smokers take up the addiction before they are 18 years of age and indeed , they take it up much earlier .
We have a responsibility to the future citizens of this Union to seek to take the first step to turn the tide against death from cancer produced by smoking !
The rapporteur , Mr Cabrol , has already clearly identified the issues that are involved here in tobacco advertising .
He does that so excellently in his report .
It was adopted without amendments by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Many members of that committee remarked on the importance of putting a Community system in place without further delay as envisaged in the Council 's common position .
I agree fully that this compromise is a good and workable solution .
It represents a balance - a satisfactory balance between the interests concerned - and allows the necessary transition time for new arrangements to be found for those presently involved with tobacco promotion .
There is no need , there is no logic , in amending the Council 's text which indeed takes account of the points raised by Parliament at its first reading .
The Commission will therefore not support any amendments to this common position which , as Mr Cabrol and the Environment Committee have said , is an acceptable text as it stands .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mrs Jackson raised a point about indirect advertising .
The objective of the common position on indirect advertising is a very practical approach to a complicated issue - how to stop other products being used to promote tobacco , or to stop tobacco being promoted using the name of other products .
The common position also takes into account the special case of existing products .
In all of these cases the position lays down clear objectives .
As we know , this directive will be transposed into national law according to the timetable laid down .
It is the Commission 's responsibility to ensure that these national rules are in conformity with the intention of the directive .
I should say to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten that the Commission will be coming forward with regular reports under Article 6 and it will make Parliament and the Council responsible and take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that the directive is transposed and implemented as it was intended .
I would like , finally , to call upon all the honourable Members of this House to adopt without amendment this important issue which will have such great significance for our young people now and in the future .
It is this common position or nothing !
That is the choice we have here today and tomorrow .
( Applause ) The European Parliament stands to make a momentous and historical breakthrough in the support of its single market and in the protection of its citizens .
I ask you to act accordingly !
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Mr President , just before you commence the voting , I would like to draw your attention to the rules of this House and to the avalanche of lobbyists that are in the corridor outside this House .
Harassing and interrogating Members at the doorways coming into this House are against the rules .
I would ask you as a very respected senior Vice-President of this House and present President-in-Office : would you have the security services remove from outside the doorway ?
I make the point because this document was stuffed into my hands coming in the door .
I am a diabetic and were it not for biotechnology from the liver of a poor innocent pig I would be a dead man today .
Stop this nonsense out in the corridors of this esteemed Parliament immediately .
Mr Killilea , I immediately gave orders to control the presence of members of the different lobby groups , but naturally I would like to believe that in the final analysis no Member of this House is affected by any activity of any " lobbyists ' .
Mr President , I rise on the same point of order .
There were outside this House people wearing a distinctive form of uniform .
I might very well be sympathetic to their cause but Members of this House really must be free to come into this Chamber without lobbyists outside the door pursuing their case whatever that case is .
We look to you and to the officers of this House to uphold our rules and orders .
Mr President , I would like to echo what has just been said .
It is not the first time that pamphlets have been handed out at the doors of this Chamber , but I think that the dignity of the House is now in danger .
We can stop these comments here .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Votes
Please withdraw the banner from the Hemicycle .
I shall be forced to adjourn if the banner stays ; Parliament cannot be turned into a theatre .
( The sitting was suspended until the banner was withdrawn )
Mr President , I have a point of order .
I do not want to disrupt the proceedings , but I would ask you if you have given permission for that television camera to be present and , if you have , who it is and why they have been given permission to film unruly behaviour in this House which does this House no credit whatsoever ?
Mr Provan , I do not know who gave permission for the filming , but the camera crew has already left . Moreover , the issue has been covered .
Mr President , I consider requests of this kind to be unjustified , for on many occasions we have seen the television cameras in this House and those television cameras , when authorized , provide a guarantee for the citizens who have elected us to be able to see what is happening in this House : the guarantee of democracy is a price we should know how to pay !
If people are afraid of what they are doing , if they need to hide when they are acting , then I do not think they meet the requirements for the votes they have obtained .
If some people here answer the multinationals ' lobby , obviously they do not want people to know what they are doing .
But I believe the European citizens have a right to know !
( Mixed reactions )
Mr Tamino , there is always full coverage of the work of Parliament by cameras in the area provided for them and all of us are always in the spotlight .
Special filming is not necessary and there are regulations which must be adhered to .
Mr President , this is a vote in the European Parliament and , if I understand matters correctly , those who are entitled to vote in the European Parliament are the Members of this House .
There is clearly a troupe of actors in costumes in the Chamber .
I would ask you to refrain from voting ...
... or else to acknowledge what you are , namely freely elected Members of this House and not a Punch and Judy show !
( Applause )
Members of this House , this debate must be closed .
I cannot allow more than two or three of you to speak .
Mr President , as President of this sitting , you are the captain of the ship .
Well , this ship has been boarded by pirates .
Do you really intend to permit this act of piracy with regard to our voting time , or are you going to behave like the captain of a triumphant ship and expel the pirates !
Mr Giansily , I , like everybody else , enjoyed the way in which you phrased your comment .
However , the banner has been removed and the way in which Members of this House dress is up to them , and I cannot intervene .
Mr President , what is extremely annoying here is that while the big banner has been removed , it is true , the little banners are still in this room .
I think the members of the Green group ought to know that there are more people in this House who are concerned about the directive as it stands at the moment .
Mr President , I request that you also have the small banners removed .
Mr President , it is a question of the dignity of this House , as has already been said .
I should like to say to one of the previous speakers : you ought to pay a visit to a Punch and Judy show , then you would see that Punch and Judy is one of our cultural treasures .
But there is one thing that I would ask for , and that is an apology from Mr Ferber .
If he thinks that he can call our group a band of pirates , then he knows nothing about dignity , democratic argument or style .
I await an apology from you , and if that is not forthcoming , then we all know what to think !
( Applause from the Green Group )
Mr President , on a point of order .
I came to this sitting on the understanding that we were here to vote .
We are about to vote on a most important topic and we should do so in a calm , dignified and responsible manner .
It serves no purpose to discuss the way in which various Members of this House dress .
It is everyone 's personal right to dress as they please .
If people wish to demonstrate , they should do so outside , not inside , this Hemicycle .
Could we now move to the vote ?
Mr de Vries , I believe that many of us agree with your comments .
Mr President , what is happening is extremely distressing .
I would propose that you suspend the sitting and ask our colleagues to behave decently .
On Amendments Nos 6 and 28
Mr President , there was a certain amount of bad temper in yesterday 's discussion of these amendments .
It was claimed that the amendments had not been submitted by the Committee on Agriculture .
Well , there is not the slightest possibility of any committee introducing an amendment in this procedure , not even the Committee on Agriculture .
That is why it was decided that , as rapporteur in this matter , I should collect the signatures of members of the Committee on Agriculture , and these appear in the list below the amendments .
Our committee has also written a letter to the Committee on Legal Affairs , expressing the fact that our interests are at stake and I am talking here about the right of farmers to continue breeding animals and plants .
I just wanted to draw this fact to your attention .
( The President declared the common position approved )
Mr Perry , We cannot keep restarting debates and letting Members of the House speak . However , your comment has been noted .
( Several members of the Green Group in the European Parliament waved piracy flags )
Mr President , in case you were not aware , the Jolly Roger has a precise meaning in terms of international law .
It represents a refusal of law .
That is why I regret that a number of Members of this House have chosen this method of expression and it is why I find it disgraceful that you have let the vote take place in the presence of such a symbol .
( Loud applause )
Mr d 'Aboville , each of us has the right to his or her own opinion and judgement .
Mr President , as Mr Perry has been so kind as to mention my name , may I advise him that , if he is to follow and adopt my principles in these matters , he may wish to go further .
The working people of my country , and I am sure all European countries , can recognize conservative Tories , because they are always wearing the same uniform and it is normally double-breasted pin-striped suits !
Mr Falconer , I do not think that we should carry on with comments on dress code , but I am not convinced of the accuracy of what you have said . There are others who wear suits like those you mentioned .
Thank you , Mr President .
I have a comment to add to what has already been said by other speakers , pursuant to Rule 19 - though at the wrong time , since the vote has already been taken - and Rule 109 . I just want to say , let us hope this precedent will not be remembered on other occasions as a justification for using some other symbol in this Hemicycle .
Symbols serve a purpose , Mr President . They are not fancy dress or a fashion statement .
They are symbols , and symbols have a meaning . That is our culture and our civilization .
Thank you .
Mr President , I would simply like to ask everyone who wishes to speak to do so every time .
It is a good point for us , so carry on !
Is there nobody else who would like to lecture us ?
We have not quite understood what you are trying to say to us !
Explain to us what is wrong so that we may understand .
I am asking colleagues to take their time and to explain to us what is wrong in what we have done .
Mr President , please allow me to pass on to you and to everyone else present a quite shattering piece of news .
I have just learnt that an hour ago an attempt was made on the life of the President of the Turkish Association for the Defence of Human Rights , Mr Akin Birdal .
Many of you will have been acquainted with him personally .
Eight armed civilians entered the offices of the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Ankara .
Mr Birdal , and no-one else , was shot and suffered serious injuries . His condition is critical and he is now in hospital .
A number of Parliamentary colleagues who were in Ankara two weeks ago with the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee met Mr Akin Birdal .
I very much hope that he will survive his injuries .
Many of you know Akin .
He is a symbol of a democratic Turkey , a Turkey which is fighting for human rights .
We all hope that he will survive this attack and that those who were responsible will be found and brought to justice .
Mr President , I think it is worthwhile voting on the last part because the organizers of these kind of parties are being asked anyway to provide chill rooms , cold water and so on .
This is a necessity to reduce the risk to young people , so I cannot understand who would not be in favour of this .
On paragraph 8
Mr President , if we vote on an amendment in this House and the amendment gains a majority , it is adopted .
I have never heard of people voting on an amendment and then saying : it is the initial paragraph we are voting on .
That is not how it is done .
That is against the rules of the House .
Mrs Aelvoet , a vote has been taken on part of the amendment which does not cover the whole text .
The rapporteur was of the opinion that the original should also be put to the vote .
The Presidency has accepted this opinion .
Mr President , I would just like to make it clear that the amendment , or that part of it which has been accepted here , must be incorporated into the original text .
Mr Swoboda , that was also my assessment .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , if you will permit me , I would like to speak simultaneously regarding two reports , that of Mrs Palacio and that of Mr Wijsenbeek .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations supports the conclusions of these two reports , with a number of reservations which I would like to expand on .
This relates to a particular case , that of Article 157 of the Portuguese Constitution , which has a particularly protective system of immunity for parliamentarians .
Paragraph 2 of Article 157 stipulates that Members may not be heard as witnesses or as the accused , without the authorization of the House , the decision to grant such authorization being mandatory , in the second instance , where there are strong indications that a crime has been committed which is punishable by a term of imprisonment of not less than three years .
Following the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities in this , Parliament is anxious to show that , and I quote , " European parliamentary immunity is , in general terms , independent of the various national parliamentary procedures . '
They want to lay the foundations of a truly European immunity , which would succeed in creating equality amongst its Members , whatever their nationality .
With regard to this , I would like to say that , as on many occasions , this is nothing but a pious wish . Declarations from the majority of this House are not currently able to remove the national status of a Member and there is no such thing as European or independent immunity .
It all depends .
Furthermore , this position - and this is my third remark - leads the Committee on the Rules of Procedure to propose a provision , unfortunately accepted earlier by a majority , which is not at all in accordance with our Rules .
Rule 6 ( 4 ) of the latter only anticipates adoption or rejection of a request for immunity , with the possibility of the recommendation being divided up if the request seeks the waiver of immunity on several counts .
It furthermore stipulates that , " the committee 's report may , exceptionally , propose that the waiver of immunity shall apply solely to prosecution proceedings and that ... the Member should be immune from any form of detention or remand ... ' .
There is no provision for the measure we have just adopted , Mr President , that is , to decide not to take a decision on the request and , so that we can support the request for a waiver of immunity , to make no objection to the magistrate concerned hearing Mr Rosado Fernandes in the same way as Mr Campos .
In reality then - and this is what our group approved of - we have lifted the immunity in the sense of the Portuguese Constitution , that is , we have permitted those involved to be heard before the Portuguese judicial authorities .
This is not what we have said , but it does not mean this is not what we have done .
By drafting paragraph 2 of our decision in this way , we have not altered the character of the waiver of parliamentary immunity .
Wijsenbeek report ( A4-0152 / 98 )
In its " interpretative ' communication on the implementation of the second banking directive the Commission is promoting the further deregulation of the banking sector and the restriction of the sovereign rights of Member States , and in so doing is transgressing the official legislative process .
This communication is bound up with the context of the more general policy of the EU , which is defined by the integration of the single market and the adoption of a common currency .
The Commission , by blatantly transgressing the official legislative process , is overstepping its responsibilities and violating the principle of the separation of powers , thus infringing the rights of Member States .
The right of the Commission to issue interpretative communications is restricted to executive matters which fall within its sphere of competence - such as those concerning state assistance and competition policy - , whereas the right of interpretation of primary and derivative law rests with the Court .
If we combine this with the fact that a similar process is being followed in the insurance sector , we fear that an attempt is being made de facto to go along a certain path and to brush aside the protests of Member States .
Even more questions arise if we consider that , as the Commission itself points out , its interpretation is not binding on the Member States and does not prejudge the possible position of the Court .
It is undeniable that technological progress , especially the challenges posed by the information society , makes it necessary to adapt the law .
For example , the growth of cross-border services by electronic means necessitates the clarification of notions which are susceptible to a flexible interpretation and the adoption of clear criteria in order to define , for example , the " place ' of service provision .
However , these criteria cannot be imposed unilaterally and arbitrarily . They must come about as a result of agreement and they must not violate the fundamental principles of international private law , given the enormously significant implications they have for the definition , among other things , of applicable law and the system of taxation .
We are particularly concerned about the direction taken by the Commission and the Court alike with regard to , among other things , the precepts of " general good ' and also about the proposed abolition of the notification procedure in the case of the provision of services .
The second banking directive determines that the banking institution which carries out activities in the territory of another Member State in the context of mutual recognition , that is by means of branches or a system of free service provision , must comply with the provisions relating to the general good which are in force in that state .
Ever since then , the competent institutional bodies of the EU have systematically attempted to introduce ever more and increasingly complex criteria to evaluate the rules of internal law in areas which are not covered by Community regulation .
This process , which even violates the provisions and aims of the directives on the liberalization of banking activity , leads to a serious diminution of the sovereign rights of the recipient state , by restricting its supervisory rights and by making its broader legislation conditional upon its acceptance by bankers and organs of the EU .
It also violates the famous principle of equality of treatment and essentially places banks in a more favourable position while exempting them from the obligation to comply with a number of legal rules which apply to banks that are governed by internal law .
In consequence , the banks of Member States which impose fewer and more lax administrative and legislative conditions and formalities are being rewarded .
Under the conditions of an integrated economy this situation leads de facto to a reduction in consumer protection .
At an institutional level this process translates into EU intervention in areas which are essentially regulated by the Member States , such as civil law - especially contract law - and procedural law , without prior harmonization and thus without a legal basis .
We believe that each Member State must be able to judge which rules it is to impose on all who carry out financial activities within its territory , while in parallel it must be in a position to safeguard the possibility of effective monitoring by the competent supervisory authorities , as a means to ensure the sound operation of its banking system and the protection of the general good .
We disagree with proposals for the flexible implementation of the notification procedure in the case of the provision of services to another Member State and , even more so , with any thought of abolishing it .
We also believe that the pursuit of customers for the provision of cross-border services cannot be dissociated from the obligation to notify .
The supervisory authorities must be informed in order to make their supervisory duties and their task easier .
Moreover , the aforementioned activities are usually the prelude to a more systematic penetration of the market of the state in question .
The notification procedure must also be adhered to in circumstances where services are performed with the dematerialization of work without displacement , such as via the Internet .
Although the agency which provides the service is not located in the state of the purchaser of the service , the place of the " typical provision ' of the service is that state and , in addition , it is a clear case of the provision of a service to another Member State .
Any other interpretation would lead to substantially undermining the procedure in question due to the continuous expansion of cross-border services .
For these reasons , in other words , due to the unacceptable nature of the process that is being promoted and the directions that are being promoted in the interpretation of the second banking directive , we cannot vote for the report .
Rothley recommendation for second reading ( A4-0170 / 98 )
Mr President , the Green Group was united in voting against the Rothley report .
We consider it to be completely irresponsible from an ethical point of view that the way is being opened up for thousands of genes - whether from human beings , plants or animals - to be put to commercial use .
Parliament has given dispensation for a massive push towards the commercialization of the human body .
It is also disgraceful that Parliament has so clearly caved in to the huge lobbying interests of industry .
Only three years ago Parliament had the courage to reject this very same report .
Today it is agreeing to virtually the same document .
It surely demonstrates the inadequacy of Parliament that we are simply swallowing whatever the Commission serves up , or as it would say : let us allow Parliament to go on voting until the result suits us .
I think that the lobbying in support of the patents directive was one of the most aggressive that the European Parliament has ever experienced .
But that should not prevent Parliament from allowing ethical sense to prevail .
Parliament has failed pitifully .
It has failed to create a clear legal framework which sets down ethical limits for industry .
It has legalized bio-piracy and the road which leads there is now ready for multinationals to travel down .
They will be able to re-interpret the genes of plants , animals and human beings , which they have done no more than discover , as their own invention and to designate them as their property .
The patents directive will lead to an enormous privatization of nature , and it is a disgrace that it is also leaving the back-door open for the cloning of parts of the human body and the patenting of human embryos for research purposes .
It is disgraceful that the directive has not even succeeded in excluding things of this kind .
I think that today is a black day for human rights since human beings are clearly being debased by this patents directive and will become nothing more than raw materials for industry .
Mr President , if the patents directive which has now been adopted by Parliament is better than the one we debated and then rejected in Parliament the first time around , it is thanks to those who essentially voted against the directive at that time .
We saw to it that improvements were made , and in my view the wording which has now been adopted cannot be compared with what we rejected in Parliament on that previous occasion .
But I am also of the opinion that we should have completed the procedure and should have confirmed at second reading what Parliament voted for by a large majority at first reading . This would have enabled us to go into the conciliation procedure with the Council armed with real possibilities for putting forward , and having accepted , views which a majority in Parliament voted for at the first passage .
Parliament has not made full use of its potential here and we have ended up badly placed vis-à-vis the Council and the Commission , despite the fact that we are normally anxious to ensure that Parliament 's position is strengthened .
This we failed to do on this particular occasion , and that is why I too voted against the amendments .
Mr President , I voted for some of the amendments to this directive .
I find it extremely offensive that Mrs Breyer feels that anybody who supported anything to do with this directive was in some way lacking in any form of moral judgement on it .
No directive has caused me more concern and more anguish in reaching my decision .
There has been considerable criticism of lobbies .
However , for some reason those who lobby in favour of Mrs Breyer 's group are not lobbyists and , apparently , those who have a different point of view are lobbyists and thus decried .
I have checked with many of the patients ' groups who are alleged to be opposing this directive , and they have told me absolutely categorically that their names were used without their consent .
There are many areas in this directive that have caused us concern .
I do not believe that my vote today has made the world a worse place .
I hope very much that we will recognize that significant medical achievements can be achieved through biotechnology .
I , too , have had reason to be grateful for biotechnological advances as I am an insulin-dependent diabetic and I use insulin .
I am glad that we do not have to kill 50 , 000 pigs every time to get the insulin .
Thanks to biotechnology , insulin is now produced in a much more safe , consistent and stable way .
I am grateful for that .
However , I recognize that we have serious ethical considerations in this directive .
Yesterday , listening to Commissioner Monti , I became convinced by his reassurances that the ethics committee in relation to biotechnology will be a serious one with which we as a Parliament can interact on a regular basis .
Mr President , I wish to raise a point of order .
Earlier on I approached the Chair to have my name put down for an oral voting declaration not just on the Pirker report but also on the Rothley document .
I was wrongly informed that only written voting statements would be allowed .
But I assume that what applies to my colleagues applies to me as well , and I should therefore like to make an oral voting declaration .
( The President .
No , no ! )
But surely , Mr President , I was given the wrong information .
I was told that there are only written declarations in the case of second readings .
But since Mrs Breyer , Mrs Banotti and many others have been allowed to make oral declarations , I consider it important , on the basis of equal treatment , that I too should be allowed to make my own voting declaration orally .
Mr Posselt , there is no express provision in the articles of the Rules of Procedure .
However there is a parliamentary practice and this was mentioned to you by our colleagues of the President-in-Office .
This parliamentary practice is that there are no explanations of vote in such circumstances .
Since the matter was very delicate and there were colleagues who wanted at all costs to speak , I allowed myself , if you like , one more interpretation than is customary parliamentary practice .
I have this right since there is no article in the Rules of Procedure which obliges me to do it this way or that .
I usually follow parliamentary practice .
In this case however I judged that I should depart from normal practice .
I will therefore allow you to speak as I did for the other Members .
Mr President , firstly may I write into the proceedings of Parliament today that there was a lot of criticism of my colleagues from the Green Group for dressing up as pirates .
However , people were packed into the public gallery , presumably paid by pharmaceutical companies and those who stand to gain by this , wearing uniforms proclaiming the ludicrous slogan ' Patents for Life ' .
That was not referred to at all .
It is wrong that people were allowed to display that slogan in that particular way .
This is a black day for Europe .
This is the only European patenting directive and today we have opened a Pandora 's Box which our children and our children 's children will deeply regret .
We have given the go-ahead for large multinational companies to plunder and play fast and loose with the world 's genetic resources .
Time and time again in Holy Scripture we are warned against what is called genetic confusion .
Today 's decision gives the green light for the industrialized mixing and mutation of genes from unrelated species .
We do not have an ethical or moral framework which is workable .
We do not even have a basic ethical committee .
For a long time we will pay a huge cost for this while certain capitalist countries will earn huge profits .
Mr President , as I said before , I did not wish to criticize anyone , I simply wanted everyone to have the same rights .
I share the opinion of my colleague , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , that we have succeeded in improving essential aspects of the directive .
I take the view , and this goes well beyond my colleague 's position , that we have made major improvements to the directive and I am proud to be one of those who offered strong resistance to it the first time around .
It was said at the time that , if we say no , there would never be legislation , there would never be any directive , and better a bad regulation than no regulation at all .
All this talk has been proved wrong .
The directive before us today is now very much improved .
Nonetheless , I would have preferred it if we had done what my colleague Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf proposed on a number of points , including primarily the four amendments on embryo protection , in other words , I wish we had completed the procedure in full .
I take the view that we should have adopted a series of amendments and for this reason I voted in favour of just such a thing .
The Rothley report is an immensely complex report with considerable implications for the future .
Not only does it contain the possibility to coordinate the patent systems of the EU countries into one system , but also moral and ethical risks which , in our opinion , have been treated in too stepmotherly a fashion .
We wished that the demand for a special ethics committee in relation to biotechnology had been met ; we consider that the implications for countries in the Third World remain unclear , and we think that biodiversity has not been given sufficient consideration .
Our hesitation does not imply that we are against the creation of a joint European patent system , we can see the need for that .
But due to the question marks still shown in the report , we are extremely hesitant in supporting this report in its entirety .
We note that a majority of the amendments suggested by the European Parliament at first reading have been adopted by the Council .
We support two amendments in this vote , Amendments Nos 10 and 25 on marking of origin .
We do not consider it necessary to set up a special ethics committee , but share the views of the Council that the tasks can be fulfilled by the existing committee .
Even if these amendments do not get the necessary majority , we shall support the report in the final vote , and thereby the Council 's proposal , as we consider it a matter of urgency that the patenting rights in this field now be regulated .
Technical inventions including biotechnological inventions are protected by patent laws in all our Member States .
The purpose of the draft directive before us now is to harmonize these rules in respect of biotechnological inventions .
We have examined the proposals over the past 10 years and insisted on guarantees in a number of sensitive areas .
The wishes of Parliament have now been met .
We asked that cloning of humans be banned .
The directive bans cloning .
We asking that commercial or industrial exploitation of human embryos be banned .
This has been achieved .
We amended the proposals to assist biodiversity .
Our amendment has been included in the directive as well as references to the Rio Convention on biodiversity .
We adopted an amendment seeking to strengthen the provisions on ' farmer 's privilege ' , the rule giving legal protection to the practice of farmers using seed produced on their own farms .
The directive reinforces this rule .
We asked for an ethics group to oversee development in the area of biotechnology .
Last year the Commission established such a group and it is composed of eminent lawyers , scientists and theologians .
We have in fact obtained all the changes and safeguards we requested .
For all these reasons I will vote for the directive .
While the common position contains improvements vis-à-vis the first proposal submitted by the Commission , there is still an absence of provisions relating to the safeguarding of evidence of the origin of genetic material , which is especially important for the diversity of species and for animal protection .
There is also a need for improvements to be made in the area of agriculture , more specifically with regard to breeding .
We require a rule on the setting-up of an ethics committee to deal specifically with bio-technical inventions .
I regret the fact that too few Members of Parliament were in agreement with the amendments .
This directive must achieve a balance between the needs of industry and the general population 's wider concerns .
Biotechnology has the potential to do much good in the treatment of genetic diseases .
Work pioneered at the Roslin Institute near Edinburgh ( in my constituency ) is a good example .
The introduction of a human gene into a sheep programmes the animal to produce a human protein in her milk which has great potential for treating emphysema and cystic fibrosis .
The common position will enable scientists , researchers and those who finance them to obtain a reasonable return on their investment .
That is to be welcomed .
However , I am not convinced that the common position has done enough to meet the genuine concerns that have been expressed about developments in this area .
I would have liked the common position to be clearer about the need for a firm distinction between discovery and invention .
I believe we should have a separate ethics committee to look at patent applications .
There is need for informed consent in respect of material obtained from human subjects or from Third World countries .
Finally , the common position should have been clearer in stating that any animal suffering must be in proportion to the realistic human benefit .
While I acknowledge its genuine attempt to find a compromise between competing interests I cannot support the common position in its present form .
I am voting against this proposal for many reasons .
The Greens have worked consistently to mitigate the worst defects of this directive , but the common position is unacceptable in its present form .
The refusal of the rapporteur , Willi Rothley , to admit any failings in the text , despite the clear evidence that Parliament 's amendments at first reading have been ignored or corrupted beyond recognition , is deeply worrying and the democratic process will be seen to have failed if this position is upheld in plenary .
According to doctors and medical researchers , the directive will stifle research and multiply the costs of treatment .
Already the Manchester Regional Genetics Centre has received demands for royalty payments whenever it tests for the cystic fibrosis gene .
The patenting of genes would reduce collaboration between scientists and increase costs for charities fighting genetic diseases too rare to be commercially interesting .
Corporations owning patents will acquire a monopoly on part of our humanity .
Major corporations have been involved in underhand campaigning techniques such as a group of wheelchair-bound protestors who had allegedly received expenses and ' gifts in kind ' from Smithkline Beecham .
Life is not a commodity which can be bought and sold .
The industry lobby argues that the directive will increase food production .
Enough food is already being produced , the directive will require farmers to pay royalties on seeds and force more costly monocultural farming methods .
With the current wording of the directive , a patent can only be challenged if the likelihood of physical suffering to an animal can be demonstrated : even proof of a physical handicap would not be sufficient .
Human genes and embryos , animals and plants will all become patentable , legalized theft of genetic resources from developing countries will continue and farmers will be serious disadvantaged .
Article 5 ' appears both to permit and to exclude the patenting of human gene sequences ' .
That is the view of the British Society for Human Genetics - the clinical practitioners who will have to work with this text - and is a prime example of the way logic and common sense have been corrupted .
The existing patent treaty ( European Patent Convention Article 52.4 ) prohibits patents on surgical and therapeutic treatments and diagnostic methods for reasons of public policy and doctors ' freedom .
Although this is acknowledged in one recital ( 35 ) , it is negated in another ( 42 ) .
Article 6 will prohibit patents on ' processes for cloning human beings ' .
The definition of such processes has been taken out of the articles and inserted into the ( non-mandatory ) recitals , which is a strange place for such an important and controversial issue .
It leaves the door open for patenting of cloning processes on anything less than a whole human being .
Parliament passed a clear statement in the first reading that all methods in which human embryos are used should be made unpatentable .
The common position text has qualified this to say that it is only industrial or commercial uses which are nonpatentable , leaving the door open for patents on research models using embryos .
BioPiracy is the unauthorized expropriation and commercialization of genetic material without the proper informed consent of the donor .
Consent to donating genetic material for medical research is not the same as consent to commercialization of any resulting products .
Parliament recognized this problem in its Amendment No 76 which introduced a new article requiring voluntary and informed agreement of the person of origin as a precondition for a patent application .
The common position has deleted this provision , substituting only a poorly-worded recital calling for ' an opportunity ' to give such consent , citing data protection problems as the reason for rejecting Parliament 's text .
There is no guidance on what happens if the ' opportunity ' is not taken or is rejected ,
Parliament voted to extend the wording of the farmers ' derogation to re-use farm-saved seed and to breed from patented livestock because the Commission 's origin proposal was technically very limited .
The common position reimposes the same restrictions in defiance of the views of farmers .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights ignored a request from the chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to reinstate these amendments .
While I recognize that the common position is an improvement on the proposal which was put before us the last time we debated biotechnology patenting , I am concerned that ethical questions have not been entirely resolved .
Where there is an issue with an ethical dimension it is not enough to simply argue for a straightforward balance between the needs of a given industry and moral concerns .
The balance must always be tilted towards those moral concerns .
That is why I have supported the amendments , particularly those tabled by Members of my own group , which sought to strengthen ethical controls .
Like every other Member , I have sympathy with the patient groups who have campaigned for adoption of the report without amendment .
It is understandable that those groups want to see the issue sorted out as soon as possible .
I regret , however , that I cannot accept the argument that there is no more need for conciliation .
It is clear from the number of concerns which have been raised that the ethical dimension needs to be watertight , otherwise we will face enormous difficulties in the future , difficulties which would benefit no-one , least of all the people whom the patient groups represent .
I share the view of many Members that farmers ' needs are not adequately met in the common position .
There appears to be a fundamental misunderstanding of how farming operates .
It is absurd to impose a financial sanction on farmers simply because they wish to continue innovative practice as they have done for centuries .
I strongly resent those provisions which exclude the ' farmer 's privilege ' .
Discussions on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions have been going on for more than ten years now .
It is paradoxical that the international institutions , especially the World Trade Organization , consider legal protection of biotechnology possible although only with regard to foodstuffs as such , without taking into consideration the production process .
We have a current example right now , with the banning of imports of hormonized meat into the European Union , which is considered reprehensible .
With regard to agriculture , the legal protection of biotechnology must not be carried out to the detriment of what is mistakenly known as " the farmer 's privilege ' .
That is why the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations tabled Amendment No 6 and cosigned Amendments Nos 28 , 29 and 30 .
In fact , from time immemorial , farmers have had the right to use their own seed and have developed a specific system known as " farm-saved seed ' .
Only recently , the Commission made aid to durum wheat production dependent on the use of certified seed , consequently causing an increase in production costs for farmers .
As a result , a reduction in the area sowed with durum wheat can already be noted in the so-called " non-traditional ' production areas , which only benefit from a reduced level of aid to production .
The " farmer 's privilege ' , that is , production of seed on the farm and self-reproduction of the seed is the best possible barrier to the development of genetically modified seeds .
Indeed , their low production cost obliges the multinational seed companies to abuse their dominant market position .
We voted in favour of a number of amendments to Mr Rothley 's report on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
We did so in the interests of having the directive sent to the Conciliation Committee because we believe it to be a poor draft .
There are at least three major problems with the directive in its present form , now that Parliament has rejected all the amendments : the requirement of proof of invention has not been included in an acceptable form ; the " farmer 's privilege ' has not been safeguarded ; and the potential for patenting genes under Article 5 - not only for specific applications - deserves sharp criticism .
Each of these problems individually constitutes adequate grounds to reject the Council 's common position , but regrettably , this was not to be .
We find the decision to adopt Mr Rothley 's report quite irresponsible .
I supported most of the amendments to Mr Rothley 's report .
I have listened with respect to many of the arguments in support of the common position , including representations from my union , MSF , and from the UK Bioindustry Association , as well as from Mr Rothley and other MEPs .
I recognize the potential that biotechnology has for curing genetic disorders and for creating jobs in Europe .
I also appreciate that granting a patent does not , in itself , allow the patented product to be used .
Much of the lobbying from both sides has been misleading and even , in some cases , dishonest .
This is unhelpful to the lobbyists , as well as to MEPs trying to reach a position in an extraordinarily complex area touching on law , science and ethics , as well as many political questions .
Claims that approving the common position will result in cures that will otherwise be prevented , or that rejecting it will fatally harm European industry are unjustified .
By the same token , many opponents of the directive have exaggerated the practical consequences of granting a patent and have made arguments that imply that any patented product is approved for use .
Nevertheless , I cannot support the common position , primarily because the battle over the directive has become a political battle over whether or not there should be a speedy and lightly regulated expansion of biotechnology .
The significance of the directive goes beyond its specific provisions .
That is why it was important to establish a credible ethics committee , as proposed in Amendments Nos 11 and 12 ; to safeguard the rights of people in developing countries ; to safeguard farmers ' privileges ; and to protect biodiversity .
Given the powerful economic and political forces now looking to make money from biotechnology in the developing world , there is a serious danger of traditional rights being undermined and the poorest people in the world being further exploited .
Adopting a model on biotechnological patenting close to the US model , we are bringing into being a powerful bloc that may force biotechnology on the rest of the world .
This would be undesirable .
We need to go more slowly .
My votes registered my concern .
Today , companies like Bayer , BASF , Hoechst and Bohringer are trying to ensure that they enjoy legal protection for the gene business .
The Directive on legal protection for biotechnological inventions is designed to ensure that companies like this can make monopolistic claims by way of patents on the use of biological materials from animals , plants and human beings .
While these companies could then assert what are in effect rights of ownership of genetic information in the form of patents , the jobs and possible cures promised by the biotechnology industry are by no means guaranteed as a result .
What is certain , however , is that European biotechnology companies will profit from the directive .
Most of the resources and knowledge for the so-called biotechnological inventions of the northern hemisphere and the resulting patents come from Third World countries .
Indeed , 83 % of genetic diversity is to be found in Africa , Latin America and Asia , and this is a source of enormous profits when combined with traditional knowledge about the use of this biological diversity which has been acquired by the indigenous people and local communities in these regions .
This is particularly true for traditional medicine and agricultural knowledge .
At the moment , one in four pharmaceutical products is manufactured from tropical plants .
These remedies have often been developed from the traditional pharmaceutical products of indigenous people .
As a rule , the knowledge and biological resources of indigenous people are put to commercial use by multi-national companies without the approval or even against the wishes of those people .
The profit margin is considerable : Bayer , Agr.Evo , BASF , KWS and Hoechst are all in the top-ten list of world companies in agriculture , veterinary medicine and pharmaceuticals .
These profits will multiply with the EU patents directive , without any decision , approval , legal protection , control or participation on the part of those concerned .
These industries would also have access to human genetic material in the EU and the patenting of isolated parts of the human body would no longer be excluded .
Isolated genetic information would be regarded as the result of technical processes and thus as inventions which could be patented .
There have already been several attempts in the past to patent cell sequences of indigenous people against their wishes .
The European Parliament is now engaged in a vote on the compulsory expropriation of genetic resources .
For this reason I am voting against the Rothley report .
Pirker report ( A4-0157 / 98 )
I abstained on this report for a number of reasons .
The whole drugs issue in Europe and the way people deal with it is very disturbing .
People are refusing to accept that there are drug addicts out there , that there are people suffering from drug addiction and that something must be done to ensure that these people are protected and that they are not criminalized .
They are victims of exploitative people .
We have to deal with that .
There seem to be two different sides in this Parliament .
On the one hand , people are saying that drugs should be liberalized and others are saying that we are refusing to deal with the issue .
People have a duty to address the realities of life and one of those realities is that drugs are available and that young people and vulnerable people are being exploited by this .
We need to deal with this and should not run away from it .
Even the d 'Ancona report some months ago hyped up some very cynical arguments .
We have to deal with the realities of life .
We have to deal with the fact that not only are the victims of drug addiction but their families too are suffering .
We should not criminalize these people but look at ways of dealing with the root causes of the problem .
Until we deal with that and stop running away from the problem , we are never going to find a solution .
The reason I abstained on this report was because there were some positive things in it but there was also a reluctance to deal with the reality of the situation .
Mr President , I simply wanted to say briefly that I am very pleased to see such a large majority in support of the Pirker report , for this constitutes a turning point in EU drugs policy which first became evident in the debate on the d 'Ancona report , which unfortunately was referred back to committee .
The Pirker report has finally made it clear that there is in this House a large majority in favour of a hard and clear line against drugs .
I believe that what is important now is to ensure that this change of direction is also taken up by the individual Member States .
In Germany , for example , the debate has fallen a long way behind the position we reached on this issue in the European Parliament .
I only wish there were as much unity of purpose over drugs policy and the fight against drugs in national politics as there is in the European Parliament .
It is inconceivable that in a week when the European Parliament will endorse the ban on tobacco advertising , we should not take seriously the threat to life and health from so-called designer drugs .
We all know of the tragic deaths that have occurred amongst young people from Ecstasy but the insidious long-term damage to the brain and nervous system is not so widely known .
It is unfortunate that the proponents of the Amsterdam Treaty have not recognized the downside to the rush to European harmonization .
Crime has also been given the green light .
Customs posts on our Western seaboard , such as Casteltownbere in Cork , have been abolished just as we need increased vigilance concerning the trafficking of all kinds of illegal drugs .
Cannabis is legal already in Holland and there is a drive to legalize it from some Member States in the European Union which will only increase pressures .
We should say NO to the Amsterdam Treaty and NO to drugs .
We would like to point out that the Pirker report is an excellent report supporting the Commission 's proposal of an early warning system for discovering new synthetic drugs .
We do not , however , share his opinion that harmonizing the sanctions for the use of drugs would be desirable , as in several EU Member States today the use of drugs is not a crime .
Harmonization would mean that Sweden risks abandoning its present legislation .
We support the amendment that legislation should not only be based on punishment and bans .
We regard the Swedish line which amounts to punishment being turned into care or treatment to be successful and desirable .
Finally , we repudiate firmly any proposal for the legalization and the controlled use of drugs .
As Hubert Pirker highlighted , the share of so-called synthetic drugs - Ecstasy , LSD and amphetamines - within drug consumption as a whole is continually increasing .
Something thus needs to be urgently done with regard to this phenomenon , which affects young people during their leisure time in particular .
The different legislations regarding these drugs , whose exact content we are for the most part unaware of , do not offer a satisfactory and homogeneous defence within the 15 Member States .
They constitute a form of protection , which is even less capable of halting or reversing that increase .
Whilst carrying out preventive actions , we must also rapidly harmonize the fight against drug trafficking , possession and use of drugs .
That is why I support the Pirker report , particularly its dissuasive and preventive aspects .
The progressive ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty gives us new legal means and methods of policing to act against this particularly structured and organized from of crime .
Greater cross-border cooperation , in particular , could help greatly in this area and remedy the development of raves .
We ensure the protection of minors and young adults in many different ways .
This area should not leave us indifferent .
It is a part of the same logic as the fight against organized crime or public health protection , as is the fight against the other socalled traditional drugs .
For the same medical and social reasons , as a Member of this House and a doctor , I could not countenance their legalization .
Mr President , I welcome the production of this report by Mr Pirker .
Designer drug usage has greatly increased and it is vitally important that the EU co-ordinates its activities in response to the problem .
All national legislation should be carefully scrutinized to ensure that no loopholes exist which permit the manufacture of synthetic drugs merely by altering the chemical formula .
This should also be complemented by increased police and customs co-operation throughout the EU which targets criminals who ply this evil trade and who profit so much from the human suffering and misery they create .
The profit margins are considerable .
An Ecstasy tablet costs 20-25p to produce yet is sold for between five to ten pounds .
The rewards far outweigh the punishments that are meted out .
It is therefore essential that EU Member States harmonize their sentencing policy to ensure that the punishment fits the crime and acts as a major deterrent .
Action at a local level also has a critical role to play .
It should not be forgotten that these drugs are mostly sold in premises frequented by young people such as discotheques and bars .
Pressure must be brought to bear on the owners of these premises to ensure that they are taking every possible precaution to prevent their circulation .
It is proven that they knowingly allowed drugs to be sold in their establishments then the local police and local courts should proceed to revoke their licences .
It is therefore clear that if we are to successfully respond to the threat caused by designer drop then strong coordinated action at a local , national and EU level must occur simultaneously .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of improved control of so-called designer drugs in the EU .
Since criminal activities do not respect national boundaries , we consider close collaboration between Member States crucial to the fight against these criminal groups .
However , there should be no doubt that we firmly support the Danish derogation in judicial matters .
Thus , we do not endorse the approximation of penal legislation in Member States .
It is high time we became aware of the damaging effects of the production and consumption of both the so-called traditional drugs and the so-called synthetic drugs .
It is also time to envisage , and take , all necessary punitive measures to fight against their production and use .
We are satisfied with Mr Pirker 's report which , with regard to the control of these new synthetic drugs - LSD , Ecstasy and amphetamines - upholds an approach based on suppression .
Use of all drugs - narcotics , psychotropic substances , Ecstasy , LSD or amphetamines - must be banned .
Cooperation must be increased between police forces in the fight against drug trafficking .
For all these reasons , as the National Front never ceases to repeat , we must say no to the legalization of drugs , no to their free use and no to a society of and for drug addicts .
There needs to be a real awareness of the risks associated with synthetic drugs .
Indeed , apart from undesirable side effects such as anxiety attacks , hallucinations and confusion , they can cause liver disease , cramp , apoplectic fits , coma and even death .
These drugs , which are for the most part consumed by the 15 to 25 age group at raves , are dangerous .
It is vital , if only for this reason , that they are banned and that their sale and use be severely suppressed .
The doubly black market in synthetic drugs - which are extremely varied and unidentifiable - is one of the greatest threats to our young people .
The Pirker report is an excellent contribution and a fundamental alarm signal in the fight against this scourge .
I would especially underline two proposals that are contained in it - that we appeal to the Drugs Monitoring Centre in Lisbon to intensify its efforts to control synthetic drugs , and , most of all , the suggested creation of a Europe-wide ' drug-free schools ' campaign , which indeed has been symbolically launched today in Strasbourg .
This is an idea which I think is a very positive way of encouraging young people to protect themselves against drugs .
Although we have some reservations - especially as regards the creation of special supra-institutional units , a proposal we consider particularly negative , and also as regards the question of harmonizing legislation - we consider the report generally positive , because it faces up to the use of synthetic drugs , which has become a part of the world-wide drugs problem as a whole .
It accepts the principle that users should be penalized - although that never means criminalized - and the need to stop the production and prevent the sale of these drugs , and also highlights the urgent need for further research into questions associated with the use of these kinds of drugs , particularly their social and health aspects .
We should , however , have liked to see a much clearer and more direct approach to the need to attack the production of these drugs and the interests associated with them , preferably using the existing laws on the matter which , unfortunately , have only been implemented to a limited extent .
Synthetic drugs are dangerous even if they are often trivialised .
Because they are " untypical ' and consequently cannot be lumped together with popular drugs - heroine , cocaine , etcetera - , they are often alleged to be harmless .
Specialists know that this is not the case .
But young people are also well aware that designer drugs and " Ecstasy ' are far from harmless .
According to one survey , 95 % of the young people who were questioned classified the synthetic products as " drugs ' , while 90 % admitted that " Ecstasy ' damaged your health and 77 % knew that taking designer drugs led to addiction .
Nevertheless , many young people fall victim to these substances .
Because designer drugs have long been part of a certain youth culture , they are taken by young people at public or private dance venues ; they are consumed mainly by the 17-25 age group , but some are as young as 13 !
In the European Union , 5 million young people are understood to take synthetic drugs on an occasional or regular basis .
The phenomenon is so acute in Luxembourg that the Centre for the Prevention of Drug Addiction has had a report prepared on the problem of synthetic drugs in Luxembourg .
Synthetic drugs are manufactured in kitchen laboratories using chemicals .
That is why it is also vital for us to gain control of these substances , which often come from central or eastern Europe .
A ban on the production of and trade in designer drugs and amphetamines is absolutely necessary , and this must be introduced equally in all EU Member States .
National legislation must be adapted to meet the new situation .
The use of preventive measures and the provision of information are indispensable if the damage is to be limited .
Useful experience has been acquired in some Member States - including disco evenings and the use of the Internet - and this should be disseminated as widely as possible .
It is also important to improve research into the effects and side-effects of these relatively new drugs , so that particularly dangerous substances are recognized in good time .
However , what matters above all is to recognise the new drugs as dangerous substances , to take steps to prohibit their production and sale , and to educate young people so that we can limit the amount of damage done .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Water quality
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0146 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive on the quality of water intended for human consumption ( C4-0083 / 98-95 / 010 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr K. Collins )
Mr President , this is the second reading on this subject , having had the first reading one year ago .
We can thus be pleased that no time has been wasted between first and second readings , which is not always the case , as we saw this morning .
Consequently , we can be happy that the Council 's common position incorporates the factors which Parliament considered to be of particular importance at first reading of this " drinking water ' directive , especially the request for the development of a harmonized method of sampling in order to monitor the lead content of water .
I introduced an amendment on this subject at first reading , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , and this point has been taken up .
I am very pleased about this .
There is also another point on which we are extremely satisfied .
It relates to the definition of points of compliance .
The Council took up this amendment , approved at first reading , which defines the point of compliance as the tap normally used for human consumption . This enables monitoring of the conformity of garden taps , for example , to be avoided .
Nevertheless , there remain several points which we think pose a problem and I would just like to raise that of where copper is placed in the annexes .
Even at first reading , I insisted greatly on this point , noting that we wished to see copper moved from Annex B , an annex relating to chemicals , to Annex C which covers iron and manganese .
This change in annex would mean that , if the copper level was exceeded , as for all of the parameters in Annex C , Article 8 , paragraph 2 would apply . According to this article , the Member States would have to implement corrective measures , as quickly as possible , to restore the quality of water , if this is a problem .
This , to me , represents a basic guarantee of the quality of drinking water .
I therefore want to insist on this point in particular , and there are many of us who clearly wish to see this amendment taken up .
There are other improvements brought about by the amendments , in particular with regard to the parametric values of certain chemical substances such as trihalomethanes or physical parameters such as radioactivity , which should be considered in the light of the Euratom directive .
On the request for studies concerning endocrine-disrupting chemicals , I insist on the fact that we are waiting for the Commission to put these research programmes in place as speedily as possible so that we have all the necessary information .
With regard to lead , which has also been the subject of a number of discussions , the Member States must provide a statement on the incidence of lead piping , having a period of five years in which to produce a report on how they intend to replace it .
This relates to Amendment No 12 , which seems to be a good solution .
According to the text agreed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , Member States have five years to reach an initial level of 25 microgrammes per litre ; they must then conform to the standard of 10 microgrammes per litre within ten years , and not fifteen , as agreed by the Council .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would simply like to note that the cost of this measure for some countries which have lead piping in use within their water distribution networks has to be carefully considered .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing an important directive on water intended for human consumption : it is important both because it seeks to protect our health from the negative effects of water contamination and pollution , and because it will finally provide the Member States with a more flexible and appropriate framework of regulations than the current one , which goes back a good 18 years .
The directive will enable us to have a Community policy on drinking water and , finally , will enable consumers to be better informed .
The Member States will have to face investment , which will amount to around 100 000 million euros over the entire Community territory .
This is important because control programmes , methods of measuring and analysing the quality of drinking water and widespread control of the entire system of all drinking water supply networks will be implemented . More than 50 million kilometres of old pipes will certainly have to be replaced as well .
Unfortunately , however , water contamination causes various problems , despite being the source of life , as Mr Florenz pointed out at first reading .
Water is no longer odourless , colourless and tasteless .
Measures therefore need to be taken , in compliance with the provisions of the World Health Organization .
It seems incredible to me , and I fail to understand why the values of the WHO are taken into consideration for certain elements and not for others .
I am referring to copper , which is still included in the table of chemical parameters , which lists arsenic , cyanide , mercury , lead and other poisons .
Although the WHO has specified that a level of 2 milligrams of copper per litre of drinking water offers a suitable level of safety ; although the European Parliament , you will recall , voted in favour at first reading , including copper in the table of indicative parameters ; although the use of pipes with a low copper content could enable considerable savings to be made for the Member States ; although there is no alternative system as yet ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I apologise for not being present when the debate opened .
I was chairing the Conference of Committee Chairmen and I have not yet perfected the art of being in two places at once .
The priority principle that we are tackling here today is the principle of ensuring a supply of good quality drinking water throughout the Community ; water that does not harm human health and which is of a high environmental quality .
The directive we have in place at the moment has not really been well implemented .
The previous speaker has made the point : it is complex , confusing and , furthermore , it is sometimes based on scientific knowledge that was perhaps all right at the time but is now outdated .
The proposal presented by the Commission in 1995 - which is what we are dealing with now - established parametric values to be met by the Member States , based on the latest research findings and WHO standards .
We believe that it represented a significant improvement .
The common position was a further improvement on the original Commission proposal largely , if I may say so , due to the work of Parliament at first reading when we secured , for example , a total pesticides limit and concessions on keeping consumers better informed .
The proposal we have on the table today I believe to be a good one .
The reason is that it has been the product of cooperative and open decision-making .
I would like to congratulate the people who have taken part in the work leading to the paper today .
That includes the Commission and its staff ; it includes many people in the water industry ; and it includes many of the NGOs .
Without them we would not be able to have the proposal that is here on the table today .
There are just one or two issues I want to raise .
First of all , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is not at all happy about the common position insofar as it deals with derogations .
We want to tighten up derogations , most importantly on lead , where we have reduced the time which Member States have to implement the lead parameter from 15 years to 10 years .
We have also introduced a requirement for Member States to produce a plan within five years , stating how they intend to meet the lead parameter established in the directive .
I want to make it clear that we are not suggesting that Member States should eliminate lead within five years .
What we are saying is that Member States should produce a plan telling us how they are going to do it , at some time in the future .
Secondly , there is the question of endocrine-disrupting chemicals .
We have introduced a parameter for endocrine-disrupting chemicals and we have called for a study .
We think this is necessary given the growing political sensitivity of this across the Community .
Thirdly , there is the question of trihalomethanes .
We have tightened the parameter for trihalomethanes and we have introduced a requirement that Member States must produce a plan , again detailing how they intend to meet this parameter .
Fourthly , there is the question of radioactivity .
The committee has endorsed an amendment calling for the directive to include a radioactivity parameter to ensure that drinking water supplies do not become contaminated .
Fifthly , there is the question of copper .
I have made my views clear on the lobbying activities of some people associated with the copper industry .
I must say that they have been rather less than responsible in the way they have behaved .
Phoning my assistant at night on her home telephone number is not my idea of responsible lobbying .
It is not the whole industry , but some areas of it .
I deplore that .
But the committee decisively overturned the copper amendments , which have been resubmitted to plenary .
I am following the committee 's line and would therefore ask colleagues not to support these amendments : Amendments Nos 31 to 34 .
Sixthly , we have dealt with distribution and points of compliance .
We have attempted to clarify confusion over the definitions of the points of compliance and differences that exist between public and private premises .
We have tried to remove the ambiguities there .
The last point that I want to make is that the committee has endorsed my call for a stop to the practice of cutting off water supplies to private individuals .
In the part of the Community where I live , this is already illegal .
You may not cut off water supplies in Scotland .
In a civilized Community I believe we should not be depriving our citizens of one of the most basic means of survival - namely , a clean supply of clean drinking water .
Finally , sources of drinking water in this Community are varied .
Some countries rely on ground water , others on surface water .
The drinking water directive has to be able to allow for disinfection of water from all possible sources in order to make water safe for human consumption , while still being flexible and respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
This is a difficult balancing act which I believe this directive manages well .
Amendments Nos 1 to 30 improve the directive .
I commend them to the House .
This directive is an improvement on its predecessor .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Collins , for his eminent work on the directive on drinking water .
It is good to see European Parliament amendments incorporated into the common position .
Clean water in Europe is not to be taken for granted .
Even today , the majority of countries have to purify their drinking water either by proper technical or straightforward chemical treatment .
The strategy for Europe 's drinking water should , therefore , be based on pollution prevention and monitoring water quality .
However , the problem of monitoring water is that we only find what we are measuring for .
Therefore , it is very positive indeed that the directive on drinking water sets up monitoring requirements for substances that we suspect may be harmful to humans .
I also believe it is important for drinking water to be free of hormone-like substances , as mentioned by Ken Collins .
The fact that the overall boundary limit for pesticides in drinking water has been brought back into the directive is very gratifying .
We are living in a time when agriculture , in particular , has to take responsibility for its use of chemical substances and the consequences this has on natural resources .
I am glad that the reference to water as a commodity has been removed from the common position .
I concur with the chairman of the committee in advocating that Member States should produce a plan to replace lead pipes and taps for domestic water supplies within the next five years , and it is also my belief that more rapid implementation of the directive will be required .
Mr President , on the whole I can concur with the comments of the previous two speakers - the rapporteur of the Socialist group and the chairman of the committee .
Today , we are dealing with an important motion here .
Looking at the world situation in this area , an incredible number of children die because they really are not able to get adequate , clean water , which is critical to their development .
Thus , it is of course also important for us in Europe to ensure that we are approaching a position where clean water will be par for the course .
As the previous speaker said , in a very large part of Europe , it is not to be taken for granted .
Thus , it is equally crucial that areas where there currently is clean drinking water should be able to ensure an ongoing supply of clean drinking water for the future as well .
On behalf of the Liberal group , therefore , I support the amendment under discussion .
Mr President , we have also looked carefully at the major problems with this report .
And , generally speaking , we share the evaluation and approach adopted by the Committee on the Environment as regards its position on water intended for human consumption .
But there is one aspect on which we differ : I refer to the question of copper .
On that point we actually agree with the majority position on the Committee of the Environment , and prefer the earlier position taken by Parliament in the House at first reading .
This is because there is no current scientific research , particularly by the World Health Organization , that justifies the inclusion of copper in Annex 1 , part B. We therefore do not understand the insistence on putting copper in that category , which we also find somewhat surprising when we observe that no precautions are normally taken when using copper for water pipes , although the results of research in that field are public property .
We therefore consider that the appropriate course would be to confirm the position adopted by Parliament at first reading , namely that copper should be included in Annex 1 , part C. This , moreover , is the only attitude that ensures that the effects of copper on water will be constantly and strictly monitored .
These are the main reasons why my group , and I myself , were persuaded to sign an amendment , as other groups and smaller groups of Members have done on this subject .
The Green Group in the European Parliament fully supports Mr Collins ' excellent report .
The vote at first reading was already a good one and the common position significantly improves upon the 1980 directive .
Having said this , a number of the amendments retabled at second reading seem essential to us .
We are particularly interested in Amendments Nos 25 and 26 .
The first relates to endocrine-disrupting chemicals .
We are aware of the fact that , according to scientific studies , these substances are likely to have a devastating effect on the hormonal system at extremely low levels .
Furthermore , the second amendment , concerning radioactivity , shows that here too , since 1980 , a number of things have changed .
We now know that there is no threshold with regard to the effects of radioactivity .
Thus , even low levels of radioactivity cannot be acceptable in drinking water .
They must be minimized as far as possible , given that it is not possible to eliminate them altogether .
I would particularly like to draw your attention to tritium , which is an extra-heavy form of hydrogen .
Tritium has two properties , that of forming tritium water , but also that of incorporating itself into organic particles .
With regard to this , given its long life , it could play a potentially serious role in the area of cancerization .
Scientists are divided on the subject but I believe that , if we are to observe the precautionary principle , it would be wise to adopt the values agreed on by the Committee on the Environment .
I consequently entreat the Commission to support this amendment and we will thus be voting for a directive which is clearly an improvement on the previous one .
Mr President , when we talk of water or water quality , we need to be clear that there is only one body of water in the world .
Dividing water into two types - one which we can pollute and poison and use as a vehicle for carrying away our rubbish , and one which we need for our vital requirements - is just not a viable long-term proposition .
That is why we must provide the best possible protection for our entire water system in every corner of the globe , because the Earth 's water system all connects up together .
This report - and here I repeat myself - naturally constitutes the right step in the right direction .
Wrong decisions taken mainly in the past , such as the use of lead pipes which are a threat to human health , should be corrected as soon as possible .
The introduction of thresholds for radioactivity is no less important .
Given that the disinfection of water is particularly good business for the chemical industry , it will be important in future to ensure that the addition of chemicals is kept to an absolute minimum .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my general support for Mr Collins 's report , particularly as regards water quality .
Cases such as those which occurred a few years ago in Cornwall , in the United Kingdom , and in Evora , in Portugal , put water quality on the front page and caused questions to be asked in Parliament , because they were matters of concern to public opinion on environmental problems .
And the viewpoint emphasized here , which gives priority to supplies , protection and the recovery of polluted waters , putting water quality first , is one that deserves our support .
Thus there is clearly greater demand for the control of trihalomethane - I would draw your attention to the fact that there are a number of systems where no such analyses are carried out - , and for the long-term replacement of lead pipes .
The proposal contained in this report is therefore a good one , just as the proposal that came out of the first reading was positive .
As at first reading , however , the point on which I disagree concerns the classification of copper as a chemical parameter , instead of an indicative parameter .
We consider that the Commission has not changed its position .
In its introductory memorandum ( COM ( 94 ) 0612 ) , the Commission stated that the use of copper materials in water distribution systems was not in itself harmful to human health , unless there was any difficulty in meeting a parameter value of 2 mg / litre with appropriate controls on the water treatment process ; since then , the Commission has so far shown no evidence of change .
To quote my friend Mr Collins , it appears that there has been greater sensitivity to other lobbies , perhaps those supporting substitutes for copper , than there has been concern to treat the existing research with appropriate rigour .
For that reason we have once again signed an amendment making copper an indicative parameter under this directive .
Mr President , like others I welcome this directive and the report on it .
It is an important directive because it simplifies the original very complicated directive on drinking water and it tightens up some of the limits in a very important way , particularly as regards the content of lead which we allow to enter water .
The question I have to ask is one which has not really been highlighted so far in this debate - I know the rapporteur is very well aware of it - and that is the question of who pays for this .
The United Kingdom is one of the countries which has a problem with lead piping .
Friends of the Earth , which is an environmental organization , estimated a few years ago that there were four million houses in England in which the lead concentration in drinking water exceeded the limit proposed in this directive .
It is worse news if you are Scottish : not only do you have Mr Collins as your MEP - or one of them - but you also have 589 000 homes out of a total of 2.1 million which have lead piping .
Clearly something has to be done about that .
I wonder whether the Commission might like to comment on Amendment No 12 , which Mr Collins highlighted .
Mr Collins has added something to the directive which was not in it and which asks that the Member States be required to produce a report and forward it to the Commission on the incidence of lead piping in households within their territories and to come forward within five years with a plan to replace the lead piping in these homes .
In other words , it is the Member States , not the Commission , which are to produce the plan .
It would be interesting to know whether the Commission backs this idea or whether the Commission itself has it in mind to tackle the incidence not simply of lead piping for the water suppliers but the lead piping in homes .
Has the Commission any up-to-date statistics by Member State as to how much this would cost ?
The figures I have seen relate to 1993 and they came to £ 2 billion in England and Wales for the replacement of water companies ' lead pipes and £ 6 billion for the replacement of domestic pipes .
That is a very large amount of money and I would be interested to know whether the Commission has any figures on that .
Finally , we have to go into this issue with our eyes open about the likely cost .
We have a terrible record on this : for example , the nitrates directive , which has been on the statute book and is being widely ignored because the Member States cannot afford to implement it .
Mr President , the common position has clearly progressed at Parliament 's second reading of the proposal on the quality of water meant for human consumption as the debate has gone on .
For that I am grateful to Mr Collins .
The proposal addresses the current insistence on human health , although , as has been said , things have gone too slowly .
Nevertheless , it is important , and this has also been said here , that we are certain that the plans to get things on the right footing will come into being within the next five years at the latest .
The amended proposal will guarantee greater flexibility with the removal of the limitations of Article 13 .
The present proposal also addresses environmental challenges more closely .
As a whole , the directive means the demand for good quality drinking water has been met in its proper proportion in respect of health standards .
We have to be prepared to pay for good drinking water .
In such a vital and influential matter as health and health care , we cannot afford to allow a policy to exist that would end up in the quality of drinking water being bargained over , due to limitations in standards of quality .
Finally , I would like to say , regarding the matter of copper , that it must be regarded as a health issue , and addressed as such .
Mr President , annexed to the directive on drinking water is a classification of substances that can have an effect on the quality of drinking water according to their degree of danger .
After Parliament 's first reading , the Council changed the classification of copper and put it in the same class as poisons like arsenic .
Copper has been a good , safe and durable material for making drinking water pipes for many decades in Europe .
If the Council 's proposal goes through and copper becomes classified as a poison , a very misleading message will be going out to the consumer .
It is true that copper is dangerous in large doses , but our bodily system actually needs small amounts of it , which is what the Commission did itself acknowledge .
It has also been scientifically ascertained that a copper deficiency is a bigger concern than an overdose of it .
In a study undertaken by the World Health Organization in 1997 it was stated that there was no scientific evidence that the use of copper as a material for manufacturing pipes for drinking water would lead to health-related problems caused by drinking water .
Another study done in Stockholm in 1997 showed that copper is not harmful to babies .
If copper comes into contact with a group of noxious substances it is easily replaced by those other materials , the effect of which is unknown .
In this world of all sorts of additives , colouring agents and preservatives , it is right that the quality of our drinking water is controlled , and this report is on the right track in this respect , but there should be moderation in everything .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I would like to thank the Members for their thorough treatment of the Council 's common position .
I also appreciated the comments by the rapporteur , Mr Ken Collins , on the collaboration between the Commission and the European Parliament .
We , too , found this extremely positive , with the entire procedure being handled in complete openness , thus also making it possible to involve too the NGOs Mr Collins particularly mentioned .
Before making my own comments on the amendments , I would like to emphasize that the Council 's common position took shape in the wake of tough , long-drawn-out negotiations between the Council and the Commission .
Thus , some of the provisions are not entirely to the satisfaction of the Commission , but on the whole , this is an acceptable compromise , fully endorsed by the Commission .
With this in mind , the following can be accepted : Amendments Nos 6 , 8 , 15 and 19 can be accepted in their entirety .
Amendments Nos 12 , which Mrs Jackson particularly asked about , and 29 can be accepted in part .
In principle , Amendments Nos 13 , 26 and 30 are acceptable .
The Commission cannot accept the following amendments : 1-5 , 7 , 9-11 , 14 , 16-18 , 20-25 , 27 , 28 and finally 31-34 .
Let me briefly comment on the most significant amendments , not least because they have figured in today 's debate .
First , I will consider the derogations , that is , Amendments Nos 16 , 17 and 22 .
The Commission has accepted the proposals put forward by the House at first reading ; these have been incorporated into the proposal .
However , they have subsequently been amended by the Council , since this was one of the most difficult issues in the negotiations .
I must emphasize , however , that derogations will only be granted when health is not at stake .
Derogations will be time-restricted , and the Commission will be involved .
Thus , the major reservations of the House have been taken into consideration .
Unfortunately , my impression is that it would be extremely difficult to renegotiate this point with Council .
The rapporteur , Mr Collins , and Mr Lannoye both mentioned parameters for radioactivity , touching on Amendments Nos 23 and 26 .
I am delighted to be able to report that the Commission accepts the introduction of parameters for radioactivity in Annex 1 part C of the directive , dealing with indicator parameters .
This is the first time such parameters have been incorporated into a directive not covered by the Euratom Treaty , so I must congratulate the House on this amendment .
Amendments Nos 8 , 25 and 30 then deal with hormone-like substances .
Naturally , the Commission has made careful note of Parliament 's reservations on this point , and I , too , share these reservations .
The Commission 's services are currently investigating the matter and guidelines will shortly be produced on what the policy should be .
I am aware of Mrs Kirsten Jensen 's reservations on hormone-like substances , put before the Committee on the Environment on 22 April 1998 , because this is also in the works .
The same applies to the question the rapporteur asked the Commission .
Reference to Article 4 , section 1 ( a ) , is acceptable , but at present , it is too early to introduce parameters into Annex 1 part B. I especially welcome the idea of a study of hormone-like substances , provided , of course , that the necessary budgetary funds are made available and approved by Parliament .
However , it is neither necessary nor appropriate to convert this idea into a directive .
Finally , we come to the provisions regarding lead , that is , Amendments Nos 12 and 28 , which Mrs Jackson particularly mentioned .
The rapporteur 's idea of requiring reports from Member States on how to tackle the problem of lead is an interesting one . It can be accepted with essential rewording at one point .
Amendment No 28 , where a period of 10 years is proposed for complying with requirements on lead , cannot be accepted .
The Commission has proposed 15 years , and this has been accepted by the Council .
It is to be hoped that this period strikes a reasonable balance between considerations of public health and the practical difficulties of complying with the standards , and Mrs Jackson 's point about the costs of the existing proposal should perhaps be mentioned .
Finally , we come to Amendments Nos 24 and 29 on trihalomethanes , THMs .
The idea of a report along the lines of parameters for lead has also been accepted .
The proposal for a more stringent limit on THM cannot , however , be accepted .
Let me also state that the reference to Directive 89 / 106 on building materials is a very useful amendment ; it is acceptable in its present form .
In conclusion , allow me to make a few comments on copper .
As Mr Collins stated , all the amendments were rejected by the Committee on the Environment , and yet it seems to have played a part in the proceedings .
This has at least been emphasized by a number of Parliamentarians speaking today .
The Commission 's proposal follows the limit value for copper put forward by the World Health Organization , WHO .
This value was not changed in the WHO 's ongoing review that took place in Geneva in April 1997 .
Since the basis for this value is health , it is reasonable to retain it in Annex 1 , part B. Should new documentation be produced warranting a change in the classification of copper , this will obviously be taken into account .
As far as the Commission 's services can ascertain , the WHO has not changed its stance so far .
Therefore , we see no reason to propose a change to Council .
The Commission agrees with the section of the amendment dealing with prior consultation with Parliament .
However , I would like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that this is already covered in Article 11 , section 1 .
Adjustments can only be made to parameters for copper and other parameters following a Parliamentary hearing , since this is a matter of procedure under Article 189c .
Finally , I would like to quote the comments of the rapporteur , Mr Collins , to the effect that many other provisions in this directive are more important than this one point concerning copper .
Mr President , that concludes my main comments on the amendments .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I would only like to focus on the fact that in the speeches that related to the subject of copper there was no intention of changing the limit value of copper , but its classification , from B to C. We all fully agree on its limit value .
That , Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , seems to me to be more of a comment than a question .
I therefore think we must let it pass , but Mrs Baldi also has a question she would like to put .
Mr President , I would like to know whether the Commission believes it is right to include copper among the chemical products , or rather the poisons , such as arsenic , cyanide , mercury and lead , despite the fact that the WHO has declared that a level of 2 milligrams of copper per litre of drinking water provides an adequate level of safety .
I would simply like to ask the Commissioner if she realizes the impact her decision may have with regard to copper .
In very many countries , we currently have water mains pipes made from copper .
By classifying these pipes in the same way as arsenic , you could mislead people into thinking that they are dangerous .
I think this is particularly serious .
Mr President , on the basis of what the Commissioner has said , I have a written text from competent organizations to the effect that the 1997 revision of the WTO accepted that there was no scientific basis for the rumoured acute effects on health of copper in drinking water and described the recommendation which it had made at that time as provisional . And , to finish my question , that same Commission , in document COM ( 94 ) 612 , accepted that the use of materials from copper in the water distribution system was not in itself harmful to the public health .
I would therefore like to know , since , from what the Commissioner said , she gave different answers without answering my question : is what I gathered from the documents wrong ? Does it not stand up to scrutiny ?
Or perhaps the Commissioner was not fully informed and answered in that way in order to stick to the fact that she did not accept the amendments , in other words to transfer copper from 1B to 1C , and remained silent with regard to the failure to mention asbestos as one of the dangerous materials .
Mr President , still on the subject of copper , I would like to raise a question I mentioned in my speech , which has not been answered by the Commissioner .
The question is this : if we accept that the Commissioner 's information on the hazardous nature of copper is correct , then some other products will have to be substituted for it .
And I put it quite bluntly : what product are we going to use to replace copper and what research has so far been carried out on the proposed replacement ?
That is the specific question I would like to have an answer to , inasmuch as no answer has yet been given by either the Commission or the Committee on the Environment , and I think the answer is of the greatest importance .
For that reason I hold all the more firmly to the position I have already stated , namely that the World Health Organization does not , as a matter of fact , recognize copper as being as hazardous as the committee says it is here .
I now give the floor to Mrs Flemming , but may I remind you that these questions must not turn into a second debate .
Mr President , it has been stated that copper presents no risk to health .
That is simply incorrect .
Very young children , for example , can be seriously harmed by this substance if a certain genetic predisposition is present .
There have been actual cases of cirrhosis of the liver in infants .
There was a case in Austria where a mother prepared tea for her child every day with the first water that came out of the tap in the morning . This water contained copper accumulated overnight from the copper piping .
The child died .
This was complicated by the fact that the mother used a copper kettle to prepare the tea .
Very young children can therefore die from the effects of copper poisoning .
People have got to be made aware of this .
Mr President , I have to say that this lack of discussion really ought to be in the form of questions .
So I shall put one or two questions and stick to the normal procedure .
Will the Commissioner agree with me that the copper industry should be congratulated because of the efficiency with which it has been able to persuade people , who otherwise know nothing at all about copper , of the efficacy of the case ?
Will she further agree with me that the committee overwhelmingly threw out the copper amendments because it believed that it was not a question of copper being outlawed as a means of conducting water to households , but of a means of making sure that we operated proper health standards ?
Nobody is suggesting that copper should be replaced in households .
Nobody is suggesting that it should be thrown away and replaced with something else .
We are introducing parameters relating to lead .
We are , for example , asking for studies on endocrine disrupters .
We are aware that there is no perfect way of making sure that water is supplied to households .
What we are doing is in fact making sure that when households receive that water , these households are healthy .
Will the Commissioner agree with that assessment of the situation and will she agree that the Environment Committee - which , incidentally , was not attended by any of the people who have raised this matter - will she agree with me that the Environment Committee got it right ?
Mr President , I do not wish to get involved in a post-mortem on the debate in the Committee on the Environment , who voted and who did not .
What I have noted - as emphasized by Mr Ken Collins - is that the proposal was rejected .
With reference to the many questions asked , I have to say it is obvious that our basis in this regard is the WHO .
It has amazed me that several speakers today have questioned the health guidelines prepared by the WHO .
From all our experience , my political position is that if the WHO adopts health-based guidelines , we would do well to follow them .
I must say that Europe is not going any further than the countries we normally use as a comparison .
The USA and Japan both have extremely stringent standards in this area , and in addition to Mr Ken Collins ' comments on the copper industry , I have to say we are not aware that standards in the USA or Japan have had any significant impact on the copper industry in those countries , so I do not share his concerns here either .
Thus , I cannot endorse the amendment switching copper from section B to section C.
Thank you , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Limit values for pollutants in ambient air - Strategy to combat acidification - Sulphur content of liquid fuels
The next item is a joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0161 / 98 by Mrs Pollack , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive relating to limit values for sulphur dioxide , oxides of nitrogen , particulate matter and lead ambient air ( COM ( 97 ) 0500 - C4-0662 / 97-97 / 0266 ( SYN ) ) ; -A4-0162 / 98 by Mrs Hulthén , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community strategy to combat acidification ( COM ( 97 ) 0088 - C4-0436 / 97 ) ; -A4-0174 / 98 by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive relating to a reduction of the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels and amending Directive 93 / 12 / EEC ( COM ( 97 ) 0088 - C4-0283 / 97-97 / 0105 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , experts suggest that at least 40 000 people across Europe suffer from the effects of air pollution , and those who have respiratory ailments are at risk of early death from the dangerous cocktail of chemicals in the air they breathe .
It exacerbates the suffering of the vast numbers of children who have asthma .
City dwellers suffer most , of course , since pollution from vehicle traffic is becoming a bigger problem every year .
In fact , as pollution from industry declines , the sheer increase in the volume of cars on our roads ensures that clean air is becoming a scarce commodity .
Health problems aside , vegetation in forests , crops and vulnerable eco-systems are succumbing to steady poisoning , and our precious European cultural heritage - buildings and monuments which have stood for centuries - are being eaten away by aggressive chemicals in our air .
The draft directive we are discussing today is a radical and far-reaching attempt to put an end to this tale of disaster .
It is the first time legally-binding emission limits have been set .
I should like to congratulate the Commission on its proposal .
Members should understand that the standards being proposed are the result of unanimous agreement over two years in broadbased working groups and are based on the latest World Health Organization 's standards for protection of human health .
They have been subjected to cost benefit analysis and are very stringent .
Four different air pollutants are being tackled in this first daughter directive , and more are going to follow in future directives .
These four : sulphur dioxide , oxides of nitrogen and particulates and lead were laid down in a framework directive as the first air pollutants to be tackled .
I cannot go into the details of the proposals here in the short time allotted to me .
Each pollutant has different limit values and the whole thing is very complex but , briefly , the directive sets limits for emissions to be achieved by 2005 and 2010 .
It demands publicly-available and government-approved action plans for areas where emissions are at present higher than these limits to ensure that concrete steps are taken to meet the deadlines .
This is very important .
In some cases it provides alert thresholds to inform the public about the air they breathe and it has a built-in review in 2003 .
It also establishes uniform measuring criteria and techniques .
Because of the gaps in scientific knowledge of the effects of some of these pollutants , there are plans for more research .
One of the things I have done is to suggest some specific areas where research is needed , where the scientific information is simply not available at the moment .
Briefly , the main amendments agreed in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection do the following : firstly , we have attempted to increase public information at every opportunity .
We have added alert thresholds for NOx and particulates .
I know the Commission has a bit of a problem with accepting the idea of an alert threshold for particulates and I accept that the WHO does not set any safe limit and therefore cannot set a level at which the public ought to be informed .
I still feel that we ought to try this .
The UK has such a threshold .
For NOx , the Environment Committee has asked for the alert threshold which is used by France .
It is lower than that existing in the United Kingdom .
We have set a lower threshold excedence for SO2 which I recognize is quite optimistic but , in view of the serious effects on public health of high levels of SO2 over even a short period of time , I hope the Commission and the Council will find a way to reduce their existing figure , even if they feel they cannot go the whole distance .
The working group on this did not recommend an hourly limit figure but I believe it is more realistic to try to reduce excedences than to go for the drastically lower limit value that some colleagues want .
However , SO2 limits need to be looked at again in the review in 2003 and we must be aware that some Member States have a lower figure than that in the text .
There is a slight problem with the Commission 's proposal on protecting eco-systems from SO2 .
The WHO guidelines looked at a range of values for different sorts of vegetation - crops , forests , sensitive vegetation and lichens .
The Environment Committee has decided to go for the limit value set to protect lichens which are the most sensitive , and this is considerably tougher than the Commission text .
My feeling is that the Commission and the Council ought to look at this again to see if they can find a better way of setting the appropriate limits .
Opting for an arbitrary number when you are trying to deal with four different things is quite difficult .
Amendment No 32 is a compromise text for the siting of measurement stations in small areas of sensitive eco-systems which I believe is a considerable improvement on the Commission text .
We have also , rather reluctantly , opened the door to some localized tolerance of excedences on lead where some non-ferrous metal smelting works will simply not be able to meet the deadline even with the best available technology .
Obviously that will have to be watched very carefully .
Colleagues from the Green Group want considerably stricter limits on NOx and particulates ; these amendments are wellmeaning but absolutely unrealistic and were all defeated in committee .
Nevertheless , we need to look carefully at progress by 2003 .
The substances are dangerous , and I share their desire to go faster .
But the levels in the text already mean a big reduction in NOx and particulates and , in order to achieve what they suggest , we would practically have to ban cars and shut down industry .
As a Londoner , I know only too well the problems of air pollution caused by traffic and there are no easy solutions .
But a number of other directives in the pipeline are going to contribute towards this .
Finally , I should like to thank the Commission , the UK representation , the committee secretariat and my own assistants for all the hard work they have done .
I hope that regional and local authorities will be able to implement the very strict limit values which are laid down .
I commend the directive and the amendments to the House .
Mr President , in February we voted on reducing the sulphur content of fuels in vehicles , so that car exhaust emissions might be cleaner .
Now we have a proposal from the Commission which aims to lower the sulphur content of slightly heavier fuels : this is a matter of industrial fuel oil or industrial diesel , where we are talking about a sulphur content which is many times higher .
In the Auto Oil programme we had to reduce sulphur content to values in millionths .
Now we are talking about percentages .
The basic premise is that the oil industry has to be able to rid the process of this yellow stuff so that it does not pass into the atmosphere .
This is technically quite possible , and the costs are not unreasonable .
The Commission 's proposal is the first real proposal for a directive to look into the issue of acidification , a matter Mrs Hulthén just spoke of .
This is important particularly for the environment , nature and , obviously , for the preservation of mankind 's cultural heritage .
The facades of many fine buildings are now peeling away because sulphurous emissions are damaging them .
We should , however , stress that this measure is also important for local air quality .
This is what Mrs Pollack has been talking about here .
Sulphur emissions from liquid fuels could react with particulate matter and cause harm to people 's health .
It must be said that this is really not just a problem of acid rain in northern Europe , but in all communities : in all built-up areas of the European Union there are problems which stem from poor local air quality and sulphurous emissions .
I wished to suggest that this proposal should also cover maritime fuels .
The Commission originally outlined something of the kind , but there is nothing on the subject in this proposal for a directive .
Parliament is , in all probability , going to approve the proposal by the Committee on the Environment that the EU should start to reduce the sulphur content of maritime fuels .
This seems totally justified .
In fact , I have the impression that the Commission 's own calculations suggest that the costs of the whole acid rain operation could be reduced by 15 % if maritime fuels were to be included in this directive .
International negotiations have been held at IMO , the International Maritime Organization , but nothing has been achieved , and I think we will have to wait .
In the same connection it has also been agreed that the Baltic Sea should be designated a special area where no maritime fuels may be used which have a sulphur content that exceeds 1.5 % , but obviously someone has fouled up somewhere in the talks because the North Sea and the Irish Sea have been excluded from these special-case zones .
They should be included ; there is no doubt about it .
I now wish to turn to the matter of diesel , or light fuel .
This is not only an important issue for the environment but is also one of political interest , as Austria , Finland and Sweden were allowed a four-year transition period during which they were seen to be able to enforce their tighter restrictions on sulphur content for gasoline .
The committee now supports the position that the threshold currently in force in Austria , which is 0.1 % , is the right one , although it is less than the Commission proposes .
The Committee on the Environment has also decided to propose Article 100 as a legal basis for the directive .
As the rapporteur , I must say I differed on this point , as this could very well serve as a measure to protect the environment , in which case Article 130 could be selected . This might well help Austria to insist on its more stringent limit if the Commission does not bring the Austrian sulphur content figure into the picture .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing here with an internal market problem and with an environmental protection problem .
In this case we are not setting threshold values for fixed installations , refineries or large combustion plants .
No , what we are doing here is setting threshold values for fuels which can be freely traded on the internal market .
We have now heard from a number of speakers that burning these fuels is the cause of the acidification of our forests and countryside .
But at the same time there is also the internal market aspect .
On 18 February , we adopted the directive on diesel oil and petrol by a large majority , and here we also want to see a reduction in sulphur levels .
Now we have to do the same for heavy and light fuel oil , because its sulphur content is still very much higher .
Let us then strive to ensure that there are uniform standards for light and heavy fuel oil in Europe , because in my view there is simply no justification for allowing a hotchpotch of measures , whether this applies to the internal market or indeed to environmental protection .
What does it in fact mean when we say that only the Member States can decide what thresholds they should set ?
In practice this means that some will go further than others , and that will result in serious distortions in the internal market for light and heavy fuel oil .
I have checked the figures and I would be pleased to let the Commission have these yet again .
In some Member States , more than half of their requirements are met by imports and exports , so we are not talking about small quantities as far as the effect on the internal market is concerned .
And then there is also the environmental aspect .
It may well be the case that one country permits a 0 % sulphur level for light and heavy fuel oil , while others do not .
Sad to say , the clouds that carry acidification do not stop at borders .
The country where 0 % applies may perhaps be worse off than before .
No , we need uniform standards .
That is why this is an internal market problem .
That is why we need Article 100a as the legislative basis .
Secondly , we must include marine diesel , because 14 % of all N and X emissions and 16 % of all sulphur emissions come from the shipping sector alone .
There is a real need for something to be done here , and this also includes the retrofitting of old ships .
So , ladies and gentlemen , let us get to work , let us turn the fuels of Europe into a sulphur-free zone .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal for a strategy against acidification is important and on the right track .
It focuses on a reduction in acidic emissions .
The strategy is still , however , not ready for a decision on it .
Before the plan is approved there are some background details that are out of date and inadequate , and that badly need putting right .
Because of acidification it is essential that a reduction in emissions plays a priority role in the strategies of countries applying for EU membership .
In connection with the issue of enlargement , supporters for the protection of the environment should look at the possibilities of reducing emissions which drift over certain frontiers .
The introduction of new technology to these countries may well achieve important results for Europe both more speedily and more effectively .
Furthermore , the directive on the reduction of the sulphur content of liquid fuels must be extended as quickly as possible to include regulations for solid fuels and factories that use them .
As the IMO have not limited the sulphur content of maritime fuels they will not be included either in the EU directive on liquid fuels .
Some of the Baltic States are not controlled by EU directives .
It thus follows that ships can go to these countries outside the EU to fill their tanks if bunker oils are covered by the directive .
This is of no advantage either to the Baltic Sea or the Union .
Other action needs to be taken .
In connection with oil refining , the nature of the work gives rise to a considerable number of non-commercial by-products , which the refinery uses as fuel .
It is not very appropriate to impose separate restrictions on refinery fuels .
Results can be just as good for the environment by restricting oil refinery emissions as by restricting individual properties of fuels themselves .
It is important for the European oil refining industry to demonstrate flexibility of choice with refinery fuels .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I would like to welcome the reports of Mrs Hautala , Hulthén and Pollack all of which make an important contribution to improving air quality and protecting human health in the environment within Europe .
By setting down these new standards for air quality in our cities we can oblige industry to start to take the necessary measures to tackle the current sources that are causing the problems of air pollution within our cities .
In particular , problems of sulphur , sometimes SO2 and of course nitrous oxides , NOx , in our atmosphere that originate from the burning of a variety of dirty fuels in factories , motor cars and from other sources such as ships .
One should not underestimate the extent of this problem .
In its first stage it is invisible and very gradual in its effect but finally results in lifeless rivers , decayed forests and thousands of early deaths due to respiratory disease .
This is a price that we cannot continue to pay and therefore these reports are absolutely necessary to avoid further damage , decay and death in Europe .
The proposals to reduce sulphur content to 0.1 % by weight in a variety of fuels are technically realizable and within reasonable cost limits .
Other measures of particular note are the proposals to create an SO2 emission control area in the North Sea .
This proposal and its associated measures will tackle a source of emissions previously beyond EU regulation .
In particular Mrs Hautala 's report also questions the legal basis of that proposal .
Is it a market measure or is it a measure to protect the environment ?
My previous remarks demonstrate that to me it is first and foremost a measure for environmental protection .
However , I am prepared to listen to colleagues and accept that there are very real market implications to the proposal which are needed to control sulphur .
Finally , the proposals in this package can only be seen as necessary steps and I would therefore urge the Commission and the Council to accept Parliament 's reports and amendments in the sure knowledge that rivers , forests , towns and cities from Middlesborough to Milan will be healthier , cleaner and better places to live in future .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the people of Europe need cleaner air , and I think that the Commission 's proposals on air pollutants are splendid .
They are a major step forward .
Anyone who comes from a country which has very strict threshold values cannot expect all the countries of the European Union to fall into line overnight .
We have to set more modest targets and be grateful for any gradual progress made .
However , I hope that you will permit me to offer three observations from an Austrian point of view .
Firstly , in relation to Article 8 on informing the public , I would like to offer a few basic observations .
According to the Commission 's proposal , information is to be regularly passed on to relevant organizations .
Experience in Austria over many years has shown that it is not necessary to have an active system for passing on this information .
While there may be a keen appetite for it at the beginning , interest soon tends to fall off .
In Austria , information of this kind can be obtained at any time by teletext , Internet , telephone or fax and , since everyone now has access to one of these information channels , it is proposed that this information should not be actively transmitted but simply made available .
As far as the threshold for sulphur dioxide is concerned , a one-hour limit value of 350 micrograms has been set , which is derived from the WHO 's 10-minute average value of 500 micrograms .
Austrian experience has shown , however , that the proposed one-hour threshold cannot guarantee compliance with the 10-minute average value .
We propose that the one-hour threshold should be set at 250 micrograms in order to achieve the right correlation .
As regards nitrogen oxides , it has to be said that , although an alarm threshold is a wonderful idea , a value of 800 micrograms is really much too high , Madam Commissioner .
We propose that this value should be lowered to 400 micrograms . Even if these proposals cannot be adopted immediately , I would still hope that in due course all European countries will be able to comply with these Austrian limits .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a Council Directive on the reduction of sulphur in certain liquid fuels , in particular fuel oil and diesel fuel , should enable us to fight against certain atmospheric pollutants known as " acid rain ' .
The effects of this pollution are well known , above all in urban areas .
Besides , I dealt with this issue in my report on the 19992000 Community action programme on pollution-related disease within the framework of sulphur dioxide emissions .
But this legitimate concern for environmental protection must not let us forget the economic aspect , in particular with regard to the competitiveness of Member States ' industry .
Indeed , there are great disparities here .
Some are large consumers of heavy fuel oils , others use less .
I thus tabled some amendments in committee , so that Member States could take the necessary measures to guarantee that heavy fuels could not be used on their territory if the sulphur levels exceeded 2.5 % in weight instead of 1 % , as the Commission specifies .
This would enable greater respect for competitiveness . However , it appears that the standards demanded are increasingly stringent and risk endangering industries which - and I insist on this point - understand the common interest and the need to fix reasonable levels .
This severity leads to a danger of seeing these standards reduced .
Nevertheless , the Commission 's proposal seems acceptable overall .
I would ask you to respect this text , rejecting unnecessarily severe amendments to the text . It is already very demanding and should avoid the even more constraining and unrealistic standards of the rapporteur .
Mr President , when I read Mr Hulthén 's report about the strategy to combat acidification , it makes me think of my own country , the Netherlands .
The discharge of ammonia by the agricultural sector in the Netherlands has only decreased by half of what it should have done , and that very disappointing result does not , unfortunately , come as a complete surprise .
This makes it clear that extra measures are needed to achieve the desired environmental objectives .
So I am very pleased , as is my group , that the Commission has worked out a strategy to combat acidification and we are in full agreement with the tightening up in the Hulthén Report .
The fact of the matter is that the Commission proposes that the critical threshold of acidification , which was exceeded in 1990 , the year of reference , be halved by 2010 , but I think that this plan could be tightened up slightly .
I agree with Mrs Hulthén that this target must be brought forward to 2004 and that by 2015 the critical thresholds may no longer be reached anywhere in the countryside .
Furthermore , agricultural subsidies must be coupled to stronger requirements on ammonia discharge .
That is what we call integrating the environment into agriculture .

It is absolutely essential , in this context , that sustainable organic agriculture is encouraged , otherwise we will not get there at all .
I hope that Commissioner Bjerregaard will have enough influence on her colleague Mr Fischler to achieve this target ; however , as we read Agenda 2000 , Mr Fischler 's proposals to the Commission are also encouraging for the environment , including the proposals on agriculture .
Finally , I think it is extremely important that the fight against acidification does not stop at the current boundaries of the European Union .
Candidate countries must be helped , and must be prepared , to meet these standards .
Mr President , alongside the fuel burners in power stations , car engines are a serious risk to people 's health .
We have to acknowledge this , even though the people who vote for us may be car owners .
We are now imposing limit values for liquid fuels , apart from kerosene .
This is a positive step .
They must be made more stringent for solid fuels also , especially coal .
In accordance with the EU energy strategy , the exploitation of natural gas and renewable energy sources is to grow .
Improving fuel efficiency and the combined production of electricity and heating will reduce emissions .
As , however , energy consumption is growing by 1 % a year , the same limits must be achieved for coal as those we are now imposing on oil .
The soil is becoming acidic , and I would especially like to remind the Commissioner that the more stringent limit values achieved in the northern regions , in Finland , in Sweden and in Austria must be allowed to be maintained , and the EU should impose the same limits on other countries too .
Mr President , the three reports on limiting air pollution leave me both pleased and infuriated .
On the one hand , they deal with such problems that the EU should pay much more attention to , problems which by their nature cross borders and demand international legislation that is binding .
Overall these reports signify a reinforcement for combating air pollution , even though there are shortcomings , aeroplane fuel , for example , has been left out .
Overall , however , attention has been paid to acidification , for instance , which is a greater problem in my country than in many other EU countries .
This is good .
It has full support from the Green Group and also from my own Swedish Environment Party .
On the other hand , however , the constant ambitions for power among certain EU Parliamentarians has cast an ugly shadow on the Hautala report , against the wishes of the rapporteur .
The Committee on the Environment demands that the legal basis be changed from Article 130s to 100a , which is not based on environmental care , but solely on the wish of the European Parliament to change the decision procedure from cooperation procedure to codecision procedure .
This may of course be justified at times , but in this context it means that the rules be changed from a minimum of rules to total harmonization , which may have negative effects on the environment in countries with stricter rules , Sweden being one .
Besides , Article 100a prevents EU countries from proceeding with stricter rules in future .
Referring to 100a ( 4 ) is pointless , as everybody knows it is no guarantee for the environment , but a barely reduced possibility for exemption , which can hardly ever be used ; and what is more , the Amsterdam Treaty will make it even worse .
It is a good thing , therefore , that Parliament wishes to sharpen the fight against air pollution , but it is a bad thing that given the choice between environmental protection ....
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr President , with regard to the directive on the reduction in the sulphur content for certain liquid fuels , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection does not seem to have followed the advice of the rapporteur , who recommended approving the legal basis proposed by the Commission , opting for Article 100a which , if accepted by Council , will make this legislative act dependent on the codecision procedure .
The Committee on the Environment has insisted on the fact that the benefits obtained by a reduction in the sulphur content of fuels would be far greater than the costs borne by the industry to adapt the refinery machinery .
We hope that common sense will prevail in codecision and that , to give an example , the fact that North Sea oil has a very low sulphur content , unlike Mediterranean oil , will be taken into account .
Consequently the southern countries have different problems from the northern countries , for which harmonization will have to take both environmental and employment problems into account .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , among the many types of environmental damage to which people are exposed , air pollution is considered the worst by most people , and is classified as the most unpleasant .
That is why I very much welcome the reports which we are discussing this afternoon : a strategy on acidification , directives on thresholds for sulphur dioxides , nitrogen oxides , lead and particulate matter , and a reduction in the sulphur content of various liquid fuels .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , and I think that her work is well-suited to the task of both reducing air pollution over , or in , the European Union , which complements the legislation adopted under the Auto Oil Programme , and also of making water cleaner , because we should not forget that 50 % of water pollution is caused by airborne pollutants .
Air pollution is a transboundary phenomenon , but it is also a local one , and both phenomena can be effectively reduced by these directives . That is because air pollution which is due to the high sulphur content of liquid fuels , especially in narrow mountain valleys , is the precise cause of pollution at local level , whereas in other places , where the topography is flat , where there are wide valley floors , transboundary air pollution becomes much a more perceptible phenomenon .
I think it is very important for industry , which is confronted with these directives , to choose new technological solutions , and not so-called end-of-pipe strategies , when it upgrades ; otherwise industry will not improve , its products will merely become more expensive .
I would like to point out that some 15 years ago the town in which I live had the worst air pollution problem of any town or city in Austria , and that by the introduction of new technologies the emission of industrial pollutants were reduced to a mere 10 % of the previous level . Furthermore , the industry in question is now in better shape than it was then .
The adoption of this directive is an important step towards preventive health care , and I think that it should be accompanied by a strategy for preventing the formation of low-level ozone .
I hope too that the amendments to the Hautala report , where the Committee on the Environment voted for one of the Austrian / Finnish / Swedish thresholds for sulphur and fuel oil , will be accepted by the Commission and that a further step will therefore be taken towards an improvement in air standards in the European Union .
In conclusion I would like to add one more thing .
In the Middle Ages it used to be said that " town air makes you free ' .
During the twentieth century it often had to be said that town air makes you ill .
I look forward to the day when we can say that everyone in Europe is able to breathe sweet and pleasant air .
Mr President , I am not going to dwell on the already well-known damage which acidification causes to the environment as we have already talked about this in great detail .
With regard to the reduction of sulphur levels and Mrs Hautala 's report in particular , I support a change to the legal basis and feel that we could thus adopt Article 100a on the internal market and harmonization of legislations , in order to avoid distortions in competition .
We know very well that sulphur levels differ when it is a question of a fuel coming from the north of Europe , as opposed to one from the Persian Gulf .
Paragraph 4 of Article 100a enables Member States to apply far more stringent national provisions for environmental reasons .
This thus enables Austria , Finland and Sweden to continue to impose much stricter limits . This would thus not cause a problem .
I must , however , say to Mrs Hautala that I believe she perhaps goes a little too far and that consideration should be given to the economic problems which her report may give rise to .
I am therefore not in favour of widening the field of application of the proposal to include heavy fuel oils and diesel fuel , nor aviation kerosene , which represents only 0.2 % of total sulphur emissions and which only affects the upper layers of the atmosphere .
Similarly , with regard to bunker fuel , I think it is preferable to wait for the negotiation of the MARPOL Convention within the framework of the International Maritime Organization , which should soon be concluded and which should set levels for the sulphur content of bunker fuels and define special protection zones .
I think it is reasonable to wait for the end of these negotiations and not to disturb their progress .
Finally , still for economic reasons , I would like reasonable deadlines for the reduction of sulphur levels to be fixed for heavy fuel oil and diesel fuel .
If a deadline of 1999 is set when we are already halfway through 1998 , I think the timescale is too short and that this will be detrimental to the economy .
Mr President , the three reports we are now discussing are closely related .
The Pollack report concentrates on air pollution as a threat to citizens ' health .
I am convinced that it is quite possible to set higher demands than the Commission has done , at least in some areas .
Certain countries have already achieved more .
I shall , however , concentrate on the Hulthén report on a common strategy to combat acidification .
It is a good report on a very serious environmental problem .
The Committee on the Environment considers a more ambitious goal to be in place by the year 2015 .
In certain areas the critical limit will be exceeded , but those areas ought to be very easily counted .
In Sweden the subsidies towards the liming of lakes in order to raise the pH level have been reduced .
It is calculated that this measure alone may be the reason why a fish stock of approximately 3 000 and one million invertebrates are eliminated .
In many parts of Europe there is significant damage to forests through acidifying emissions .
In 1993 the use of coal was responsible for 60 % of emissions of sulphur dioxide .
The proposal to stop national subsidies for coal is therefore significant .
Instead , penalty fees ought to be levied on coal for the emissions of sulphur .
The rapporteur has also mentioned other effects of acidifying emissions , the effects on health , for example .
Seeing data from the Commission 's own external report on different types of energy , it becomes clear that if we replaced nuclear power with coal power over a ten-year period , the Union would have had 20 000 more cases of cancer than we have today .
We should also admit that the safe Western nuclear power provides a considerable contribution against acidification as well as the greenhouse effect .
I am also convinced that calculations of the total costs for air pollution will show that it pays to try to achieve Parliament 's objectives , and it ought to be possible to support them with effective economic resources .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European and national measures to control air pollution have been in force for almost 20 years .
But traffic continues to be one of the main sources of pollution .
Our group has from the outset underlined the importance of combating pollution at its source .
This is also the objective of the two directives which are dealt with in the reports presented by Mrs Hautala and Mrs Pollack .
Our group also supports basic proposals for improvement in this area , although I think it important that the new legislation should be compatible with other basic provisions , such as the IPC directives dealing with plant approval .
In many Member States there is also the problem of inherited contamination , due to the centuries-long practice of ore mining .
This long-term degradation means that greater levels of contamination are to be found in and around lead smelting works , and pollution of this kind can hardly be reduced by the required amount in the period of time prescribed . I therefore think that a tightly drawn derogation is necessary in this area .
The relevant amendment which has been proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection goes too far in my view and would in practice make derogations possible for just about every town and city .
That is why I have introduced my amendment .
Furthermore , I would ask for consideration to be given to a typical problem which is encountered on the borders with the former Eastern bloc countries of Hungary , the Czech Republic and Poland .
While we should continue to keep a record of the high quantities of pollutants which , for the foreseeable future , will continue to be blown into our territory from these countries , this contamination should not be charged to the EU countries when emission thresholds are being assessed .
I call on you to support these amendments and I would also like to ask the Commission if it is prepared to accept them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , sulphur dioxide emissions represent a major problem in Europe .
For some regions this means damage to forests , for others it constitutes a threat to important historic monuments .
However , for us all it is a matter of the health of the people of Europe .
Measures have to be introduced in different areas .
One of the most important is undoubtedly a reduction in the sulphur content of vehicle fuels .
The Auto Oil Programme , in which Parliament has stated unambiguously what is required in terms of environmental policy , is currently at a difficult stage of conciliation with the Council .
Today 's debate concerns an important supplement to the Auto Oil Programme and relates to certain fuels which in some respects constitute a considerable proportion of total SO2 emissions .
This applies particularly to heavy oils .
The threshold values advocated by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection will make it possible to improve the situation without making excessive demands of anyone .
This will be guaranteed primarily by the derogation provision which allows the sulphur limits to be exceeded in cases where SO2 pollution can be justified .
Nonetheless , the Commission 's proposal needs to be modified in two respects . The scope of the future directives should be extended to bunker oil and marine diesel .
In justifying its proposal , the Commission itself referred to the fact that we are dealing in this case with a significant source of emissions , especially in the area of the Baltic and parts of the North Sea .
However , it would be wrong simply to await the outcome of international negotiations .
It would be better for the European Union to exercise a degree of pressure by setting thresholds in its own area .
In my view , the same importance is attached to the question of what the legislative basis of the directive should be , that is to say Article 130s or 100a . We all know that this is a question of law for which the European Court of Justice has developed clear criteria .
The Commission has put forward certain reasons for choosing Article 130 . I do not wish to comment on these reasons or go into details .
I would just say that , in the arguments in favour of Article 130s , there has so far been no discussion of why the directive from the Auto Oil Programme is based on Article 100a . In this case we have the same conditions and the same legal basis .
Article 100a therefore applies here too .
Mr President , I agree that we have to combat acidification , but I also want to point out that Europe is very diverse and the Swedish lakes are not the same as certain arid areas in the south . So , Madam Commissioner , we need to be much more flexible when producing legislation .
Madam Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am worried by the problem we have with environmental legislation .
In general , it is not complied with .
You know that , Madam Commissioner .
It is hardly complied with at all .
And it seems to me that the problem is partly due to the legislation being unsuitable .
I want to repeat that although the strategy to combat acidification is very important - reducing the sulphur content of fuels - we have to take account of certain sectors .
I tabled some amendments - which were not accepted by my group - about oil refineries and cement factories .
Oil refineries are going to be subject to the directive which limits emissions from large combustion sources , so I do not think it makes sense to have a double regulation , especially when this stricter one already exists .
And cement factories burn all sorts of fuel . They do not permit sulphur oxide because they incorporate it into the clinker , and that should be taken into account , Madam Commissioner .
In any case , I welcome the whole set of rules on regulating acidification , but bear in mind that if they are not flexible they will not be complied with , and that will cause enormous frustration .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Eco-label
The next item is the report ( A4-0119 / 98 ) by Mr Poggiolini , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on a revised Community eco-label award scheme ( COM ( 96 ) 0603 - C4-0157 / 97-96 / 0312 ( SYN ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner , today we are at first reading of the revision of Regulation No 880 / 92 on the Community eco-label , an ecological quality label for low environmental impact products , five years after its adoption .
In these five years , the system has not operated very well . Very few EU citizens have seen products on their supermarket shelves labelled with the European logo , a little flower consisting of a corolla of 12 stars around the " E ' for Europe .
The many difficulties and delays in implementation , obvious problems of conflicting jurisdiction and the excessive red tape involved in the procedures have meant that criteria have been defined for just 12 product groups . For this reason , only 40 licences had been granted to 22 manufacturers up to September 1997 .
While the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection fully supports the Commission in its aim of maintaining and improving the Community eco-label , it has nevertheless introduced significant and courageous changes . Numerous amendments have now been approved .
First of all I will deal with the Commission 's proposal to set up a legally recognized European eco-label organization with the task of establishing the criteria for each product group . In view of the difficulties of this approach , I proposed the replacement of the new agency by a technical committee for the eco-label within the Commission .
This was made up of competent national bodies but presided over by the Commission itself , whose important role as a political mediator and technical coordinator should be maintained , in our opinion . The consultation forum , which the Commission had inexplicably abolished , was then reintroduced and reinforced , to enable all the parties concerned to have more say in the decision-making process .
The scope of the regulation has also been extended to services . This represents a significant opportunity for small and medium-sized businesses and for craft businesses .
One result of this could be , for example , a car body shop that only uses ecological paints . Another important factor we now consider is technical reliability as determined by product quality .
We should ensure that ecologically sound products are also of good quality and that consumers are satisfied and prepared to buy them a second time . If they are not good quality there is a risk that no-one will buy them , however eco-friendly they may be .
One change has been introduced that will be appreciated by eco-label users : a 50 % reduction in the cost of annual duties for small and medium-sized businesses and for developing countries .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has chosen a logo showing a single flower , which is much better than the extremely complicated system proposed by the Commission . Additional information on at least one and no more than three factors of environmental impact - such as low atmospheric pollution , energy efficiency and toxicity - may also be added .
The last but no less important obstacle to overcome before we relaunch the European eco-label is its relationship with the numerous national systems already existing in various Member States . These are known and respected by many European citizens : for example , the Blue Angel in Germany or the White Swan in the Scandinavian countries .
Our European flower will have to co-exist with no fewer than eight European systems .
In Article 11 , the Commission proposed that national systems should be replaced by the European system within five years of this regulation coming into force , but only for those product groups for which specific Community criteria have been established .
It is not true that we want to abolish existing systems .
As evidence of our very real desire to ensure that the various labels can co-exist in harmony and to ensure the European system is as strict as possible , I hereby as rapporteur express my full support for Amendment No 52 . This was submitted by the Greens and by the GUE / NGL as an amendment to Article 11 , and it is also supported by many members of other groups .
It calls for an independent study , requested by the Commission , to ensure the environmental criteria laid down for the European label are at least as strict as the standards set by the best national system . For the European eco-label to take off , it must also be properly publicized .
Only then will it at last be recognized and appreciated by consumers as an important means of contributing to a greener and cleaner world . These ideas are perfectly in keeping with a European Union that has given itself a common currency and that aspires to expansion and to increasing economic and political integration .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur .
I remember our interesting and sometimes emotional discussions about the subject in which I was impressed by his democratic and charming behaviour .
But what about the issue ?
The European Union 's eco-labels scheme is a good initiative to protect the environment within the internal market .
As a voluntary scheme aimed at promoting environmentally-friendly processes of production and helping consumers to make an informed choice about their purchases , eco-labelling is a potentially promising instrument .
I therefore welcome a revision of the EU eco-label scheme , because until now the eco-label scheme has not had the success it could have , as Mr Poggiolini pointed out .
The Commission 's proposal , however , will not in its present form result in the success of the EU eco-label scheme .
It has been sharply criticized by , amongst others , stake-holders such as consumer and environmental organizations in the industry .
First , the introduction of the graded label is not supported by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection because of its complexity .
Consumers will not have the chance to understand why more than one flower will be attributed .
This graded label will be too confusing , since it is difficult to understand the reasons behind the attribution of two or more flowers to a product .
Our group will therefore vote in favour of an eco-label with one flower which also gives extra information about the environmental criteria used for attributing an eco-label to that specific product .
Secondly , our group agrees with the rapporteur that the formation of an independent European Eco-label Organization ( EEO ) will not overcome the difficulties that arise from the complex procedures for establishing criteria for eco-labels .
Our group supports the rapporteur 's initiative for a compromise - the establishment of the technical committee for the ecolabel under the responsibility of the Commission .
We also agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to bring this in line with Article 100a of the Treaty .
Finally , we cannot agree with the Commission on the total harmonization of the national and private eco-labels for products that have received an EU eco-label .
I should also like to refer - as Mr Poggiolini did - to the Nordic Swan and the Blue Angel .
For the time being they should be recognized as strong labels .
Before we harmonize , we have to create a time schedule so that in the future we can bring them together .
Finally , I hope the Commission will succeed in getting the European public to recognize a strong eco-label .
Mr President , Mr Poggiolini 's report is , on the whole , an improvement on the Commission 's proposal .
One big problem , however , remains , namely , section 1 of paragraph 11 of the Commission 's proposal on the possibility of banning national and multinational eco-labelling systems .
In my opinion there is no disadvantage in having parallel systems .
In Sweden , one of the countries with the best functioning eco-labelling , we have two competing systems , which is all to the good of eco-labelling .
Besides , it is by no means certain that the EU flower will have reached the same qualitative level or will include as many products as the existing system , even after five years .
There is an obvious risk here of destroying an eco-labelling system which is working well , providing consumers with good information .
Why cannot the Commission , which is otherwise so keen on free competition , be so in this case , too ?
That is something we would appreciate !
The best thing would be for section 1 of paragraph 11 to be left out , that is , to be done away with .
We have also tabled such an amendment .
The next best thing would be to adopt Amendment No 52 .
That would at least limit the potential damage that would be caused by interfering in national systems .
Mr President , we all have good reason to support Mr Poggiolini 's endeavours to improve the EU 's ecolabels , but the truth is the eco-labelling system is not working at the present time .
The Commission 's proposal contains a very serious mistake , which Mr Sjöstedt and Mrs van Putten referred to .
And that is that there is a wish here not to permit free competition between the various label systems , and that the Commission is proposing that in five years ' time alternative ecolabel systems will have been eliminated .
The Commission calls this harmonization .
I find this puzzling , as generally the Commission defends free competition and the market economy .
We think that good and successful eco-labels should not be withdrawn in this manner , and I call on the rapporteur to approve our amendment , which is based on the belief that this would be a rash move .
It would be best if the Commissioner for the Environment , who is from Denmark , were to agree to take out of the Commission 's proposal the point relating to the proposed withdrawal of the alternative labels in five years ' time , because it might mean that perhaps the world 's best eco-label system , the Nordic Swan , will meet its death .
I would now ask everyone if this beautiful eco-flower should administer the deathblow to our swan , among others , which works so very well .
It works because national organizations are involved in the decision-making process , and the whole operation is very open .
Mr President , I would like to pursue this theme .
Discovering which eco-label is best in practice depends simply on use and the market .
Eco-labelling is practically the only means environmental policy-makers have that provides the consumer with information on the environment when that consumer makes meaningful purchasing decisions .
The more consumers assimilate the significance of the eco-label and demand it of the products they buy , the keener manufacturers will be to start manufacturing more durable and environment-friendly products .
The Nordic Swan has achieved this kind of consumer confidence .
It is visible and reliable .
Here in Parliament , for example , it is on the photocopy paper .
On the other hand , the European eco-label is still a long way off from being instantly recognized and accepted .
It is not known any more among manufacturers than it is among consumers .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection voted on whether we would get rid of national eco-labels .
The verdict that they would be withdrawn within five years was carried by a majority of one .
Now I hope that debate on the matter in the part-session will result in a decision that the national labels will be replaced only if the common European eco-label proves to be better than any single national label .
Otherwise , it will be a pity if perfectly good systems are ruined in this way , or their impact weakened .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for a good report .
I believe a common European system will also be able to give consumers the guidance they need when making good and correct environmental choices and getting products manufactured in an environmentally friendly way .
I would like to emphasize what Mr van Putten said : that one flower is enough for guiding the consumer correctly ; too many flowers would cause confusion .
I also hope that in future this will not only be confined to goods , but that we will be able to eco-label both transport and services .
Like many others here I share the anxiety about removing existing systems , private , regional and national .
I do hope that both the Chamber and the rapporteur take note of this anxiety and ensure that we keep the systems that already exist and work well today .
Mr President , first of all , my thanks go to the rapporteur , Mr Poggiolini .
I will cover the various components of the report .
As has been mentioned , EU eco-labelling is one aspect of a broader strategy intended to promote sustainable production and consumption .
This coincides with efforts by the House aimed at improving the standing and knowledge of consumers .
Even though considerable progress has been made over the last two years with the Community scheme in its present form , there have been practical difficulties with the effect of the statutory instrument .
Based on experience gleaned so far , along with strong indications from the Council , the Commission concluded that it was necessary to improve and streamline the approach , methods and work routines of the scheme in order to make it more effective and transparent .
Thus , on 10 December 1996 , the Commission adopted the proposal we are dealing with here today .
There is no need for me to explain the proposal yet again .
The House has , after all , made an excellent job of stating the principles behind it .
However , following various informal discussions with Members of the House , the Member States , the responsible ecolabelling organizations and NGOs , the Commission recognizes that a number of points in the proposal are simply not good enough .
Nonetheless , the Commission 's overall attitude is that the Commission must defend its own proposal at first reading before the House .
The Committee on the Environment has proposed some comprehensive changes to the report , and at the present time , the Commission is only able to accept 7 of the 34 amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment .
At present , the Commission cannot accept some of the additional five amendments either , due to be voted on in the partsession .
Nevertheless , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Poggiolini , very much indeed for the considerable amount of work that has gone into this proposal .
I think it is natural to inform the House that at this point in the decision-making process , the Commission can only accept this limited number of amendments , but that the Commission will , however , be willing to consider further improvements to the proposal later on in the procedure .
The Commission has taken note of the points in the financial review .
Regarding the amendments , therefore , my comments today are as follows : with regard to the establishment of the European Eco-label Organization , the Committee on the Environment rejects the original idea and proposes establishing a technical committee on eco-labelling .
In defence of the scheme that we ourselves have prepared , I can say that , to a large extent , the question is whether the structure we are creating can be considered to be a legal entity , and whether it can consequently carry out the technical tasks to be dealt with .
The original Commission proposal to introduce a graduated eco-label has also been rejected , as was mentioned here today , in Amendments Nos 5 , 12 , 26 and 28 .
The idea of having one flower along with a selection of further information to the consumer disregards the original proposal , because the House does not accept the original idea of having several labels to give consumers the information they need .
Thus , this amendment amazes me , but I have followed the line of reasoning set out by the House today .
Finally , there is the amendment to extend the area of application of the scheme to include services as well .
This is covered in Amendments Nos 3 and 14 , and I regard that as an interesting possible development for the eco-labelling scheme .
However , that would mean some sections of the provisions of the proposal would need to be reworded , and we will have to come back to that some other time .
The amendments to lower the fee for using the Community label - Amendments Nos 31-34 - go further than the Commission 's proposal to set a ceiling of ECU 4 000 .
That , too , is an interesting proposal , but the Commission has not assessed the financial consequences of the EEO ; consequently , these amendments cannot be accepted .
A crucial element of the Commission 's proposal is increasing transparency and streamlining procedures .
Re-establishing the former eco-labelling consultation forum - as in Amendments Nos 16 , 17 and 27 - is an original proposal , approved by the Committee on the Environment .
It aims to reintroduce current hearings of special interest groups in the revised scheme .
The current role of the consultation forum is not satisfactory , mainly because its input is only taken into consideration at a very late point in the decision-making process .
The idea of revamping the eco-label advisory forum cannot be accepted , partly because of the unsatisfactory representation of small and medium-sized companies and non-European producers and the need for better technical expertise .
The Commission endorses the principle of financial contributions to non-state consumer and environmental organizations as mentioned in Amendment No 17 .
However , since there is already provision for this kind of financing outside the framework of the eco-labelling scheme , the Commission views this amendment as superfluous .
The Committee on the Environment is asking for the legal basis of 130s , part one , to be extended to include 100a .
The two articles together require the inclusion of 189c and 189b as well , and since these two procedures are inherently contradictory - at least , under current provisions - we cannot accept this amendment .
A number of other amendments have been tabled by the House , but , as I have stated , we cannot endorse many of them at the present time , and I will refrain from elaborating on all of them , except for some specific amendments for which the House desires a more detailed explanation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was adjourned for three minutes )
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0464 / 98 ) .
Before we begin , Mr Wijsenbeek wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I wish to speak in connection with Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure and Annex II .
I submitted a question on 31 March , directed at Mr Kinnock whose turn it is to answer questions today .
So I was a bit surprised yesterday , when document PE268.631 was given out in which the questions are listed , to see my question as Question No 77 under other questions , not therefore among those which will be answered by Mr Kinnock , so that there is hardly any chance that my question will be answered .
I would like to point out that my question would have been the fourth question if it could have been answered by Mr Kinnock .

I am very pleased now to see that Commissioner Van Miert is here today , who also knows about the subject of my question , that is , ship insurance and the system of ship insurance .
I would like to put the question to you , because my question , normally speaking , should have come up for discussion , and under Rule 41 only the President of this institution can decide whether a question is admissible or not , the President evidently has done that , but I do not see that the Commission can change who my question is addressed to on its own authority and can say : no , that question should not go to Mr Kinnock or you cannot ask Mr Kinnock that question .
Our President should deal with that and , at the very least , the questioner should be informed earlier than the day of Question Time .
I am therefore asking you as a matter of priority whether Mr Van Miert would like to answer my Question No 77 .

Mr Wijsenbeek , as a great expert on the Rules of Procedure - I modestly admit you are more of an expert than I am - you know that the admissibility of a question is a matter for Parliament , whereas it is up to the Commission to decide which Commissioner should reply .
So , Mr Wijsenbeek , all we can do is accept the Commission 's choice of whichever Commissioner they think should reply , whether they are right or not .
That is the reason for what has happened to your question .
So , now that the Commission has heard your comment , please let us begin Question Time , since this Presidency has no powers to resolve your concern .
So , we shall now commence Question Time .
Question No 39 by Concepció Ferrer ( H-0472 / 98 )
Subject : Free movement and transport of goods
Over the last few years groups of French farmers have attacked lorries carrying Spanish fruit and vegetables on their way to various EU countries .
Last December the Court of Justice condemned the passivity of the French authorities because they have been unable to prevent these attacks .
Bearing in mind that there have been a number of road blocks and incidents in Brittany and that such events happen year after year , does the Commission intend to take any steps to remind France of its obligations when ensuring compliance with Articles 5 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union ?
In the wake of the judgement pronounced by the Court of Justice on 9 December 1997 during case C-265 / 95 , the Commission called upon the French authorities , on 9 March 1998 , to respect the obligations imposed upon them by the EC Treaty - particularly Articles 5 , 30 and 171 - and by common agricultural product market organizations .
The Commission also submitted a proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 97 ) 0619 / def. of 18 November 1997 ) with the aim of establishing a mechanism that would enable the Commission to ask the Member State to adopt necessary and appropriate measures quickly in order to eliminate particularly serious obstacles to the free movement of goods .
This proposal is being examined by the Council and Parliament .
In the reply made on 9 April 1998 , the French authorities described the measures they considered appropriate for complying with their obligations .
These measures are organized into three levels and provide specifically for a Franco-Spanish agreement , a preventive public order mechanism and a legal mechanism .
Now that French farmers have made further threats against the marketing of horticultural products from other Member States in France , the Commission is insisting once again that the French authorities should apply the new measures with the necessary rigour and efficacy to ensure free movement of agricultural products .
Actually , Commissioner , I do not so much want to ask a supplementary question as to say thank you for what the Commission has done in this case , insofar as there is no question but that real respect for fundamental rights in the EU depends on actions such as the ones which have been initiated . One of these rights is the free movement of goods .
And that becomes much more important now when , together with the citizens , we are trying to build Europe .
Because these rights are not respected , many people feel that Europe is turning its back on its people .
So besides thanking you for these actions , I would like to repeat my request that you should continue to make sure that France fulfils its obligations , so that these regulations , these measures that have been adopted , can really be put into practice in order to guarantee free movement once and for all .
On this point , I also wish to confirm the importance the questioner attaches to this subject .
Freedom of movement of goods is certainly not a peripheral matter , but absolutely central to the credibility of the single market and the entire construction of Europe .
This is why the Commission drew up the proposal for a regulation in November 1997 , which I referred to , and why , in executing the mandate assigned to the Commission by the Amsterdam European Council , we are trying to find a satisfactory legislative solution to this subject .
My question concerns the proposed legislation put forward by the Commission to the Council of Ministers to guarantee freedom of movement .
This proposed legislation has met with some criticism , not least from the unions .
A potential conflict has been foreseen between the right to strike and carry out actions on the labour market and the demands for maintaining mobility .
There has , for example , been a strike in Denmark recently .
It has clearly affected the freedom of movement in many ways .
Can the Commission guarantee that the proposal which has been tabled does not in any way limit the possibility of disputes on the labour market and employees ' abilities to take proper legal action which could also affect transport ?
Thank you for this question which gives me the opportunity to clarify two points .
Firstly , the original proposal for a regulation presented by the Commission clarified , rightly I believe , that we are not questioning in any way the right to strike or other fundamental freedoms guaranteed by Member States ' legal systems .
The Commission has also gone on to express its acceptance of wordings that make this concept absolutely clear during the course of further discussions , particularly on the Council . The regulation cannot now be interpreted in any way as implying limitations or interference in the exercise of these fundamental rights .
I can therefore give you every assurance on this subject .
Mr President , Commissioner , I remember that we had the same problem before , and then traffic came to a complete standstill because of the strikes by customs officials .
In your statement or in the rules which you are preparing , Commissioner , you should refer first and foremost to the fact that national governments have the responsibility of ensuring that traffic can move freely in Europe .
However traffic may be restricted , and for whatever cause , ensuring the free movement of traffic is one of the most important responsibilities of national governments .
Thank you , Mr von Habsburg , for your question and your comment , relating to a fundamental freedom of the single market .
The free movement of goods justifies this proposal for a regulation , and the Internal Market Council has confirmed on several occasions , the last occasion being on 30 March , its political desire to find a satisfactory solution in line with the mandate conferred on it by the European Council .
During the course of various meetings held by the Council 's working party , the Member States and the Presidency proposed various solutions , while the Commission maintained its initial position on the regulation .
The final proposal put forward by the Presidency took the form of a regulation , again based on Article 235 , and on a resolution .
The regulation would comprise three new aspects : firstly , Member States ' obligations to take measures to eliminate obstacles , in accordance with the regulation , and to report back to the Commission ; secondly , the creation of an early warning system ; and , thirdly , Commission intervention in the form of notification .
The Presidency hopes to obtain political agreement on this final proposal during the Internal Market Council on 18 May , that is , next Monday .
In the meantime , the Commission 's proposal is being examined by the European Parliament . The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have already met once in April .
Consequently , Mr von Habsburg , our various institutions are coming together to look for ways to ensure our other fundamental rights without affecting our right to strike and to safeguard the essential aspect of free movement of goods more effectively .
Question No 40 by Graham Watson ( H-0491 / 98 )
Subject : Ticket allocation system for the 1998 World Cup
Is the Commission satisfied with the CFO 's arrangements for the distribution of the remaining World Cup tickets via the " hotline ' ?
Of course , you know how this matter has developed .
We have debated it in this Parliament .
You know that the Commission did not agree with the way the sale of the tickets had been organized and also at the time we urged that the tickets still available , only about 5 or 6 % , should be made available to citizens of the European Union who live outside France , by way of compensation .
Unfortunately the committee did not accept that and that is why , as you know , we are taking the procedure , the infringement procedure , further , and why we are currently working on the preparation , or engaged in drawing up what are known in English as the statements of objection .
More specifically , the question is about the regime , or formula which the organizing committee has worked out to make the remaining 110 000 tickets available , not only to citizens from outside France but to residents of France as well .
There is one bright spot to mention , in the sense that there are another 60 000 extra tickets available .
They are tickets which were given to football associations outside Europe but which they have been unable to sell .
They got more than they needed .
Those extra 60 000 tickets are now being made available to citizens of the European Union and that is a bright spot .
I would like to underline that .
This brings the total to 170 000 .
Apart from that , as you know , dozens of telephone lines have been made available for citizens who wanted to telephone to try to get hold of a ticket .
I believe it is working quite well on the whole .
Some things have been brought to our attention which we are looking into at the moment to find out whether the system is proceeding in a completely non-discriminatory way .
I cannot tell you any more about this for the time being , but if anything is brought to our attention which could point to discrimination , it will be investigated immediately .
So if you have knowledge of any facts of that nature , let us know .
That is roughly how things stand at the moment .
Commissioner , thank you .
You spoke of bright spots .
If there is a bright spot here it is only insofar as every cloud has a silver lining .
The organization of the 1998 World Cup has been a disgrace : over 60 % of the tickets have been available exclusively to French citizens , despite the intervention of the Commission , the CFO has refused to make even 160 000 tickets available to football fans outside France .
FIFA and the CFO are making a mockery of European Union law .
For fear that the Commission would not act , I and other MEPs started a court action . My questions to you today are these .
Will the Commission associate itself with our court action ?
What action will the Commission take unilaterally , and how far will the Commission go in pursuing this ?
It is no good saying that this hotline is functioning smoothly : any British fan trying to get through to France just knows that ' smooth ' is anything but the description of how it has worked .
Since we have already had a general debate in plenary we do not need to have one again .
You know very well what I said : that , indeed , we fundamentally disagree with this kind of system and , therefore , it should be reviewed .
I must say that the organizers of the European Championship in the year 2000 , which will take place , as you know , in the Netherlands and Belgium , are already talking to the services of the Commission - to my officials - in order to sort things out now before one ticket is sold .
So the message has been well understood .
That is a positive result .
For the rest , as you know , we continue to pursue the appropriate procedure , but we have to do so according to the rules .
Legally speaking we must adhere to them .
Again , I confirm we will do so to the very end .
However , the Commission will follow its own procedure as usual , probably on the basis of Article 86 , and , therefore , obviously we will not intervene in what you are doing but we will continue along our own way .
That is the situation .
Commissioner Van Miert , can you tell me what the point was of the expensive studies which DG X carried out in 1993 ?
I was rapporteur on sport at the time and they produced a huge volume about the impact of EU activities on sport .
There were three pages at that time , five years ago , about exclusive ticket sales .
The Commission 's position in black and white in that report , dating from five years ago , states that exclusive ticket sales are fundamentally wrong and in contravention of Articles 85 and 86 .
I am pleased that you will now be keeping a close eye on the Belgian and Dutch organizers for the European Championships in 2000 .
My question is why it had to take such an extraordinary length of time and whether there was any point to those expensive studies at all ?
Thank you , Mrs Larive .
Excuse me , Mr Van Miert , but when you listen to the question in one of the languages you understand , you forget that our interpretation system takes a certain amount of time to convey the information to all the Members and , especially , the President .
So I did not interrupt you for taking the floor spontaneously , but because we had still not heard all of Mrs Larive 's interesting speech .
I now invite you to reply to her question .
These studies were carried out , as you yourself have indicated , on behalf of DG X. They were dealing with general policy in this area but , as you know , DG IV is looking into matters relating to competition .
Things happened in the past , for example where the sale of tickets was tied to the sale of travel facilities for example , or hotel rooms .
We have always said that that must not be allowed .
If the client wants that , there is no problem , but , for example , a travel agent cannot lay that down as a condition .
Now and then we receive complaints because it still seems to happen here and there .
So we have , meanwhile , tackled a number of problems already .
Here it was about a different kind of discrimination , that is to say that a large proportion of the ticket sales were being reserved for the citizens of one country .
Once again , action was taken when that came to light .
Unfortunately , most of the tickets had been sold in the meantime .
I can remember that similar things happened on earlier occasions without there being all that many complaints .
What is new on this occasion is that people will not take it any more and that the citizens of the European Union rightly believe that they are entitled to be treated in a non-discriminatory way .
I am pleased about this and , to repeat , we will keep watch to ensure that such things do not happen at future sports events .
This is a warning to everyone .
However , may I remind you again that sports associations are not too keen on turning to the Commission .
Most of them dispute the authority of the Commission .
There is not much to dispute now , as far as I am concerned , or as far as the powers of the Commission are concerned , certainly with regard to competition , but it is not always so evident that they will take that .
I would just like to remind people of that .
Parliament is sovereign to , as it were , organize its own appeal .
The Commission has to stick to the instruments it has been given .
Either we establish that there is an infringement , for example on the grounds of Article 86 , then we can act ; or , if that is not the case , we cannot .
But you know what our intention is and I would like to confirm that here today .
Apart from that , if you know of actions which do not fit in with what has been agreed , let us know .
I have also already received , I have to confirm , a couple of letters from Belgium from citizens who tried to get a ticket in the normal way and evidently say : yes , if we do not take the rest as well , we do not get any .
That is wrong .
On the other hand , it must not stop at borders either .
People cannot , for example , refuse to sell a ticket to a German citizen .
That is not permitted ; that has been agreed quite clearly .
However , I am afraid , just as you are , that things are going on here and there , bearing in mind what has happened in the past too , which are not always as they should be .
But if we get any opportunity to take action against this , we will take it and I can tell you , we will take it vigorously .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Mr Wijsenbeek wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr Wijsenbeek , let me remind you that whereas I will always grant you the floor on a point of order , it means there is less time for questions from other Members of this House .
You have the floor .
I will be brief , Mr President .
On the grounds of Annex II , B ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I am asking you now and I would be very grateful for your reply , to raise Question No 77 since Commissioner Van Miert is still present .
Mr Wijsenbeek , I must inform you that the order has already been established with the agreement of the President of Parliament and the Commission , and it is impossible for the Chair to alter it during the sitting .
I have taken good note of your comment and will convey it to the President and the Commission , Mr Wijsenbeek , but I an certainly not going to change the pre-established order .
Question No 41 by Marie-Paule Kestelijn-Sierens ( H-0440 / 98 )
Subject : Sale of drugs via the Internet
In view of the disturbing increase in the supply and unmonitored sale of drugs on the Internet , can the Commission say how it will ensure that European suppliers of drugs via the Internet satisfy all Community and national provisions in respect of permission to market , the advertising of drugs and the sale of drugs requiring a prescription ?
What action can and will the Commission take , in view of the international dimension of the problem , to protect cyberconsumers from this unsupervised sale of drugs ?
Mr President , the question must contain two answers .
One is very formal and relates to what we have already done together in order to ensure that sales of medicines on the Internet are conducted in a proper manner , and the other deals with the practical implementation of these regulations .
For one thing , it may well be a contravention of Community law if , for example , there is no authorization for trading in the medicines sold .
The purpose of such an authorization is , after all , to guarantee the quality , safety and efficacy of the medicine .
There may also be a contravention of the directive which prohibits public advertising , particularly in the case of medicines requiring a prescription , and there may of course also be a contravention of the directive which specifically allows Member States to prohibit the marketing of medicines in their territory through agreements on distance selling .
Moreover , in certain Member States the national regulations , or the pharmacists ' monopoly , or other established practices , may be contravened .
These are all clear legal regulations .
But the question of course , and this is the only important question , is what effect do they have in practice ?
Well , in practice , action can be taken against any company which commits such contraventions from a base inside the Union , because offences committed by one 's own citizens can of course be punished .
However , because of the increasing importance of the Internet as an international organization , it is impossible , both in practice and also in law , to take action against companies or individuals who are proceeding in accordance with the laws of their home country while acting outside of EU laws or national regulations .
If they act in accordance with the laws of their home country , then they are in any case legally protected .
If they contravene these laws , prosecution of the offence is a matter for the home country concerned .
In other words , there are only limited possibilities open to us .
We can bring proceedings against our own companies , but not against others .
That is why we have made several attempts to settle this issue at international level .
There would then at least be an internationally valid legislative basis .
We are having discussions with industry about questions of voluntary commitment , with other countries about common rules , and also with international organizations , in this case the World Health Organization , with a view to establishing these rules .
However , I should emphasize here and now that even if we do have international rules , given the technical character of the Internet it will not be easy to prosecute and punish contraventions of such rules .
We must always bear this in mind , and that is why we are looking more to practical measures than to legislation , or at least not just to legislation , for this cannot guarantee the necessary degree of protection .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I would have liked to hear from the Commissioner what he plans to do about these problems within the Union .
Naturally , this is a problem of consumer protection , if a medicine which has to be dispensed on prescription can be bought via the Internet without prescription .
And there have been two notable examples of this .
Just consider melatonine , which is freely available in the United States but has to be dispensed on prescription here .
There is also the recent example of the medicine Viagra which can be obtained freely via the Internet , which could have harmful effects on the user .
What is the Commissioner going to do about investigating infringements and has he already been able to investigate specific infringements ?
In other words , how can control be exercised ?
Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens repeats the question which she has already put in writing , and I could now repeat the answer which I have already given .
But that would not get us much further .
I said that we have legal regulations in the Union and in the Member States which afford adequate protection to the consumer .
You have yourself quoted a case where these legal provisions are not effective .
If , for example , a medicine is permitted in the USA , which no-one could describe as a wild and under-developed country where all sorts of things can be sold , then a manufacturer or someone else who wants to offer this medicine for sale is able to do so via the Internet .
That is not prohibited .
While this would not be permitted by our legislation in Europe , the distributor in question is not travelling to Europe , he is in fact selling the medicine from a base in America .
The fact that the Internet extends to every country in the world is due to the technical nature of its infrastructure .
That is why the distributor is in a position - at least under international law - to sell his products in America and , furthermore , to send them to any European consumer who wants them without breaking European law .
Nor does the consumer make himself liable to prosecution or contravene any laws unless he is intending to buy medicines which are clearly prohibited .
But in the case which you have mentioned the consumer does not make himself liable to prosecution .
So the only possible way in which we can settle this is to seek an international agreement under which , for example , the American manufacturer undertakes , by way of a voluntary commitment , to supply his medicines only to countries in which they may be obtained without the need for a prescription .
This is the only solution which will work .
We cannot tackle these problems using legislation alone .
There is also a problem in respect of competition , because if the restrictions we are discussing today apply to European companies or pharmacists , we shall see these pharmacists , traders or businesses being put at a competitive disadvantage vis-àvis other countries where such medicines are allowed to circulate freely .
We therefore have a problem facing our industry and it is one which cannot simply be solved by passing a new law , in fact quite the reverse .
I am convinced that we must review existing laws to do justice to both sides of the argument , namely protecting the consumer while at the same time safeguarding the competitiveness of our industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Bangemann 's reply brings us to the end of the time allocated to Part I of questions to the Commission .
So Questions Nos 42 and 43 will be dealt with in writing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Fourth Lomé Convention follows on from the Maastricht Treaty in emphasizing the objectives of combating poverty and encouraging respect for human rights and democratic principles .
This general emphasis is also apparent in the draft mandate the Commission has put before Parliament and the Council , which is now being debated , and which relates to a new partnership with the ACP countries .
To give the Member a direct answer , however , the Community has not so far expressly considered support for the disabled as a specific priority for cooperation .
Nevertheless , within the context of its programme for the reform and rehabilitation of health systems , the Community does support many forms of action , particularly for the benefit of victims of war and , even more specifically , victims of anti-personnel mines and crippling diseases .
This is particularly true in the case of Angola , Mozambique and also certain non-ACP countries such as Cambodia .
These actions in ACP countries are financed not only by the European Development Fund but also from a number of budgetary categories relating to emergency aid and rehabilitation .
The Community also supports numerous non-governmental organizations such as ' Handicap International ' , ' Help the Aged ' , ' Médecins Sans Frontières ' and others .
That support is designed to assist with development , particularly in terms of orthopaedic clinics , medical supplies. infrastructures , professional training schemes and health projects for victims of mines and burns , among others .
So far as the Lomé Convention is concerned , the Commission intends to go on giving priority to this work , since it is estimated that the number of victims , or people affected , by anti-personnel mines is over 60 000 in southern Africa alone .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his sentiments .
But I have to say that I disagree and I think the majority of the Members of this Parliament will disagree when it is said that disability is not a high priority for development cooperation between the European Union and the ACP countries .
I ask him to reflect during the course of negotiations on whether or not we should give it a higher priority when one in four poor families in developing countries have a disabled member ; when there are only 3 % of the 500 million disabled people worldwide who are literate ; when the mortality rate for under-fives in developing countries is well under 20 % - it is between 60 % and 80 % for disabled children .
Truly , there should be no higher priority than to meet those needs .
Could the Commissioner , in response to my supplementary , give a firmer commitment to actually quantify the assistance we give ?
He failed to do that in his answer .
Would he give us an indication of how he will deal with this issue in the negotiations with the ACP ?
So far it has not been a priority .
I made a factual statement .
We have worked in many areas in which , in one way or another , disabled people were the focus of our attention , namely in regard to the anti-mine action in Southern Africa .
I believe that among the main actions that are being carried out , especially regarding the health system , disability is being addressed .
What is lacking - I will be very honest - is the social integration of disabled people .
Training has been virtually nonexistent in our agreements hitherto .
But I will take on your suggestion because , especially in some countries , the figures justify an explicit statement on those lines .
Question No 45 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0463 / 98 )
Subject : Burden-sharing in staffing
What progress is being made with the initiative to share the burden of staffing in connection with sudden refugee movements , and also movements of asylum-seekers ?
In March 1997 the Commission put forward a proposal for joint action on temporary protection in situations of mass flight .
Article 5 in that proposal aims at making it possible to offer support in different forms to Member States which receive a particularly large number of people in need of international protection .
The idea is that a decision about such support be taken on the basis of an annual report on the situation , to be worked out by the Commission .
The proposal is in line with earlier positions in the Council of Ministers .
I am thinking specifically of the resolution adopted on 25 September 1995 , and which deals with burden-sharing on receiving and providing temporary accommodation for fleeing people .
I am also thinking of the Council 's decision of 4 March 1996 , and which deals with the way the European Union is to share the responsibility for people in need of temporary protection .
The Commission 's proposal has been discussed on many occasions in the Council of Ministers during the past year , particularly during the Luxembourg Presidency .
At the informal Council meeting at Mondorf in October 1997 this question was on the agenda .
The discussions we had then show that the question of burden-sharing demands further consideration .
Some Member States consider Article 5 in the Commission 's proposal to be too far-reaching ; others consider it too limited .
At the express wish of the Commission , the Council of Ministers also consulted Parliament , of which you are , naturally , aware .
Parliament supported the proposal on 23 October 1997 .
We then had 22 amendments ; two of these , Nos 12 and 13 , were aimed exactly at the need for the article on burden-sharing to be extended , and for it to be made more concrete .
Against that background , the Commission has now considered putting forward a separate proposal on burden-sharing .
The reason is that it would be very sad if the initiative on temporary protection for people were to be delayed because of the question of burden-sharing .
It is now my hope , Mr President , that a separate proposal from the Commission will lead to a solution .
I therefore hope that during the Austrian Presidency we shall not only reach a decision on temporary protection , but also find a separate solution for what is burden-sharing .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , thank you for your detailed answer .
However , I still fail to understand whether or not the Commission has in fact now submitted to the Council a concrete proposal for personnel burdensharing .
I am forever being told that the Commission does not want to submit such a proposal because it does not expect to get a majority in the Council .
I have to say quite openly that the acid test has to be tried , we have to establish precisely which governments may be trying to slow things down , so that we can turn the spotlight on them in terms of their political responsibilities and discuss this both in Parliament and also in public .
But none of that will be possible unless we have a very detailed proposal on personnel burden-sharing in the form of a fixed formula between the Member States .
The Member knows very well that the debate on burden-sharing has been going on for many years .
It is not the Commission 's fault that we have not solved this issue .
You could say that there have been such deep differences of opinion within the Council of Ministers that we have not succeeded in finding a solution .
The Commission has tried to find compromise solutions many times , but these have not fallen on good soil .
We are now working on a new set , having sounded out many governments on the issue .
We are trying , among other things , to remove the issue of burden sharing from the proposal on temporary protection and turn it into a separate issue .
Then we await the reaction .
Question No 46 by Eva Kjer Hansen ( H-0493 / 98 )
Subject : Protection of the Community 's financial interests
As the Commission indicated in its answer to Question P-3615 / 97 , the opportunities for protecting the Community 's financial interests will improve following ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Has the Commission , on the basis of the revised Article 209a ( Article 280 in the Treaty of Amsterdam ) , planned any action to harmonize legislation designed to protect the Community 's financial interests , including legislation to safeguard against fraud affecting the euro ?
According to Article 209a of the Treaty , Member States are to take the same actions to combat fraud against the economic interests of the Union as they would to combat fraud against their own .
The Member States are thus invited to coordinate their actions to protect the economic interests of the Union against fraud .
The Commission will assist with organizing close and regular cooperation between the administrations concerned .
Unfortunately , Article 209a does not include an operational legal basis .
In order to make decisions on joint actions in this field today we have to use Article 235 instead , which , as you will know , requires unanimity .
This will change with the Amsterdam Treaty , when it comes into force .
Firstly , Article 209a will be changed into a new article , Article 280 .
This provides legal ground for joint actions to protect the economic interests of the Union .
Secondly , the work will be simplified , as it will be possible to reach decisions by qualified majority voting .
Thirdly , it will establish that protection of the economic interests of the Union be equal in all the Member States .
These changes will strengthen our means to protect taxpayers against fraud and cheating .
While awaiting the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , we do not at present plan any concrete proposal , based on these revised articles .
As regards the question of preventing counterfeiting of the euro , the Commission 's working schedule on cheating and fraud of 1998-1999 was adopted on 6 May and includes several measures for the protection of the common currency .
This means that the Commission has already entered into discussion with Member States on how to combat fraud and cheating .
Effective protection must , in my view , be in place before the euro is in circulation on 1 January 2002 .
It will then be of utmost importance to build up a stable legal framework for the exchange of information and to set up a common database .
Close cooperation and mutual assistance will also have to be established between the Member States , the European Central Bank , Europol and Interpol .
The objective must be that the measures introduced to protect the euro will act as an equally strong deterrent in all the Member States .
The achievement of this will demand actions within the first as well as the third pillar .
My colleague , Commissioner de Silguy , and I plan therefore to submit a report to the Council and to the Parliament even before the summer on what kind of actions will be needed .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for answering the question and I would like to say that we are of course looking forward to receiving more specific proposals regarding which initiatives are to be put into practice , and I am delighted that this is taking place before the summer recess , because I think it is important to follow up on this matter right now while we are discussing the euro .
With regard to the new Article 280 in the Amsterdam Treaty , I must say I am amazed that the Commission is still unwilling to commit to specifics , because to me , it is a good argument alongside many other good arguments in favour of the Amsterdam Treaty .
For the sake of EU citizens and in the interests of the taxpayer , I believe it is important to come up with specific initiatives to prove that any initiatives are being started at all in this area , and this is , after all , one of the areas in which we urgently need to change the way decisions are made .
Thus , my question is actually more of an appeal to the Commissioner to ensure that specific mandates are given .
I think we should also look at what initiatives to take in order to put this into practice .
I consider it a matter for great regret that the Member States have not ratified one single instrument regarding the protection of the economic interests of the European Union .
Once 1 July is passed , the deadline laid down in the Amsterdam Treaty for ratification in the Member States , there is reason to start discussing whether we should not turn these instruments into first pillar instruments and directives instead .
Question No 47 by Mark Watts ( H-0088 / 98 )
Subject : Failure of Member States to transpose EU transport directives
Given that 60 % of the Single Market Directives adopted in the field of transport have not been transposed by Member States - the worst rate of non-transposition in the EU - what action does the Commission propose taking to ensure that Member States fulfil their objectives and complete the single market in this sector ?
Mr President , according to the so-called single market scoreboard report adopted by the Commission last November , the rate of non-implementation of single market directives is high in the transport sector , as the Honourable Member indicates in his question .
A partial explanation for that is provided by the fact that much of the single market legislation in the transport sector is relatively recent .
For example , there have been 38 transport directives in the 1990s , compared with just six directives in the insurance sector , the last of which was adopted in 1992 , where the transposition record is best .
The main reason for this significant amount of legislation in transport is obviously the evolution of the common transport policy and its application in the changing context provided by the single market .
Despite that practical explanation , however , the Commission is concerned about the non-transposition of law which Member States have after all agreed upon in Council .
In general , the majority of Member States are adopting national transposition measures after a significant delay and only after reminders have not elicited a productive response and infringement procedures have been instigated by the Commission .
For example , infringement procedures relating to two-thirds of Member States have been opened in relation to the 19 transport-related directives for which transposition was due to be completed by the end of 1997 .
The Commission will of course continue to pursue these and other infringement cases until the Member States have properly implemented the directive .
At all times actions will be determined entirely by the duty of the Commission to secure adherence to the law which the Member States in Council have obviously endorsed .
I should like to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his answer .
Quite rightly he is stressing the amount of effort the Commission , and in particular his directorate , are putting into ensuring that directives and regulations agreed by Member States are transposed by those Member States .
I am very pleased to hear that much progress has already been made following the publication of the single market scoreboard .
However , does he agree with me that we could , perhaps , further highlight some of the poorer Member States in terms of transposition by producing a league table of those least effective Member States - maybe a list of shame to try to ensure there is public pressure in the Member States concerned to ensure that Community law is complied with ?
Secondly , does he agree with me that perhaps Parliament , too , could support his efforts by putting more emphasis on monitoring and enforcement ?
Perhaps we could devote more of our committee time to these issues rather than examining fresh legislation .
I would welcome his views on both of those ideas .
Commissioner , no doubt you are enticing us into the House of Commons ' enviable habits of speed and spontaneity ; so it is no bad thing .
On the contrary , we should all imitate your example , having seen the liveliness of the House of Commons .
I invite you to reply to Mr Watts ' question .
I would simply say to the honourable Member that I am grateful for his comments .
In his proposition for a league table he has suggested one of the very best uses to which a written parliamentary question can be put .
He can be certain of receiving a candid and full answer .
So far as naming and shaming is concerned , I am not sure that would be the effect but I am prepared to work on the basis that if a law is worth passing in the Council of Ministers , it must be worth transposing and , indeed , it must be worth applying and enforcing in a Member State .
One would presume that we would be assisting the governments of the Member States in trying to ensure that public notice was drawn to the gap between their willingness to pass the laws and their willingness to turn them into domestic legislation .
While I welcome the Commission 's commitment to enforcing the procedure in the transport sector , I would draw the Commissioner 's attention to the case of a constituent of mine , Salvatore Colucci , who is attempting in vain to operate as a merchant marine officer in United Kingdom shipping .
He has had tremendous battles with the United Kingdom authorities , in particular with the previous administration .
We discovered that the Maritime Marine Agency would not accept his qualifications , although the EU directive said it should .
There is an aliens act in the UK which goes back to 1911 , which meant that merchant ship officers had to be UK citizens .
We are waiting for this legislation to be repealed .
I do not know if the Commissioner is familiar with this .
I am prepared to pass the correspondence on to him .
It is very important that we get the qualifications of merchant seaman agreed .
If I can say to the honourable Member I do not honestly know the detail of the particular case mentioned so I would be obliged if he could write to me as he suggests .
He will know of course that under current legislation Member States do reserve the right to stipulate the proportion of nationals who are appointed to offices in certain categories of shipping .
If he would like to write to me I will certainly pursue the matter and indeed if he were to take up the matter with Mrs Glenda Jackson who is the current Maritime Minister in the new United Kingdom government it is conceivable that he would find a cooperative reply .
Thank you very much , Mr Kinnock , for your reply and your willingness to help .
I am sure Mr McMahon will convey your message to the individual in question .
Question No 48 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0185 / 98 )
Subject : Lorry Blockade in France
Will the Commission investigate why the French Government has now confirmed that the British hauliers who suffered as a result of last year 's lorry blockade in France will receive no compensation despite the disruption to the Single Market ?
The Commission has made enquiries about the matters raised by the honourable Member in her question and I have to report to the House that we have not been able to find any evidence of any communication by the French government to the effect that British road hauliers would not be compensated following the 1997 strike action by French road transport workers .
At all times the Commission has made it clear to all concerned that it expects the French government to honour any legal obligation it may have to compensate those road hauliers who are directly and adversely affected by the dispute last year regardless of their nationality .
The honourable Member may already be aware that the United Kingdom Department of Transport has informed the Commission that all cases relating to United Kingdom hauliers in respect of the 1996 strike have been addressed and that procedures are in place to resolve outstanding cases from the 1997 strike without undue delay .
If the honourable Member can provide references to justify the assertion made in her question the Commission will of course investigate the matter further despite the fact that , as the honourable Member knows , compensation arrangements are entirely within national law and procedures and consequently not a matter covered by the legal authority of the Commission .
The honourable Member is a fastidious attender in this House and a fastidious attender to the Treaty .
She will know , therefore , precisely what the legal position is .
I repeat that insofar as compensation arrangements are concerned , as she knows very well , the Commission has no power .
There is no juxtaposition of events which could give the Commission power so far as compensation is concerned .
Secondly , the honourable Member will know very well the extent of the authority exercised by the Commission so far as its ability to intervene in domestic industrial disputes is concerned .
Those limitations may frustrate me as someone who wants to safeguard freedom of movement , but I observe the law , as she says , in my role of guardian of the Treaties .
So far as scenarios , real or otherwise , are concerned , she would not expect me to comment on the envisaged possibilities .
But she will know very well - I trust that she will pay reference to this in the forthcoming month or so - that there is no preventative power afforded to the Commission under the Treaty ; neither is there any ability in the Commission to preempt the conduct of a dispute .
I hope therefore that whatever other action is taken or proves to be necessary in the course of future months , no one , least of all the honourable Member , will try to give a totally distorted and exaggerated view of what the European Commission can do in the event of any extremely unfortunate , highly regrettable and totally counterproductive action that might be contemplated in some quarters at the time of the World Cup in France .
God knows , people wanting to see that World Cup in France will have enough to put up with in any case .
Unlike the previous speaker , whose petty , insular views were apparently preoccupied only with British lorry drivers , I would say , Commissioner , that only 10 % of all the lorry drivers concerned from all over Europe have been compensated by the French authorities .
Does the Commissioner not therefore think that he needs the intervention mechanism that the Council now seems to be refusing the Commission and that with this intervention mechanism there needs to be some kind of Commission fund from which , before the Member States go over to paying only one-tenth , it could forward the money that is owed to those people who , from no fault of their own , have got involved in these strikes and roadblocks ?
The European Community , as I am sure Mr Wijsenbeek will know - indeed , this is a view he will support - is a free association of democracies .
This means that unless and until the Council endorses a proposal relating to intervention of the kind that he suggests , it would be not only inappropriate but highly offensive to everything we believe in as democrats to award to the Commission power to intervene to impose compensation requirements or in other ways to try to dictate the direction in which affairs should go at the time of , or following , an industrial dispute .
Whatever his personal opinions may be , or , indeed , whatever possibilities for action I could contemplate , for as long as the Council refuses interventions of that kind , I will respect the will of the government representatives of democratic administrations .
Commissioner , some of the lorries from my constituency caught up in the blockade in France last year were transporting perishable goods , particularly fruit and vegetables , as , indeed , were many lorries from Spain and Portugal : they suffered complete loss of their consignments , not just the late delivery of goods .
Many of them are still awaiting the promised compensation from the previous , much more long-drawn-out blockade .
Will the Commission maintain its pressure to persuade the French Government to honour also this previous commitment to pay compensation and , incidentally , suggest to them that this would considerably mitigate the increasing irritation felt by other Member States towards France , not just because of their mishandling of the lorry blockade issue but also , more recently , their mishandling of the distribution of World Cup tickets ?
Question No 49 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0394 / 98 )
Subject : " Open skies ' agreements with the United States
What information can the Commission provide on the infringement procedures against those Member States which have concluded " open skies ' agreements with the United States in the civil aviation sector ?
Mr President , a short question sometimes provokes a lengthy answer so I apologize in advance for what must unavoidably be a fair degree of detail in response to the honourable Member .
In November 1994 , the Commission communicated to the Member States its concern that bilateral air transport agreements with the United States of America would affect internal Community legislation .
It drew the attention of the Member States to the Commission 's view that such negotiations could therefore only be conducted at Community level .
Assurances on the issue were sought from the relevant Member States in February 1995 and , when they were not forthcoming , the Commission initiated proceedings based on Article 169 of the Treaty in June of that year .
Discussions on aviation relations with the United States meanwhile continued in the Council and in June 1996 the Commission was given a partial mandate for negotiating a common aviation area between the European Community and the USA .
Since this signified the possibility that an approach that conformed with Community law could be established , the Commission then suspended the infringement procedure .
That mandate awarded in 1996 did not , however , include market access issues such as traffic rights and capacity , which are plainly vital for the purposes of any successful comprehensive air services agreement .
Discussions were nevertheless held with representatives of the USA in accordance with the mandate .
The only tangible conclusion reached , however , was that a common aviation area could only be agreed if negotiations involved all of the relevant issues .
The Commission has pursued its efforts to obtain a full mandate for some years and , at all times , has emphasized its total commitment to taking detailed account of the concerns and interests of all Member States so that none would encounter any disadvantage whatsoever .
Regrettably , the Council has thus far not been willing to agree on any workable mandate and , in recent Council meetings , discussion of the issue has not been substantive , although attention is now being given to the issue at working group level .
The Commission consequently advised the Council that the suspension of the infringement procedure could no longer be justified .
In March this year therefore , the Commission issued reasoned opinions to all of the eight Member States concerned .
As the honourable Member will know from other parliamentary proceedings at which he has been present , the Commission 's view and its action are completely consistent with our duty to uphold Community law .
In addition , as you will also be aware , the Commission is strongly motivated by a practical desire to negotiate conditions in civil aviation that will be fair , balanced and certain to uphold the interests of the Community , of all its Member States , of the civil aviation industry of the European Union and of the citizens of the Union .
I must admit , Commissioner , you are acting splendidly in this matter .
And though it may seem you are facing the danger alone - like Gary Cooper - do not believe it ! I want to assure you that many Europeans support you and are grateful for your efforts to consolidate our common market .
If this goes unchecked , it will result in the creation of serious discriminations and distortions of competition , causing EU rules to be ineffective and European law itself to be violated .
Also , these " open skies ' agreements would make it impossible to be sure of eliminating the imbalances which would result between the national markets and the main companies arriving here from the US , without any reciprocity at all .
So I urge you , Commissioner , to continue fighting in the same direction .
Thank you very much , Mr Camisón Asensio .
Mr Kinnock , you now realize that you are not alone , although there are not many people in this Hemicycle .
In any case , you have our support on this question , as Mr Camisón Asensio said .
I invite you to reply to his supplementary question .
Mr President , I am very grateful to you and to the honourable Member .
As he says , this is not ' High Noon ' , I am not Gary Cooper and I am certainly not accompanied by Grace Kelly .
I am , if time permits , willing to sing to the honourable Member ' Do not forsake me , oh my darling ' - but I won 't .
I might indeed lose support if I inflicted my voice upon people here .
What is true , of course , is that Parliament 's view - consistently taken - is a source of great strength , so far as the Commission is concerned .
But the good news is that , in addition , there are Member States who increasingly can see the joint and individual advantage of negotiating as a Community with the United States of America .
I am therefore confident that the day will come when the full mandate will be given to the Commission to negotiate on comprehensive issues and gain the best possible deal for our carriers , our citizens and our Member States .
My one concern is that agreement to a mandate may not come early enough for us to be able to deploy our full negotiating strength simply because a multiplicity of bilateral deals could award the Americans nearly all that they want without European carriers being able to get a balanced and equivalent amount of access to the very rich United States market in return .
Therefore , the sooner we get the power to negotiate comprehensively , the better it will be for the whole Community .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is very sensible that a supplementary question can also be put during Question Time .
I frequently make use of this facility , but what we have been witnessing in the course of the last few questions is not the putting of supplementary questions but rather - with all due respect - the exchange of pleasantries . While this may well be good for the mood of the House , it does not help me much because I shall not now be able to put my question since the session will shortly be closed .
Mr President , I would ask you to chair the session rather more tightly .
Mr Konrad , I admire your ability to distinguish in advance between a question , a compliment and a comment .
I cannot do that . In any case , Members of this House have one minute - which I am strict about - to use responsibly in whichever manner they feel is appropriate .
Since you have used that minute for points of order , obviously you cannot use it for a supplementary question , because at 7.00 p.m. we shall be suspending the sitting .
Question No 50 by Jan Andersson ( H-0418 / 98 )
Subject : Transport links in the Öresund region
A study , partly financed by the EU , has been carried out into the feasibility of building a tunnel linking the Swedish town of Helsingborg and the Danish town of Helsingør , which are only about 4 km apart .
As both towns are situated in a densely populated region in which cross-border regional cooperation is increasing in a number of areas , there is an urgent need for a tunnel .
Improved transport infrastructure would most definitely boost cooperation in the region .
What could the Commission do to help ensure that a tunnel linking Helsingborg and Helsingør is built as soon as possible ?
As the honourable Member points out in his question , studies into the feasibility of building a tunnel connecting Helsingør in Denmark and Helsingborg in Sweden have received support under the European Union 's INTERREG IIa programme .
The Commission , is , however , not aware of any decision to construct such a tunnel link and the Commission has not received any request for Community support for such a project .
If such a request were received , it would be considered through the normal procedure .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for the answer .
I would also like to say thank you for the resources the Commission contributed towards making the study ; it shows that the costs for this tunnel between two countries are less than the costs for communications on land on the Swedish side and also on the Danish side as regards the link by bridge between Malmö and Copenhagen .
I can very easily understand that decisions are required by the Swedish as well as the Danish governments before the Commission will be able to give further financial assistance , but I would like to put the following question : supposing the Swedish and Danish governments were to agree to build such a link , might the EU then assist in the same way as in the matter of the link between Malmö and Copenhagen ?
As the honourable Member will know , the INTERREG Programme does not afford a facility for providing grant funding for infrastructure development .
I can only repeat what I said earlier that if Member States , individually or collectively , were to make a proposal under the relevant funds for support of some kind in the development of a major infrastructure link of the kind that has been mentioned , serious consideration would naturally have to be given to it .
I would not want to mislead the House or the honourable Member into believing that there was any automatic right of allocation .
Every proposal obviously has to be studied very closely and thoroughly on its merits .
Thank you very much , Mr Kinnock .
Ladies and gentlemen , we still have two minutes left before 7.00 p.m.
Taking advantage of Mr Kinnock once again , I propose that he replies to one last question .
Question No 51 by Maj Theorin ( H-0430 / 98 )
Subject : Rail transport
There are several major European firms currently transporting goods by road which would like to transfer heavy road haulage to rail , primarily for environmental reasons .
Does the Commission think that this is a good idea and , if so , what is it prepared to do to facilitate such a transfer to rail ?
In view of the shortage of time I am tempted just to say ' yes ' , but I think the honourable Member would like more detail than that .
We have consistently and actively sought to promote the transfer of goods transport to rail as an alternative to road transport .
The common transport policy contributes to increasing the competitiveness and attractiveness of rail transport through various actions including the so-called PACT programme - Project Action for Combined Transport - the removal of technical and regulatory barriers to international freight transport - which is absolutely crucial - the efforts to complete the internal market in rail , which will enhance efficiency and attractiveness , and also other policies like the development of the trans-European networks which , because it is very substantially balanced in favour of rail , can also make its contribution to increasing sustainability of transport .
I am grateful for the " yes ' answer , as that is most important of all .
As the Commissioner is well aware , the problem today is that the railway cannot quite compete pricewise , due to a very peculiar system , with each country setting its own prices .
Today 50-70 % of the railway wagons go empty , at the same time as these large transport companies would like to double their capacity on the railway .
They want to make use of 40 000 wagons .
Otherwise , they would be forced to use 80 000 lorries , which is something none of us would like to see .
It would make me very happy if in some way we could give them the reply that in the near future a concrete initiative may be taken by the EU to help these transport companies which do want to transport their goods by rail .
I will send a full reply in writing to the honourable lady , but I am grateful for her close interest .
Perhaps I could illustrate the point she makes further by saying that if the rail-freight freeways - just one freeway - which the Commission has worked with others to organize , were used , it could mean the removal of 70 000 trucks every year from the roads of the European Union .
That would work to the advantage of competitiveness , employment and a sustainable environment throughout the Union .
When I send her the documents I am sure she will be interested enough to want to set them to music - they are real poetry .
Thank you very much , Mr Kinnock .
As you all know , these 60 minutes are shared out between three Commissioners , and it was Mr Kinnock 's turn today for a very long contribution to Question Time .
As is his wont , he has answered as meticulously and thoroughly as we have come to expect .
But I must thank him specially today for all his hard work .
So once again , thank you very much , Mr Kinnock .
Since the time allocated to questions to the Commission has now expired , Questions Nos 52 to 119 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.03 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Towards a Europe of Knowledge
The next item is the report ( A4-0166 / 98 ) by Mr Perry , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : " Towards a Europe of Knowledge ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0563 - C4-0649 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Britain 's Labour Prime Minister , now the President of the Council of Ministers , began his administration by saying that his priorities were ' education , education , education ' .
I have observed that he has adopted many sensible policies and priorities from the previous Conservative administration , and I am happy to say that I share with him those priorities and I believe that for the European Union too our priorities should be education , education , education .
Students , however , please note that does not mean I am about to propose the introduction of tuition fees for students across Europe .
Indeed , without seeking to labour a political point , I would urge all members of the Council of Education Ministers to consider how unilateral actions on their part , such as introducing charges for students , can , perhaps unintentionally but nonetheless , do great damage to the task of helping students gain part of their higher education in different parts of Europe .
So when I say ' education , education , education ' , I recognize in my report that substantial extra resources are needed .
This Parliament showed its commitment to that in the conciliation process in last year 's budget when we fought for and achieved additional funding for the present Socrates programme and the Commission and the Council do not doubt the overwhelming agreement across the parties in this Parliament to put extra money into education .
It is in that perspective that I shall ask Parliament to reject Amendment No 2 to my report , which seeks a doubling of the funding , if possible .
Since we are dealing with what are in reality very modest sums of money , why limit ourselves to doubling ?
Two times very little is still very little and budgetary policy is always constrained by what is possible .
So I say to the Council : ' put your money where your mouth is ' .
I know it is an old cliché often raised in this House but we have put almost ECU 1bn into tobacco growing , ostensibly for employment protection .
Put that sort of money into education for employment promotion and to positively help the people of Europe , help our people prepare for new jobs , not just protect old jobs .
Of course , it is not for the European Union to undertake the responsibility for education across Europe but we need to recognize that Europeans must be assisted to get the best out of the opportunities of the single market , which is where the European Union must be involved .
The Union must provide an add-on extra to the educational provision by the Member States .
I am quite clear in my mind that this means building on the existing programmes .
Keep the existing names for the programmes Socrates , Leonardo , Youth For Europe .
It takes a long time to get public recognition , and constant changes of name make the schemes obscure and little known .
The schemes can be modified and should be modified and updated , but the name should remain .
Those students who embark on these schemes are putting the European ideal into effect .
They must be congratulated and helped and certainly must not be penalized for doing so , which is why it is particularly important to have proper recognition for the study time spent in other EU states .
For the most part this works well , but not always .
On a related matter , I want to raise the question of our redoubling our efforts to get mutual recognition of academic certificates and qualifications .
Failure to achieve this is becoming a real inhibitor to mobility across Europe , and it is a vital necessity in the days of the euro and the single currency to help the labour force to be truly flexible .
I have drawn attention to the need for a European dimension in ancillary education services , such as vocational guidance .
Possible employment opportunities in other countries of the Union should not be a closed book , and with facilities such as the Internet , there is every possibility for students to be made aware of employment opportunities throughout Europe .
That is why in the report I support the Netdays and Netyear projects , which help our students link up to the Internet and put it to good use .
I have touched in my report on elements of the school curriculum and I wish to emphasize in this speech the importance of including in our programme links with central and eastern Europe with the accession countries .
I see this as especially important for a country like Slovakia where we need to help its people develop their fullest democratic potential , and educational exchanges are especially useful in that respect .
Similarly , we need also to develop educational links with other neighbouring countries and cultures .
I would particularly cite our neighbours in the Islamic world where mutual understanding and respect still need much promotion .
To turn to the amendments , I have already explained that Amendment No 2 is too limiting and too precise about funding .
Let us just agree that we mean what we say when we say a substantial increase in funding is needed .
Amendment No 1 , dealing with the reformed Structural Funds in the European Union vocational programme , is very useful , and I welcome that .
The third amendment I must leave to the House .
We need to be very careful not to behave like ostriches on the question of language and ensure that we concentrate on a core language so our people really can achieve that flexibility across the whole of Europe .
Mr President , first of all I would like to express my warmest and most sincere congratulations to Mr Perry on his report .
I would then like to say that my congratulations to the Commission are not quite so warm because I have good things to say and bad things to say concerning this Commission communication on the Europe of Knowledge .
There are good things in this report such as , let us say , among the principles which govern the programmes , the restricted number of objectives , the focused actions and the emphasis placed on the partnership relationship and the promotion of the principle of partnership .
However , beyond this , a feature which governs this Commission communication is its generality , its lack of detail .
There is no appreciation of old , existing programmes , Socrates , Leonardo and Youth For Europe .
The interim report on the Leonardo programme does not shed light on the profile and the numbers of participants nor on the impact of the programme .
There is a problem with regard to the complementary nature of objective 3 and the new training programmes .
No account has been taken of the interaction of the programmes in question , what objective 3 does , what the new programmes do .
There is a vagueness as to what the outcomes of the decisions of Luxembourg will be regarding the programmes that concern us here .
In relation to the simplification of procedures , it is well known that the Court of Auditors , in its 1999 budget report , decided that there would be two procedures for the choice of schemes under the Leonardo programme and , for this reason , the Commission quite rightly talks of decentralization in decision-making and of a new procedure , but I think that it is going from one extreme to the other .
The Structural Funds and the necessary procedures for the Structural Funds are one thing ; Leonardo , in which the Commission must maintain its administerial and coordination duties is quite another .
I will finish by saying what we would wish for .
On the part of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs we would like , first of all , a communication without any of these weaknesses and , secondly , we would like to see importance being given to measures relating to language to facilitate mobility and the promotion of information technology .
This is extremely important in view of the incursion into our lives of the information society .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the communication from the Commission wishes to establish guidelines for future Community initiatives in the area of general vocational training for the period 20002006 .
We will discuss these in detail after the Commission has presented its specific proposals on 4 June of this year .
Today , however , I would like , on behalf of my Parliamentary group , to note that increased cooperation in the field of education in Europe is an important prerequisite for the integration process .
The issue of sufficient funds for exchange programmes and the related question of equal opportunity in terms of access to training and culture for all Europeans should be seen in the context of ideas currently under consideration for a more active labour market policy in the EU .
We must reach a point where all school leavers can speak at least one language and that all young people have the opportunity to gain experience abroad during their vocational training .
The Commission also considered this context itself in its communication ; this makes it all the more incomprehensible that on the one hand , the sums of money being made available for language visits for schoolchildren and young employees within these training programmes are completely inadequate , and on the other hand , the Member States , despite their primary responsibility for educational policy , have done much too little in terms of experiences of other cultures , tolerance and mobility to prepare the youth of Europe for easier access to the common European market .
Only 10 % of schoolchildren , 1 % of vocational trainees and 5 % of students currently take part in exchange programmes .
It is still not bad though !
I appeal to the Commission and the Council of Ministers to consider , when reorganizing the Social Action Fund for a more active labour market policy , ways in which in future resources from the Social Action Fund can be used for employmentoriented training measures and of course ways too in which Socrates and Leonardo could be considerably better equipped to complement in an innovative way the European Union 's efforts in the field of employment .
Therefore , as far as the quite excellent training programmes are concerned , I have tabled an amendment to the brilliant report by Mr Perry which not only demands a considerable increase in funding but also requests that , if possible , the level of funding be doubled from the year 2000 onwards ; without this , even today 's tasks cannot be completed in view of the enlargement of the EU towards the east and the level and availability of individual funds which in socio-political terms are currently unacceptably low .
Vague statements being interpreted in one way or in another does not help young people much ; it is in the final analysis the credibility of Europe which is at stake .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in its communication on a Europe of Knowledge the Commission provides guidelines for the next generation of European training programmes .
I think that anyone who is involved in politics , whether at a European level or within the Member States , is aware of the crucial importance which thorough planning of our customary training programmes will have for the European Union in the 21st century .
However , is it a prerequisite of a successful working life to ensure that as many different people as possible have a general education and vocational training ? Do programmes which promote the European exchange of culture and training or look after the education of the young individual contribute significantly to the political integration of the Union ?
In this context I welcome the Commission 's plan to simplify the administration which will be required to implement the programmes and to ensure greater openness and transparency in its organization .
It also seems important to me , however , to lend continuity to incentive measures in the area of training .
It is specifically in schools and in the area of youth that cooperation structures have been built over the years .
They represent a potential which we should take advantage of .
I therefore consider it important that the three programmes be continued separately in their current form .
We should attempt , in doing so , to introduce improvements into the existing system by building on a careful evaluation of programmes to date .
In any case , the network of solid human relations that has been established with the help of previous programmes and which is also the goal of these programmes must not threatened by changes which are meant well but are not well thought out .
Finally , I would like to offer Mr Perry my congratulations on his very good report .
Mr President , the Commission 's communication now being debated by the European Parliament on the working principles and aims of education and youth programmes in the next millennium is of vital importance to the citizens of the Union .
Mr Perry 's excellent report provides a good basis for further discussion .
I hope that the Commission pays attention in their forthcoming proposals to the talks both the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and Parliament have had , although inexcusably little time has been allowed for them to have had an effect .
The reform of the education and youth programmes is not just a technical process but a great opportunity to hold discussions on just those European values we wish to base our future on .
At their very best the EU education and youth programmes are the very tool we can use to bring the citizens of the Community closer together and realize , in practical terms , our goals of tolerance , equality and sustainable development .
The Amsterdam Treaty stresses how important it is for everyone to have the opportunity to receive a high standard of education and work as a committed citizen of the Union .
The active participation of citizens is best helped by a motivating European youth policy that offers , furthermore , a variety of learning contexts outside the classroom .
The role of national organizations in lifelong learning should be given more weight .
We should also be able to pull down the old barriers between college , jobs and the so-called third sector .
Through interaction we can achieve partnerships and forms of cooperation that will open up new opportunities for personal development and finding employment .
I believe that we are all convinced of the great importance of the European education and youth policy and the need for its development .
Now is the time to recognize its importance in concrete terms too , and draw the right conclusions which will be clearly translated as increased figures in future education budgets .
Mr President , I want to say that I agree with the position of the rapporteur , Mr Perry .
I would like to mention three obstacles , in my opinion , which relate to the creation of a Society of Knowledge , young people and the role of the European Union in all this .
The first obstacle is - and I think Mr Perry also referred to it - the reduced sums of money utilized by the European Union .
We cannot give , in the name of subsidiarity , such a low priority to culture and education when it comes to funding .
The second obstacle is the difficulty of access to third level education , which has become extreme in some countries such as Greece , where the possibility of whether the child will enter further education or not has become a drama for the families concerned .
At the end of the day this is a matter which affects not only Greece but the rest of Europe .
The third obstacle , in my opinion , is the need to retain a cultural dimension , especially in matters relating to language .
There is a problem with regard to languages which have the support of fewer population groups and I think the European Union needs to put into effect special measures on their behalf .
In finishing I would like to mention the importance of supporting and pursuing the teaching of the mother tongue , such as Ancient Greek and Latin , of many countries of the European Union in the face of what we see happening in various countries .
At a time when society is reflecting upon the issue of transmission of our knowledge and values to future generations , it is particularly reassuring to see the European institutions looking into the concept of knowledge .
I would like to congratulate the Commissioner for the work she has undertaken so far , for she has been deeply involved in the White Paper which the Commission recently proposed to us .
Indeed , at a time when the youth and education programmes are coming to an end , it is necessary not only to be able to evaluate them , but also to give a new direction to their actions according to previously agreed central themes .
In this respect , I understand and appreciate the desire to emphasize training and education and to ensure that it is encouraged throughout life .
Secondly , we know that employment policy is inseparable from education policy and that it is thus necessary to give everyone a chance to be trained .
I therefore support the desires which have been expressed to rationalize the objectives , to develop transnational mobility , to encourage recourse to new educational tools and to promote language learning .
In this respect , particular efforts must be made to help schools enter a new era and to learn to communicate through new technologies .
Apart from these comments , I would like to highlight what some colleagues have already said , in particular the rapporteur , Mr Perry , whom I would like to congratulate on the quality of his work .
Indeed , it is absolutely necessary to keep the current names of the programmes .
The youth of Europe know these names now .
I am thinking in particular of the Socrates programme , so appreciated by young people .
It would be a shame if they lost a little of that recognition because their names were changed .
It is undoubtedly necessary to move beyond these programmes and to create a true status for students in order to encourage their mobility .
Furthermore , I think it necessary to implement youth programmes which are distinct from education programmes .
In conclusion , I would like to remind you that these new programmes must not only help European youth to embark upon the new millennium but they must also mark the opening of our Union towards the east , and perhaps also towards the south and that , in this , young people have an irreplaceable role to play .
These are therefore the challenges which lie before us .
Mr President , the financing issue mentioned again and again here is unfortunately only a part of the solution .
What is still lacking are programmes whose content concentrates not only on learning but also on learning needs .
Also missing are direct links to other areas .
One example of such a link would be the Dutch report , " Culture 2000 ' , which for the first time creates a link between education , a training programme and the culture market in a country .
So people no longer say that culture requires more and more money and more and more subsidies but that there is a solution to subsidies in the area of culture if we learn more , experience more , buy more books , go to the cinema more often , visit more museums and thus spend more money on the culture market .
This report , however , also mentions briefly the problem of language , which has not yet been discussed here .
The problem of language diversity in Europe cannot be reduced to a purely practical problem ; instead , it must take into account the cultural needs of the individual countries .
Mr President , the Europe of Knowledge and learning in the global information society of today and tomorrow must be the main objective , I believe , of the European Union .
Moreover , the Amsterdam Treaty has already given a clear direction to the European Union towards this objective as an obligation in the broader sense .
I would like to remind you that , with the Amsterdam Treaty , the Member States are under an obligation to promote the development of the highest possible level of knowledge for all people .
Naturally the substructure of this attempt can only be the younger generation .
In very simple terms this means that our greatest effort must be directed towards our young people , that is to say , the future of tomorrow and the future of today .
This means that any programme which reinforces the natural tendency of children to communicate , the mobility of youth within the Member States and familiarization with customs in other countries must be the foundation of our policy .
I believe that the programme presented to us by the Commission constitutes a real basis , as was demonstrated moreover by the debate which took place in the Parliamentary committees , and I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Perry on the main report and Mr Hatzidakis on the opinion which was drawn up in my own committee , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The debate which took place in the European Parliament and the debate which is taking place today , as well as the final decision which I hope we will come to , show that such an ambitious , great and difficult attempt can be enriched and pursued in this direction .
I believe , for example , that the proposal which is contained in this programme , that in other words there must be a common axis for action to enable this activity to be better coordinated and supervised , is quite right .
This , in my opinion , does not mean that there is any contradiction in retaining the names of the programmes as they are today .
I would like to make just one comment on the issues related to training , since I am on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , as I have said . I believe that , given the direction the new professions are taking and the historic crossroads at which the European Union finds itself with the opening up of the European Union to the countries of Eastern Europe , professional training today must be at the very centre of our policy .
This will not only provide working people with the opportunity of achieving life-long retraining but will enable the unemployed to gain access to the world of work .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , as the Commission says in its communication , the society of the future will be founded on knowledge ; knowledge in terms of quantity , but most of all the quality and the up-to-date validity of that knowledge .
And this is true not just for a few people , but for people of all classes and all ages .
I recently heard it said that nowadays ' we need to share out knowledge in the same way as we once needed to share out bread ' .
A learning process that lasts a lifetime - not just a few years while we are young - opens the doors to employment , but also , let us not forget , to personal fulfilment .
Education and culture release the potential for freedom that exists within every person .
We must bear that in mind if we do not want to become a society of robots or yes-men .
I would like to mention a few points that ought to be of concern to us .
Firstly , the ' Europe of knowledge ' must of course be the whole of Europe .
In the field of knowledge it makes no sense to create exceptions , exemptions and transitional measures for the single market or agriculture. central and eastern Europe are as much an inseparable part of the common European fund of knowledge as Southern or Northern Europe .
Secondly , there must be a European dimension in our school curricula ; not as a subject in itself , but permeating the whole system .
And the European languages should not be taught only as foreign languages ; they should become a vehicle for teaching the various subjects .
Thirdly , the creation of ' info-points ' to be used in common by the Union and other international organizations concerned with education and youth , such as the Council of Europe , UNESCO or the OECD , would be a powerful means of achieving the cooperation that is much discussed but little practised .
And , finally , if the Union recognizes the primary importance of education , it must express that recognition by means of firm political decisions which will enable it to be successfully implemented .
I would specify three : a visible increase in financial resources , indexing them at a minimum percentage of the Community budget immediately ; rapid general availability of access to the new technologies from primary school age ; and a bold language programme - this is very important - consisting of teaching two foreign languages from the elementary stage onwards , a European language which can be used as a common means of communication between all citizens , reinforced by a second language , not forgetting that non-European languages are increasingly being spoken in Europe .
We are the heirs of ' 48 ' , when the idea of Europe was conceived .
Fifty years on , it is our duty to give that Europe fresh impetus by instilling new values and new priorities .
That is what Mr Perry has tried to do in his report , and I congratulate him on his excellent work .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his interesting work , which enables us to alert the Commission once more to the tremendous challenges which education , training and youth represent .
It is vital to the future of the European Union to preserve and expand these proven programmes , despite a low level of funding .
As the rapporteur highlighted , and I quote , " in the context of limited financial resources , European added value can be achieved only by developing the future programmes as real transnational ' European laboratories for innovation " .
Europe must make use of shock treatment , for tomorrow 's society will be one of intelligence , research and knowledge , bringing with it work and wealth .
The emphasis on the need to lay the foundations of an integrated youth policy , as distinct from education programmes , seems extremely important to me .
By stimulating young people 's creativity , we can get them involved in the fight against social exclusion and violence at home and at school .
Continuing education , gained within youth organizations , in particular sports organizations , must be recognized and encouraged .
In my region , I support pilot initiatives for young people from inner city areas , which involve them in sport and other activities and encourage knowledge , creativity , and contact with young people in rural areas .
We have an enormous task before us in Europe .
Determination and consistency are required .
Unfortunately , traditional accountancy methods attach little importance to intangible assets .
At a time when the euro is being introduced , is it not necessary to consider the creation of a currency of knowledge ?
Mr President , my congratulations to Mr Perry and to the Commission for bringing forward this report which is , as we know , very important and it points the way forward for the future .
Education is a crucial element in building a society for the future , both vibrant economies and successful and happy communities .
It is as important in a European-wide field as it is to individual countries .
Mr Elchlepp has already spoken about funding and I believe that there is no better use of European money , no fairer way of distributing resources than to put it into education .
I think we ought to be looking again at some of the ways we spend our European money .
For example , we put some of it into tobacco subsidies and we put it into bull fighting .
I think we should be redirecting that money into something really useful like education rather than indefensible areas .
Recently a vast amount of money has gone into Monetary Union and we know that there is some opposition to that but there is massive enthusiasm for the education programmes of Europe and by comparison , I have to say , very little money .
I want to talk particularly about three paragraphs : 26 , 30 and 31 .
Paragraph 26 talks about languages and this , I believe passionately , is the crucial medium of communication and the most vibrant and valuable identity definer especially for smaller countries .
It is true that some languages are more powerful than others but as Mr Alavanos has said we must respect the rich language diversity in Europe and also , I would say , reject artificial languages and resist those who look to suppress variants .
I would like to talk on paragraph 30 but I have not got time and Mrs Vaz Da Silva has said it so eloquently so I will leave that one .
Paragraph 31 is a very important point .
In particular it talks about civic education and this is very important for my own country , the United Kingdom , where there is an appallingly low level of understanding of the democratic process .
We must invest in education of this sort for our young people to build an understanding of the democratic processes and encourage people to understand and participate .
That is as important a factor in building a united Europe as anything .
We must protect those areas , we must develop them and I look forward with great anticipation to the new Commission proposals .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I would first like to congratulate Mr Perry on his exhaustive report and say that it has come at a particularly opportune time because , at the moment , we are - quite rightly - not doing anything except talk about the European monetary system and financial issues , and tomorrow we have an important vote to cast .
However , it is absolutely essential to talk about a Europe of knowledge and to resolve to create a true European educational system in which priority is given to knowledge , citizenship and the development of employment skills , all issues requiring effective promotion of education and training .
There is certainly something to be said about Mr Perry 's report . The main thing is the way it has been sidelined by the Commission .
On a bitter note , we can see immediately that the document has been forwarded with a certain amount of delay , and this is always a problem : Parliament is called to give its opinion late on the Commission 's decisions .
I would like to hope that this will not happen any more because the proposals drawn up by the European Parliament - which is after all made up of Members elected by the people of Europe - are extremely important .
We are all aware of the importance of the topics we are examining , and it is therefore fundamental that we work hand-in-hand .
Mr President , I would like to thank our rapporteur for a very comprehensive report which I think has brought together all the feelings and the interests that we have as a committee .
I will try not to repeat any except the necessity of incorporating the European dimension in education .
In that I think , Madam Commissioner , that you can lead as a facilitator although of course it is naturally up to nation states to build that into their national curriculum .
We talk incessantly about the globalization of the economy and yet we constrain our young people within a very national curriculum ; that clearly has to change if we mean what we say about them becoming employable in a global economy and in particular in a European single market .
All that you can do is to emphasize to Member States that they build into every subject that European dimension - that in mathematics they learn who Pythagoras was , where he came from and the contribution that somebody like him made to mathematics as a whole .
Mr Evans picked up a key point in Mr Perry 's report on the need for civic education which again is critical in terms of ensuring that our young people understand the society within which they live .
On behalf of the Federal Trust and the Secondary Schools Association of the European Union I would like to thank you , Madam Commissioner , and your Directorate-General for the invaluable support that you have given to a project on citizenship .
It has enabled this project to develop teaching materials on citizenship , and European citizenship in particular , containing a whole module on European democracy and in particular this Parliament .
I believe it should have disseminated across our secondary schools in the European Union as a matter of urgency before the European elections next year .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Protection of minors in audiovisual and information services
The next item is the report ( A4-0153 / 98 ) by Mr Whitehead , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Recommendation concerning the protection of minors and human dignity in audiovisual and information services ( COM ( 97 ) 0570 - C4-0670 / 97-97 / 0329 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , this is the first substantial debate which we have had since the grand arguments over television without frontiers on the costs and benefits of the new information services .
The services that are offered - more or less , point-to-point , on-line , and now in the wonderful random universe of the Internet - we acknowledge can expand horizons : they cross every border , they enter every home , directly or indirectly they influence us all .
They can multiply almost to infinity the range of information and educational exchanges .
It can be the best of times , but we need to be vigilant that it is not the worst of times too at the hands of those who use these services , not to enable and to enrich but to exploit , degrade and to threaten human dignity .
This is a debate as old as human society itself : the debate about how that society is enriched .
When I was a student I sat at the feet of Sir Isaiah Berlin in Oxford and heard his lectures on the two concepts of Liberty : positive and negative liberty , freedom to and freedom from .
Freedom to expand horizons , to be challenged , to communicate , and freedom from others who invade our space and destroy the integrity of our lives .
It is the balance , if you like , between Article 10 and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
How do we reconcile these ?
I welcome the fact that Parliament and the Commission have come together in this matter and have been given full support by the Council under the presidency of my own country and , indeed , before that .
We are coming together , as the Member States have done , to acknowledge a common aim in pursuing the pedlars of illegal material and the systems through which , freed from restraints of time or scarcity , they can sometimes entrap the young and the vulnerable .
The vulnerable are not always the young and the young are not always the vulnerable .
We need vigilance and we need cooperation between police forces in the Member States who can be effective against illegal material , be it child pornography or race hatred , throughout our Community and , indeed , beyond .
There is much that is not illegal and for which a free society should have tolerance but which can , nevertheless , be harmful to some .
Following very much along the lines of the recommendation from the Commission , and I welcome the fact that two directorates have come together with a convergent recommendation in this matter , and an action plan . This is a wonderful state of affairs , for which we are deliriously happy now .
We call in the report for a process whereby technical development and convergence go hand in hand with a monitoring review of the way in which these different services operate .
That is what the report from the Commission essentially recommends . It should be on the basis of self-regulation responsibly exercised by service and content providers with the maximum linkage to domestic filtering schemes - like the PICs scheme in my own country - and the close involvement of citizens ' initiatives like the Internet Watch schemes pioneered in the Netherlands and elsewhere .
The recommendation and the action plan invite the Member States to be proactive , to promote research , to involve teachers as well as parents and to facilitate the exchange of information .
These are worthy aims .
The four-point plan set forth in the proposal for the Commission to bring about definitions of good practice , to facilitate research , the sharing of experience , the linkage with the authorities of law and order are wholly commendable .
The Birmingham assizes under the UK presidency address this issue .
I should like to congratulate my very old friend , Mark Fisher , for his work with our Secretary of State , Chris Smith , to see that this proposal has a fair wind through the Culture Council in May .
Commissioner Oreja , I am delighted to have you with us .
We listened to you with interest in Birmingham a few weeks ago .
We are grateful , also , for the support of your team from DG X who are alongside you tonight , and I am grateful for the work of my colleagues and my two assistants who have worked on this report .
Our recommendations and our amendments are pretty self-evident also .
I pass over the sonorous platitudes which every report has in the recommendations in the preambles and turn only to the more hard-edged recommendations for toughening up the four points at the end of the report .
Commissioner , I hope you can address , in particular , Amendment No 19 which calls for an evaluation report by the Commission to be placed before Parliament and the Council within two years .
We hope you can commend this as a measure of the effectiveness , and not merely the effects , of self-regulation with an indication of what further measures may be necessary .
It is precisely that form of precautionary scrutiny aimed at bringing the best out of the self-regulators of tomorrow which will be a benchmark for those efforts .
They , of course , may fail .
Colleagues have evidence of failures in other fields where it has probably been the hacker rather than the huckster involved up until now .
We hope they succeed .
But whether they do or do not , we have to make certain that Parliament and the Commission together have played their part .
They and we travel hopefully , but warily , down the electronic highway together .
Mr President , firstly we need to applaud the Commission for taking action as much as for its intentions : it does not duck issues in a field where the Community is not really competent to act .
Secondly , I will deal with the request to discuss measures already existing at Community level : we have already adopted the " Television without frontiers ' directive which rules that no programme should seriously harm the physical , mental and moral development of minors . This particularly concerns programmes containing scenes of violence , pornography or gratuitous violence .
Various joint actions have already been undertaken .
More specifically , we are encouraging exchange programmes between people responsible for combating the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children . Another joint action within the same field aims to combat racism and xenophobia .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights believes it necessary to extend all three joint actions , and also the Europol Convention to specifically include the protection of minors and human dignity within the audiovisual and information services , and to adapt the legal system accordingly . It believes all this to be very important .
The Commission 's proposal mentions the protection of minors and the protection of dignity .
It is not just a question of protecting minors , but also of protecting human dignity . This applies to everyone , not just minors .
Sooner or later we need to make a thorough examination of the present-day pornographic industry , which can reach out to a potentially larger market through new information media , particularly the Internet . We must understand this change is motivated by money and not freedom of thought .
I think these issues must be tackled . Recent news events show that persistent , obsessive pornographic messages are closely connected with serious acts of violence that have occurred recently , which include extreme forms of violence against minors .
For these reasons , while accepting the Commission 's proposal , I think that in future we need to emphasize the need for wider reflection on the entire subject of pornography . We should not be content with self-regulation but should implement effective regulations .
Mr President , the report we are now dealing with leads us into a very important discussion of principles .
Two fundamental values are set against each other : the need to protect our children against damaging materials , such as violence and pornography on the one hand , and on the other , the principle of freedom of expression , something we Swedes care greatly about .
It is important to emphasize the value of new technology and the Internet from the point of view of information .
There are not only advantages but disadvantages as well with the new technology .
One of the advantages is that people who , for reasons of geography or culture , have not had access to information , libraries or bookshops can now take in what information they wish .
Once one has learnt to navigate on the Net , it is like wandering around the world 's biggest and best library .
The Internet may , however , also be a source of disinformation which can have serious consequences , especially for the weaker members of society .
I am thinking of the children .
Freedom of speech is a sacred principle , but it cannot be applied at the cost of our children 's right to grow up harmoniously .
It is very difficult to set up joint rules on illegal material .
It will be even more difficult to agree on how to define the concept of " damaging ' .
I support my party friend Mr Whitehead 's proposal on joint rules for marking lists of contents with the aim of simplifying the identification of illegal and damaging contents .
I also support a regular review of a system of self-regulation and a review of this action plan after two years .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media we have been very clear about Mr Whitehead 's report , so when we examined it on 23 April we approved it unanimously .
I must make two clarifications , following on from what my colleague Mr Casini said , about our views on this protection .
We have to consider on the one hand the protection of minors from certain contents which can affect their physical or moral development and , on the other hand , the protection of human dignity from illegal content , which is banned throughout society , regardless of the age of the potential recipients , and which goes against the very foundations of society : specifically , as I said , our dignity .
As the rapporteur states in his magnificent report , the new communication media offer their content to any user anywhere at any time . That has to be regulated to retain protection for the weakest .
But let us not forget that the Member States regulate this matter , and therefore this regulation is not enough unless it is accompanied by active government policy . Without promoting cooperation between the police and the judicial authorities , it might be possible to limit the excesses , but it would not be possible to put an end to the illegal activities .
There have to be minimum guidelines , based on four key elements : consultation , a code of good practice , national authority and regular review .
Those are the objectives the European Union is proposing .
Will it all work in practice ?
At least we agree that it is worth a try .
And , Mr President , at least so far , we have an enormous degree of consensus .
Mr President , Commissioner , the subject we are dealing with this evening seems to me to be extremely important and I wish to take up an idea already expressed by Mr Carlo Casini , namely , that the audiovisual and information services industry cannot disregard respect for human dignity and , above all , the protection of minors .
The idea of protecting human dignity is therefore of paramount importance .
Member States should therefore assess their own national systems by applying a procedure drawn up at European level . The idea would be to promote national self-regulation of on-line services while also testing other new means of protecting minors .
Apart from these technical and operational methods , we also need to continue to stimulate and encourage adequate training and education for minors and families in the use of new digital resources . If we fail to adopt a two-pronged approach , nothing will be of any use .
It is therefore important for all Europe to adopt a common moral approach to the information society .
It is right for each of the Member States to be responsible for its own internal affairs and it is perhaps important for states that have already adopted these types of regulations to be able to provide models for others .
For example , Italy has recently adopted a code of conduct that regulates the relationship between the television industry and minors and it seems to me this is moving things along in the right direction .
Mr President , when we speak of preserving human dignity and protecting the under-aged in audiovisual services we are in a very sensitive area .
It is easy to see it as a black and white issue , where there is support , on the one hand , for freedom of expression and a condemnation of censorship , and on the other , for the protection of children and a condemnation of greedy , commercial exploitation .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Philip Whitehead , whose report balances the points of view splendidly and goes into the problem in depth , at the same time skilfully managing not to bring the two attitudes to a head .
I believe that we all broadly agree on the need for protection , as it stands .
The police and the judicial powers in different Member States are becoming aware of the need for closer cooperation in prohibiting , for example , illegal or in any way harmful , offensive or fraudulent material on the Internet .
A new media industry , however , requires a new approach .
The old , paternal-style control from on high simply will not work with the new services , and the Commission suggests self-regulation as a solution to the problem .
In an action plan , governments are urged to promote self-regulation through an extensive network of cooperation .
This really must lead to the creation of an industry , rights of use and services with providers .
An alternative approach is the creation of custom and practice regulations on a national level , and it would then be the duty of the Commission to coordinate and support a network of national self-regulatory systems and information sharing .
Self-regulation is certainly to the benefit of all enlightened service providers , but are all service providers so enlightened ?
If they were , the problem would be eliminated .
But self-regulation on its own is not always enough .
There must also be the desire to establish international standards that are effective , but which , at the same time , take stock of cultural differences .
No internationally-based agreement can work unless there is practical commitment through ongoing cross-border partnership .
Mr President , information technology is indeed progressing in leaps and bounds and is dismantling the technology of the state of law at national level , while the state of law at European level is simply marking time .
At the moment we are lacking the means of researching and intervening in these issues , as Mr Whitehead quite rightly described , and for this reason we are lacking the organized will to carry it out .
The Commission 's proposals are adapted to our weaknesses .
Mr Whitehead put it well and was right in proposing that we strengthen the measures to control the monitoring of self-regulation .
However , I do not believe in these measures , I do not have faith in them ; they will not produce any results .
Perhaps the Commission , operating as a think tank , could draw up a scenario , as it has done in the past , on what we would do if , in fact , we had a politically united Europe with a truly European state of law . How would we react to this attempt to surrender our children to the powers of profit and money and to total indifference to anything else ?
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Phillip Whitehead on his report .
He has worked with great speed and erudition and shown a clear understanding of the issues and great complexities involved .
On the one hand he has encouraged creativity and commercial success on the Internet , but he has also defended freedom of expression , respecting privacy and reconciling this with the need to defend human dignity and protect minors .
As Phillip himself has said , in a generally literate climate there will always be those who will want to trade in cruelty and fear in order to debauch society .
It seems possible that everyone can go almost everywhere on the Internet .
People can often go where they did not intend to go .
A teacher recently informed me that in her class children were able to access adult material the minute her back was turned .
In another class an innocent search using a pop group 's name led them into material that would be illegal for adults to download .
Obscenity is clearly endangering the benefits of the Internet .
Because of fears such as this parents tell me that they may buy their children a PC but not the modem that will give them access to the world-wide web .
This is the real problem that we have to address .
The Internet has a great potential to be an educational tool , a means by which our citizens can communicate across frontiers , bringing Europe closer together , a vital tool of citizenship , a complement to public service broadcasters , a window on open government , a means of addressing the powerful .
But it will never be any of these things unless parents can be confident that they can leave their children alone with a PC and a modem .
What is the role of the European Union ?
As we advance into the dilemmas posed by online services the European Union has a vital role to play in developing the Internet as a citizenship tool .
It can enable us to maximize transfrontier cooperation .
In a medium that is still developing it can enable us to share the very best practice .
Mr Whitehead rightly places emphasis on a systematic review of how national systems of self-regulation are working .
He is also right to call for an assessment after two years as to whether regulatory action is needed .
Self regulation , as you heard Mr Oreja in Birmingham , always needs oversight of last resort if the self-regulators should falter or even fail .
Most important , I believe , is Amendment No 6 where Mr Whitehead reminds us that competition is not the be-all and end-all of human endeavour .
Industry has a responsibility to the wider society .
If the Internet is to move into every home , we need to look to the communications industries now for effective means of ensuring that self-regulation and maybe regulation exist to ensure that the Internet is both safe and beneficial to all our citizens .
I look forward , thanks to the collaboration between the Commission and Parliament , to an early adoption of this recommendation under the UK Presidency , particularly with the blessing of British Ministers Chris Smith and Mark Fisher .
Mr President , about 20 years ago I was talking to an elderly gentleman about the generation gap .
He said to me : ' Of course there is a generation gap .
The only exposure I had as a child to anywhere outside the street where I lived in Cork was when we went down to a neighbour 's house and put our ears up to an old steam radio and heard somebody far away singing ' When the red red robbin comes bob bob bobbing along ' .
Look at what my grandchildren are seeing now . '
He was , of course , at that stage referring only to the television .
We are extremely happy to totally support Mr Whitehead 's excellent report .
As has already been said , it was supported unanimously in committee .
I am also conscious , as somebody who still has not managed to crack this system , of the difficulty for all of us in legislating for such a volatile and dynamic medium .
Parents are rightly concerned .
Unfortunately , just as with the television set , it is not always possible to leave your children alone .
Many voluntary groups concerned about the material which is undoubtedly appearing and , as Carole Tongue has rightly said , is very easily accessible need to go back to some of the most simple rules when , whether you can understand it or not , you try to accompany your children on some of their journeys into cyberspace .
You might not quite understand what is going on , you might have to pretend you understand , but the mere fact that they are aware that you are interested and with them might in itself be a very useful way in which we can deal with this .
All to frequently almost on a daily basis we see evidence that children have become desensitized by some of the material they have been exposed to , both on the Internet and on our television screens . Often with deeply tragic results .
I wish to join the chorus of praise for Mr Whitehead .
This was a totally unanimous report .
None of us have any problems in supporting the points he made and we hope very much that the effectiveness of voluntary regulation will be demonstrated as soon as we get the first report .
Mr President , the issue we are debating is something more than just important , as everyone has said , and it behoves us to extend our warmest congratulations to Mr Whitehead on his meticulous work .
I wish to stress that our group fully supports his proposals , which were adopted unanimously in the relevant committee .
The protection of minors and the protection of human dignity in audiovisual services and in information services in general is a very important issue in an age of electronic convergence .
This protection is urgent and necessary , when we bear in mind the type of illicit material which has begun to circulate widely on international networks .
The Commission recommends that the Member States work towards a national framework of self-regulation , encourage the experimental implementation of new methods to protect children and help to make parents aware , and other related measures .
It also seeks a code of conduct from industry , while the Commission itself is called upon to facilitate the networking of those authorities which have undertaken to determine and implement national networks of self-regulation and to facilitate measures against illicit material .
The rapporteur for his part provides significant clarifications concerning self-regulation and judges it desirable to advance European cooperation to strengthen the effectiveness of technical measures and to determine a common ethical approach .
We must see how best to achieve this approach - its weaknesses have already been highlighted by certain quarters - and this is a fundamental aim , since it must be achieved over and against all the other pressures and possible interests .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , some debates are especially pleasing , and this is one of them .
It is pleasing firstly , because this is an important matter which affects the European model of society ; secondly , because it achieved unanimity in committee ; and thirdly , because it is practically identical to the Commission 's earlier proposal .
So I have to say it is with great satisfaction that I am here for this debate , to listen to the Members and see how we are tackling this important matter , with a much-needed on-line programme , and with determination and decision .
We would like to go further , because self-regulation might not be enough , but this is all we can do at the moment .
The truth is , I think this is a good beginning - a good start to what we need to do .
Next I want to congratulate in particular Mr Whitehead .
He has done extremely good work , and has given a masterly presentation of it here today .
It is also important because it is not one of those routine reports that Members have to do .
It is the result of Mr Whitehead 's conviction .
He has done this because of his conviction , and that is why he has also been able to convince other people . I sincerely congratulate him on the work he has done , both as rapporteur for the Green Paper on the protection of minors and human dignity and in this recommendation .
I also think there has been excellent collaboration between Parliament and the Commission right from the outset .
I hope that continues in the future , as regards this subject and others , but especially in connection with this one .
I think this recommendation is an important step for the European Union for several reasons . My first reason is of a general nature .
On several occasions , I have mentioned the importance of the ethical dimension of the information society .
Things are happening today , such as the euro coming into force , which has now become a reality .
However , together with this and other events , such as the internal market , there is something we cannot forget : a final political project based on ethical limitations .
We would not achieve anything , no matter how much progress we make with economic or monetary problems , without an ethical project to guide our actions . This is just that sort of project .
It also seeks to provide a high level of protection of general interests , which is also one of the European Union 's priorities . It addresses what I referred to at the beginning of my speech : the meaning of the European model of society .
I think that is one of the things which should concern us at a time like this .
The European social model is not the same as others , as we are seeing all the time .
We must stick up for and protect that European model of society , and this recommendation and this report address precisely that idea and that model of society .
Furthermore , it is also essential - nobody could doubt this - to increase the competitiveness of audiovisual and information services , since that helps to create the climate of confidence necessary for their development .
And in that sense the protection of minors - our children and the citizens of the future - is essential , so they can grow up in a suitable audiovisual environment .
I want to underline something many of the speakers here have said . There is concern to protect minors , but it is not just a question of minors , but also of protecting human dignity .

Mr Whitehead said so , and so did Mr Casini and Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes .
Many speakers have mentioned what this concern about human dignity means , not just for the protection of children - which is very important - but also for the individual as such , who has a right to that suitable environment .
Another important aspect of this recommendation is the scope of its application and the nature of the instrument being created .
I think the European Union has managed to provide itself quickly with a legal instrument for audiovisual and information services , as well as for the new on-line services such as those available on the Internet .
The European Union has clearly demonstrated its ability to react .
I think we are sometimes criticized for being unable to react immediately , but we have done so here . We have reacted and we have reacted quickly .
When the Green Paper was approved , in October 1996 , the new on-line services scene posed many questions about how to apply the law . The people involved were themselves often defeated by the challenges and legal complexity of on-line services , beyond the simple statement that anything illegal off-line is also illegal on-line , as must be the case .
In other words , it made no sense to treat the two things differently .
And the work that people have been doing has achieved a consensus , which was so badly needed .
At the moment , the new industry demands a high level of protection of general interests . It is not a matter of questioning the existing set of regulations .
The question is how to facilitate the application of the laws so that the new agents can work in an orderly fashion to produce codes of practice , which is something that was mentioned in all the contributions .
And the keyword is selfregulation , a word which , although delimited by the legal framework , always turns out to be indispensable .
Furthermore , the recommendation is the first legal instrument to refer to the content of the new on-line audiovisual services . It is also a new normative focus for the definition of guidelines for national measures , to prevent the appearance of guidelines which might be too restrictive for this new industry or , perhaps , too disparate to allow the free movement of services .
In his report , Mr Whitehead also takes the self-regulation approach . He recognizes its advantages while also stressing of course , in a completely justified manner , its limits .
The judicial and police responsibilities - the competences of the law enforcement authorities - need to be developed in parallel . We must also develop the use of content labelling and filtering schemes .
Most of all , there is a need for monitoring and supervision . We must evaluate how the recommendation is being applied , and do so very carefully .
The rapporteur proposes some amendments to the text which specifically address this aspect and the Commission 's intentions . In my opinion , these amendments perfectly reflect the spirit of the recommendation .
I think the last amendment deserves special attention .
It invites the Commission to present Parliament and the Council with an evaluation report on the implementation and effectiveness of the recommendation .
Several of the speakers have mentioned this , particularly Miss Tongue .
I want to say here in this Chamber that I will try to make sure that Parliament 's wishes on this point are respected in the final text which may be approved by the Council on 28 May . I must add that in satisfying Parliament , it will also satisfy me , because I fully agree with this proposal put forward by Mr Whitehead .

Also , in the same amendment , the Commission is asked to organize regular consultations with the Member States .
I also want to say , Mr Whitehead , on behalf of the Commission and with all the solemnity implied by a statement made in this Chamber , that the Commission intends to hold periodic meetings on its own initiative with the competent national authorities , as part of the regular monitoring of this recommendation 's implementation .
Otherwise , I think it would be a little lame .
I think it is important not just to rely on the recommendation . I think we need this evaluation you have mentioned , on the one hand , and also this meeting with the relevant authorities , in order to find out exactly how far we have got and how things are progressing .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , while the United States , for example , has to some extent failed to get over the Supreme Court 's invalidation of the provisions for the protection of minors contained in the Communication Decency Act , I think the European Union has managed to provide itself quickly with a coherent instrument for audiovisual and information services , which can only help to guarantee a high level of protection for minors and human dignity on our continent .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Interim agreement on trade with Mexico
The next item is the report ( A4-0156 / 98 ) by Mrs Miranda de Lage , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the conclusion of the interim agreement on trade and trade-related matters between the European Community , on the one part , and the United Mexican States , on the other part ( COM ( 97 ) 525-11619 / 1 / rev. + 11620 / 1 / 97 rev. 1 - C4-0024 / 98-97 / 0281 ( AVC ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , the first comment I want to make is that today the United Mexican States make up a nation which , since the start of this decade , has been turning itself into a forceful and promising economy .
The effort to modernize production and the financial system has been accompanied by institutional modernization . In just a few years , the institutional and party system has undergone spectacular change .
Today the institutions are more diversified and participatory .
And as was demonstrated in the most recent elections , the Mexican people have made their choice without being tied by limitations based in the past , thereby becoming the real protagonists of modernity and change in a nation which is now the thirteenth economic power in the world .
My second comment concerns its ties to the various choices for regional integration and economic blocs .
Mexico plays an increasingly important role in the world economy .
Most notable is its membership of one of the most powerful trade and economic blocs in the world : NAFTA .
Almost 80 % of its exports are directed at the US market .
However you look at it , that degree of dependency is excessive . The reason is that , as is well-known , Mexico 's economic autonomy has been reduced ever since 1994 , because of the crisis which caused the United States to intervene in that country 's economy .
That fact should not be allowed to detract from the good results being obtained with NAFTA , such as increased investment and industrial modernization - in short , economic awakening .
Nor should it be forgotten that in recent years Mexico has joined organizations such as the OECD or APEC .
But it would also be a good thing to have a fairer distribution of the economic boom and the current benefits .
My third comment concerns the relationship between the European Union and Mexico .
Our current ties are based on an agreement signed in 1991 , the trade aspects of which are limited , and which is obsolete today for the reasons I have given .
I will repeat two of them : Mexico 's links with NAFTA , which have significantly reduced our bilateral trade ; and , secondly , the fact that Mexico 's export pattern has changed so much that today only 9 % of exports to the EU come from the agricultural sector .
The European Parliament , following the recommendation of the Committee on External Economic Relations , indicated back in 1994 that the situation was beginning to attract attention . At that point , it requested that the Union should place more importance on its political relations and consider negotiating a free trade agreement to provide us with a more balanced presence in the region .
If Parliament ratifies this agreement , the negotiations to open up the markets will be able to start in 30 days ' time .
Parliament 's recommendations for the final phase were reflected in the explanatory statement and resolution on the communication which were approved in 1995 , and should be included in the global agreement .
So we have several months ahead of us , and during that time Parliament will have the chance to follow the negotiations and their progress closely , and make a statement on the final result once negotiations have been completed .
My fourth comment is that this report has been prepared at a time when the situation is rather complex .
The violent events of the last few months , especially in the state of Chiapas , which have been condemned by all believers in democracy , have meant that this debate - of great importance politically and for the future , no matter how you look at it - has not been quite as relaxed as it might have been .
The inclusion of the democracy clause is a new element in the bilateral relationship , and is directly linked with the new Mexican reality I mentioned earlier .
The process announced in 1994 is still not finished but there has been obvious progress . It would be very short-sighted to deny that .
The fight for fairness , more effective justice , equal opportunities and regional development has still not been completed , nor the objectives achieved , but the same is true of our own societies .
The EU-Mexico agreement will contain progressive elements and compromises which can help with modernization , regional development , the fight to overcome inequalities and an improvement in the human rights situation .
We will be able to help with this .
In keeping with Parliament 's positions , with the analysis of the current situation and with our policy of cooperation with Latin America , the Committee on External Economic Relations - which has the basic responsibility - the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Development and Cooperation have all recommended ratification , by a wide majority in each case .
However , our responsibility does not end there .
By means of parliamentary dialogue , established in the protocol signed by the chairman of the relevant delegation , Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , we have provided ourselves with an instrument to allow us to monitor the relationship and the progress of the signed undertakings , especially the democracy clause .
Mr President , I conclude by thanking everybody who has helped me : not only the draftsmen of opinions but other Members too , and members of the Committee on External Economic Relations and civil society . They provided elements which are reflected in the explanatory statement , which I believe should satisfy everybody .
Mr President , after congratulating the rapporteur , I would like to say that giving our assent for the interim agreement with Mexico is not the end of the road but the beginning of a new stage in relations between the EU and Mexico .
Because of its population , size and strategic nature , Mexico - which , under President Zedillo , is immersed in an unfinished process of reforms - is one of the powers of the American continent , and is a real bridge between the United States and Central America . It is also a privileged port of entry for all those foreign investments anxious to establish themselves in the emerging market of Latin America .
But like the other countries of Latin America , Mexico is not just a market , no matter how important .
This interim agreement , which concerns trade aspects , fits into a wider and more innovative scheme , such as the one the EU wants to establish in the face of the fickleness of other powers , giving total priority to political will .
The clearest expression of this priority appears in the democracy clause which inspires , or should inspire , all the areas of cooperation in this agreement . Parliament regards this clause as fundamentally important , and it is intended to be mandatory .
Parliament expressed its concern about the human rights situation in Mexico with its January resolution on the tragic events in Acteal . The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy wanted to reflect that concern in its opinion .
The committee also wanted to request that the voice of civil society be taken into account in some way when it comes to monitoring and evaluating this question , which is so sensitive and important .
To conclude , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur again on her work . I also want to remind people , Mr President , that the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy unanimously recommended giving our assent for this interim agreement , not as a blank cheque but with the view that it will be a useful , valuable element to give EU-Mexican relations the importance they deserve .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her work on this report .
Trade between the United States and Canada on one hand and Mexico on the other has been given a very considerable boost by its inclusion in NAFTA , following the Mexican economic crisis .
Without a new agreement with Europe , relations between Mexico would inevitably suffer in political , cultural and other spheres as well as commerce .
I have a strong antipathy to many aspects of what is described as economic modernisation , to neo-liberal policies , to deregulation and privatisation .
However , the globalization of our economies is an inevitable development and we in this Parliament must surely support an agreement which will help to stimulate trade between Mexico and Europe to our mutual benefit and help tilt the balance against Mexico becoming even more dependent on the United States .
In the European Parliament we have quite rightly adopted a strong stand on human rights issues .
We have passed a number of resolutions against suppressing the Zapatistas by force of arms , condemning the massacres of last December and appealing for greater social justice for those who are desperately poor , discriminated against and deprived of the communal rights to land .
We must continue to raise these issues for the very reason that we do care about the Mexican people .
The agreement will strengthen our power to do this ; its rejection would lessen the attention paid to our views .
I very much hope that the Commission will fully recognize the importance of monitoring the human rights situation and stressing the deep concern that we feel .
I trust that some indication will be given to us this evening of the acceptance of this notion and how it will be put into practice .
In supporting this agreement I hope that it will assist development on both sides .
Many Mexicans , above all the indigenous population living in conditions of squalor and degradation without access to the means of obtaining a good standard of living , decent housing , proper education , adequate health care or full recognition as equal citizens , are at the present time demanding changes to provide all their citizens with their basic needs and we must express our solidarity with them and oppose attempts to crush them by violent means .
The government must , as it has pledged itself to do , pursue peaceful means to resolve the process by following it through to the end .
It must not blame the problem on foreigners , who are continually being deported at the present time .
We hope very much that the agreement will contribute to prosperity , from which all will benefit , and on this basis I hope that it will get the full support of this House .
Mr President , I want to acknowledge the work and effort put into this report by the rapporteur , Mrs Miranda de Lage .
Back in 1995 , this Parliament recognized the need to broaden and deepen the scope of the agreement which still governs relations between the EU and Mexico because that agreement , dating from April 1991 , does not satisfactorily address the new needs of the signatories . Parliament declared itself in favour of a negotiation strategy centred on the conclusion of a new political , commercial and economic agreement , to include strengthened political dialogue and the progressive , reciprocal liberalization of trade in goods and services and investment conditions .
I want to emphasize the inclusion of the democracy clause as an essential element of the agreement .
This clause did not exist in the 1991 framework agreement . With this clause , the signatories commit themselves to fulfilling their obligations in human rights , as well as social and environmental matters , which are very important in these countries of the American continent .
If they do not , the clause means that the agreement can become invalid .
In any case , I want to quote what I consider to be the key paragraph in this recommendation : " the imperative need for economic policy to reflect a firm desire to promote greater social equality and a political system that is genuinely democratic and pluralist and which respects human rights ' .
That is what we really want for Mexico , a country which is so important for the European Union and greatly loved , especially by all Spanish speakers .
Mr President , my compliments go to Mrs Miranda .
The Liberal group will vote for the interim agreement .
This has not been an easy decision : the human rights situation in Mexico , we know , bloodbaths in Acteal , negotiations with the ZNLA have come to a standstill , the activities of paramilitary gangs go unchecked and unpunished , all these things continue to give cause for concern .
Nevertheless , we will vote for it , as the elections this year are the first step toward political pluralism and , moreover , the interim agreement contains a democracy clause and provisions are now being made for cooperation in the area of what is known as ' civil society ' .
However , the situation continues to call for vigilance , as is illustrated by the difficulty the Mexican government had in accepting democracy in human rights clauses .
That is why we have to develop control mechanisms and the human rights clause must not remain a dead letter .
We have to use the clause and the whole agreement as an instrument for the modernization of Mexico .
The Union must insist very strongly that the Mexican government find a peaceful solution to the conflicts in Chiapas .
In addition , extensive cooperation between NGOs must put an end to human rights violations .
I want to put a question to the Commissioner : how does the Commission think it can ensure the dynamic implementation of the human rights clause ?
I invite the Commission to report on an annual basis on the human rights situation .
Mr President , as is almost always the case with delicate subjects , the decision is a difficult one . In this case , the discussions have been going on for a long time , and information has been received from the Mexican government , the pro-human rights NGOs , and so on .
There are reasons for voting in favour of assent , for example , the role Europe should play in Latin America generally and Mexico in particular ; the fact that Mexico should diversify its trade and relations , so they are not , as they have been so far , 90 % with the United States , but so that trade with Europe can be extended ; the fact that there are cultural and emotional ties , especially with the people of Spain , who will never forget that Mexico welcomed certain Spaniards after the Spanish Civil War ; and the fact that Mexico 's democracy is becoming stronger all the time .
Also , one of the paragraphs in Mrs Miranda de Lage 's report clearly specifies that this agreement opens the way for cooperation in relation to financial aid for social programmes , programmes for the indigenous communities and programmes in favour of human rights .
Some of the conclusions of Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra 's opinion also make it clear that there must be monitoring to make sure human rights are being complied with .
Nevertheless , as I said at the beginning of my speech , there are also reasons for a " no ' vote .
I have here a report from the International Civil Commission for the Observation of Human Rights . It is certainly a very serious report .
They interviewed not just members of the indigenous population , not just people who live close to the indigenous people - like Bishop Samuel Ruiz - , but also members of the government and the human rights attorney , Mr Madrazo , whom we met on one of the delegation 's visits .
The report is dedicated to José Tila López and Trinidad Cruz , who were murdered after providing information about what was happening .
If we also think back to the massacre at Acteal and the circumstances surrounding it , we can conclude that there are also reasons for a " no ' vote .
Nevertheless , we think that an active abstention would perhaps be the best approach . That does not mean you do not know what is happening .
It means constantly monitoring what happens after the agreements . Especially , Commissioner , if we manage to set up mechanisms to monitor compliance with the democracy clause and human rights , and if we also manage to get a report before the global agreement , to show us what progress has been made with human rights in Mexico .
Mr President , when we requested that a human rights clause be included in the new agreement with Mexico the government called it unacceptable interference in internal matters .
The same argument is now being used to expel international observers from Mexico .
Such diversions damage our confidence in future improvements in relations .
Yet the people of Mexico have high expectations of the new EU / Mexico relations , particularly where human rights are concerned .
We should not disappoint them .
The clause must not remain an insignificant piece of rhetoric and the agreement must not be a general absolution for the government .
We know that the Mexican government needs the approval of the treaty as a sign of international recognition as its reputation in its own country is diminishing constantly and we would very much like to give this approval if it helps human rights .
An important step would be a rapidly drawn-up report on the human rights situation .
Is the Commission prepared to present such a report to the EP at short notice ?
Will the Commission present an annual report to the Parliament ?
Will it involve human rights groups in the drafting of the report ?
Will there be someone in the EU delegation who is responsible specifically for human rights ?
How does the Commission wish to involve Mexico 's civil society in political dialogue ?
Without these elements we will not be able to approve a global agreement .
Then the interim agreement would not serve any purpose either .
We therefore urgently require specific information which is not based solely on statements from Mexico 's government as , unfortunately , theory and practice have so far been too far apart there .
This is something we owe to ourselves and to Mexican society .
Mr President , Mexico has lived through major changes in recent years , at an economic and at a political level .
For instance , Mexico has become a member of NAFTA .
While exports from the United States to Mexico have increased considerably as a result of this , exports from the European Union have decreased .
By and large , Mexico has become extremely dependent on the United States .
There are , therefore , economic reasons enough for the European Union to revise the 1991 framework agreement by means of the interim agreement proposed now .
The general agreement to be approved later will lead to a gradual liberalization of markets on both sides .
However , a number of comments do need to be made on this agreement .
I recognize the economic motives of the European Union , which wishes , of course , to strengthen its competitive position vis-àvis the United States .
I have to point out though that the balance of trade with the European Union still always shows a considerable deficit for Mexico .
It is open to question whether Mexico is ready to take on freer competition with the European Union at the moment .
The European Union really will have to look at home for solutions and really open up the Community market to Mexican exports .
I look forward to hearing whether the Commission and the Council do intend to do this .
In addition , we cannot ignore the gulf between rich and poor in Mexico which despite - or may I say , precisely because of - economic growth is getting bigger and bigger .
It is good that the agreement addresses cooperation on social affairs and poverty as well as questions relating to refugees .
Whether this will be enough to allow the whole population to benefit from the agreement is questionable .
Time will tell .
Let us follow this closely and maintain contact on these issues , not only with the Mexican government , but also with social organizations which have to face reality on a daily basis .
That brings me , finally , to the question of human rights .
Social reality paints a harrowing picture .
There is the situation in Chiapas , where death squads have murdered thousands of Indians .
The suspicion still exists that these squads have contact with government troops .
The human rights clause which has been taken up in the agreement is something new which we can be pleased with .
To sum up : approval of the interim agreement is the best tactic now , but caution is still called for , both against too much greed on the part of the European Union and too little democracy and distribution of wealth in Mexico .
Mr President , in March I took part in a UK delegation studying human rights violations in Chiapas in southern Mexico and tonight , as we consider the EU-Mexico Agreement with its human rights clause , I want to describe the situation there .
Seven thousand new soldiers drafted in since December ; one village I saw where there was one soldier for every family ; where the army sites its barracks illegally and , in many cases , in schools , driving the teachers away and depriving the children of their education ; repeated and extensive evidence of paramilitaries operating alongside the security forces , waging a dirty war against the civil population symbolized by the bloody massacre at Acteal where I heard that seven hours of bloodshed took place as the security forces stood doing nothing three hundred yards away ; vicious and unwarranted attacks on brave human rights defenders ; the Catholic priest accused of raping an old woman , of conducting black masses and of blessing arms when he and his colleagues simply seek to bring humanitarian aid across the lines of bitter division .
Foreign observers are systematically expelled and international aid is deliberately obstructed , and there is an economic war against the indigenous population shifting up to 17 000 people off their land .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Miranda , on bringing forward this interim agreement , allowing us to use the democracy and human rights clause before considering the full agreement .
To the European Parliament and the Commission I ask that we establish a permanent mechanism to monitor and report back on the human rights situation in Chiapas and the rest of Mexico - one which incorporates NGOs involved in the defence of human rights and which offers them increased direct European support .
To the Mexican Government I say : you tell us you wish to end excessive militarization , to disarm the armed groups , to welcome bona fide international assistance and to promote the rights of indigenous people .
We in Europe can work with you to achieve those aims .
It is a test of your commitment to this agreement whether you do so .
Mr President , I congratulate my colleague , Ana Miranda de Lage , on her report , and I have no hesitation in supporting her proposal that this House declare itself in favour of the agreement between the European Union and Mexico .
This will contribute to the restoration of the emphasis on economic relations between the two parties , although we must express our concern at the relative loss we have been sustaining as a commercial partner . For example , we have seen trade fall from 11 % in 1990 to 6 % in 1996 .
This has been a natural consequence of Mexico 's commercial preference for other countries which are her partners in a free trade area , in this case as a member of NAFTA .
But the prospects opening up in this area are in turn an additional attraction , and Europe must be in a position to obtain wider benefits from the effects of the growth expected for member countries .
Apart from an understandable European interest , it will certainly be of great interest to the Mexicans , with greater opportunities in the biggest world market , the European market , and a corresponding reduction in their dependency on a single country , the United States of America , whose share of Mexican trade rose from 69.3 % in 1993 to 75.5 % in 1996 .
It should also be emphasized that the agreement with the European Union covers fields such as competitive tenders in publicsector buying , intellectual property and respect for democratic principles , that are not taken into account in NAFTA , which has a strictly commercial philosophy .
Our political concern , as expressed later in Article 1 , should serve to dispel the reservations expressed by some in the light of the difficulties experienced by the country 's authorities .
It is not , therefore , a question of ignoring the problems . On the contrary , we are trying to open a way which will contribute to solving them .
On the economic side , the rules on public-sector buying should be emphasized , because this is an area of interest to both parties , and may be especially interesting to European entrepreneurs , with good opportunities in a market which we hope will expand accordingly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the interim agreement on trade and trade-related matters between the European Community and Mexico , being considered for ratification by Parliament today , constitutes an essential stage in the ambitious journey we embarked on three years ago now , which should culminate in the approval of the global agreement on economic collaboration , political coordination and cooperation .
Both agreements belong in the framework of European strategy towards Latin America , which we designed in 1995 , and which is resulting in the adoption of policies adapted to the different protagonists within the region , depending on their particular characteristics and specific circumstances .
In that context , the new situation in Mexico has stimulated the European Union to define a different relationship of a strategic nature , based on reciprocity and association , built on a basis of shared interests . These include : the interest in helping to build an international community based on democratic principles , the rule of law and full respect for human rights ; the interest in reasserting in the international debate that it is possible to conclude bilateral trade agreements which are compatible with the World Trade Organization ; the interest in invigorating our economies and thereby promoting the growth of world trade ; and finally , the interest in consolidating our respective presences in geographical areas of mutual importance .
That is how Parliament saw things back in 1995 , when Mrs Miranda de Lage presented her report , which in the last analysis is what allowed us to provide the necessary political impetus to progress towards more ambitious objectives .
In that sense , Mrs Miranda de Lage , the Commission wishes to congratulate you once again . I must say that as regards the description of the political background and the Motives - with a capital " M ' - justifying Parliament 's assent to this agreement , the European Commission fully agrees with your reasoning .
I now want to reflect briefly on certain aspects some of you have raised .
Firstly , we are talking today about the interim agreement . The aim of the interim agreement is to enable the Commission to carry out negotiations to establish a free trade area between the European Union and Mexico .
To answer some of your doubts , of course the European Parliament will have to give its final opinion once the negotiations have been concluded , because a decision will also have to be taken on the final global agreement .
Of course it is entirely possible for you to establish a monitoring mechanism , as suggested by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , Mr Bertens and somebody else , I am not sure whether it was Mr Howitt or Mr Newens .
You have the opportunity for discussion , dialogue and meetings .
To address the arguments which have been used for or against accepting this agreement , you will not be surprised by what I am about to say , because you know me well enough .
Given a choice between dialogue or breaking off relations , I prefer dialogue . What sense is there in saying " no ' ?
Will we automatically resolve the Chiapas problem if we say no to Mexico ?
Of course not .
I would even say to those people who have reservations and propose active or positive abstention that by choosing dialogue and accepting cooperation we can , through negotiation , resolve certain problems in this new framework of political cooperation .
I will tell you something else . I have had a direct meeting with the representatives of CONAI and , in particular , with Bishop Samuel Ruiz .
CONAI is in favour of this agreement .
In other words , the organization which protects the interests of the indigenous people of Chiapas is in favour of this agreement , because it sees this political dialogue as a useful mechanism .
Finally , I want to remind you that the Troika , in the Rio group , has already had a very intense session in Panama , in which Mexicans and Europeans exchanged opinions about the Chiapas problem .
And it was extremely useful .
I also want to remind you that you organized a hearing on the Chiapas question here in Parliament , with the participation of civil society , NGOs and also the Mexican government , and that deserves thanks .
At least with us - the European Union - the Mexican government is respecting the rules .
So regardless of any reservations people might have about human rights and the Chiapas situation - and nobody denies that there is a problem there , not just to do with indigenism but also to do with marginalization and poverty - , this agreement , because of its democracy clause and mechanisms for political cooperation , also establishes elements of dialogue which are extremely useful for our privileged relationship with the Mexicans .
I will conclude by mentioning something I think is important , which most of the speakers have referred to : the Mexico of the Zedillo era is going to be a different Mexico .
I have inherited the 1991 agreement , and the Mexico of the Salinas administration was not the same as the Mexico of the Zedillo administration .
We must recognize that fact .
There have been changes which would have been unimaginable a little while ago .
Mr Howitt spoke of the Acteal massacre , but that massacre , which was carried out by paramilitary forces , has also had political repercussions in Mexico .
The Interior Minister and the State Governor were removed from office .
Knowing the history of the Institutional Revolutionary Party , the fact that the President sacked the Interior Minister and the State Governor represents a qualitative change in policy which deserves recognition .
So , with the " yes ' with abstention , the " yes ' for reasons of political vision and the " yes ' because of problems of economic balance , the Commission thinks this is an extremely useful instrument for organizing a political dialogue on the delicate subject of human rights and the problems of indigenism in Mexico , and that if used properly - with respect and a sense of its usefulness - it can be extremely useful for resolving this problem .
As regards the vision of the future in economic terms , I go along with the description given by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra in his speech .
We find Mexico very interesting for the reason you indicated : it is a solid platform , which is recovering from the " tequila effect ' and which , within NAFTA , represents a significant opportunity for the European Union , which is what we want to make the most of .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Community customs code
The next item is the report ( A4-0149 / 98 ) by Mrs Peijs , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2913 / 92 establishing the Community customs code ( transit ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0472 - C4-0489 / 97-97 / 0242 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the immediate reason which led to the revision of the Community customs code was the report by the committee of enquiry of the European Parliament into fraud in customs transit .
The approaching completion of the internal market , increasing complexity , the lagging behind of computerization in the customs services and the extremely high indirect taxes on some products create problems in the handling of customs transit .
We are talking here about products like cigarettes , one of the so-called susceptible products on which there is a great deal of profit to be made if they are ' lost ' and sold on the black market .
The Commission proposes a number of measures to clarify and simplify the laws .
Parliament heartily endorses that .
Let there be no misunderstanding on that .
The measures which the Commission wants to take can be divided up into three groups : revision of the legislation ; better cooperation between the customs services in the Member States ; and computerization of the communications between customs services , the new computerized transit system .
It is unacceptable at a time when the Commission is running so many programmes to get business and industry to computerize , that we go into the 21st century with customs services with 20th century technology .
I estimate that we are three years behind , Commissioner , and that it will be 2003 rather than 2000 .
Is it true that as important a country as Germany has refused to take part in the pilot project which has already been simplified ?
How can the Commission solve that one ?
The revised legislation lies before us .
I am not going to go into all the details .
The most important point from the Commission 's proposals is that they want to trim down the customs code and they want to transfer the formulation of the regulations to the procedure of the customs code committee .
Of course , Parliament can see the advantages of that system for the Commission , namely greater flexibility and speed .
So naturally Parliament would like to cooperate where possible .
However , Parliament also sees disadvantages , for example that the regulations can be changed on a regular basis which involves uncertainty for parties in the market , without any opportunity for Parliament and industry to stand at bay .
In principle , the Commission can take very radical decisions which I , as rapporteur , think should not be left to the committee .
The two most important examples of this are the rules for the provision of security , including the test of reliability , Article 94 , and the limiting of opportunities for Member States to introduce simplified procedures , Article 97 .
Why is Parliament not completely behind the Commission 's proposals which look so reasonable ?
Once again , Parliament is completely out of the picture in the committee procedure .
In itself , that is no great disaster and it could have advantages .
Still I have opted to continue to include essential points in the code and only to leave implementation provisions to the committee .
My attitude , Commissioner , would have been different if business and industry could have been guaranteed a clear say in any changes introduced by the Commission , for example by being included in the code ; not the feeble surrogate say which is now on offer and does not give industry a chance .
Since no better arrangements can be guaranteed anywhere else , I have tried in the report to find the right balance between flexibility and democratic control by the European Parliament .
Apart from this demand , which in our eyes is justified , Parliament has been extraordinarily cooperative , both towards the Council and the Commission .
That is why we are convinced that both these bodies could demonstrate understanding of Parliament 's standpoint which is based on democratic arguments .
We know the Commissioner to be a good democrat and so have confidence in the outcome .
There is no shifting Parliament on the issue of democracy .
It became clear during the discussions with the Commission and the Council that the Commission cannot accept Articles 92 and 97 .
It appears that the Council stands behind Parliament on Article 92 .
The Committee on Budgetary Control of our Parliament let it be known in its letter of 22 April that it wants to follow my proposals .
Since it looks as if the common position will be close to Parliament 's standpoint , I urgently request the Commissioner to adjust his standpoint in the direction of Parliament and the Council .
Article 97 is more difficult , I think , and Article 97 above all things is a crucial point for Parliament .
In order to amend this article , the Commission will have to come back to Parliament at some time in the future .
We do not want it to be done in a committee procedure .
This is because this guarantees business and industry a fair chance of being heard when real changes are being made .
I am not prepared to compromise on this point , Commissioner .
So I am hoping for your good will .
It would damage the very nature of our people 's representation without the European Commission making any attempt at all to put something in its place for business and industry .
Mr President , let me just raise one question of principle which I often tend to do when speaking on issues such as this .
It is about where the lines are to be drawn for the area of competence of this Parliament .
The Commission 's proposal aims at simplifying customs procedures .
An important part of this simplification means moving decisions which at present fall within the customs code , that is the constitution itself , to a committee procedure .
The rapporteur is somewhat sceptical about this .
She does point out that it may mean greater flexibility , but there are risks with it as well ; on the one hand , the committee may inadvertently make decisions for the economy ; on the other hand - and maybe first and foremost - a committee procedure implies that this Parliament will no longer have the right to codecision in matters concerning customs code on transit .
May I say that I take a somewhat different view on this matter , despite standing politically to the left of the rapporteur .
My fundamental view is that Parliament should mainly occupy itself with working out general guidelines , that is , frameworks .
It should then hand over to committees of experts and authorities to work out the details .
One of the problems with our Parliament , I think , is that we occupy ourselves far too much with detail in areas where we really lack basic competence .
I can agree with the rapporteur that there are risks involved in allowing a committee of experts to work out the details .
" The devil is in the detail ' as we say in Sweden .
I do not , however , think we should exaggerate these risks , as a committee of experts would , naturally , know all the requirements for commerce and industry .
I do not believe it realistic to imagine that a committee of experts who really know all the details in the case would put forward a proposal that would come as a total surprise to commerce and industry .
As to Parliament 's insight , a committee of experts could , of course , turn in the completely opposite direction from what Parliament and the Commission may think , but then there is always the possibility for us to step in and alter the directives or regulations on such questions .
Let me highlight a problem that may occur .
It concerns Amendment No 5 from the rapporteur , dealing with the exemptions from giving economic security .
The Commission wishes to transfer this to the committee , briefly put , and let the committee decide which companies are to be trusted .
The rapporteur introduces a number of rules here .
She says , for example , that transports on the river Rhine or its tributaries should be granted permanent exemption .
I only ask , whether it is really reasonable to write into acts that transits on a certain waterway generally be granted exemption .
I lack expert knowledge in this particular matter , but I wish to use this to illustrate the problems that appear when legal texts are made too detailed .
Apart from that , I have no other objection to the rapporteur 's excellent report .
Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur for the very useful suggestions put forward in detail in this report .
One area of transit is the problem of fraud , which is quite a considerable one .
In the last year we have had 5 162 cases with a total loss of ECU 1.4 billion ; this is a considerable sum and also represents an enormous cost for the EU budget .
Another area is the huge number of daily goods deliveries .
It is the role of customs to carry out inspections , to ensure smooth handling and to ensure that government revenue is correctly paid .
Senders and receivers want to transport their goods from A to B quickly and as simply and cheaply as possible ; the forwarding agent also wants to transport the goods simply and cheaply .
We must bear in mind that in the European Union we are concerned primarily with small businesses , SMEs ; for this reason procedures for the majority of goods transport must be as straightforward as possible .
There are of course sensitive areas , such as tobacco , alcohol and agriculture .
Here , procedures must of course be very strict and every care must be taken to ensure that there is no illegal trafficking .
While ensuring these sensitive procedures for an infinitely small sector of goods transport we must not , however , forget those for which procedures must be simple and practical .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate Parliament , and particularly the rapporteur , Mr Peijs , and thank him for his excellent work and the good report he has drawn up on such a technical subject .
The revision of Community customs code provisions relating to transit is an important question as the new provisions will lay down fundamental principles for a deep-seated reform of customs procedures . Current procedures have led to numerous frauds that have resulted in considerable financial losses to the Community , individual Member States and businesses .
The Commission 's proposals for transit reform are in line with the recommendations of Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry .
Our aim is to protect public access and to offer businesses reliable means of safeguarding safety , flexibility and a free arena within which they can compete on equal terms .
Most of the amendments proposed by Mr Peijs are consistent with this approach and can therefore be accepted by the Commission , with two exceptions .
The first involves Amendment No 3 , relating to release from the transit system .
The current regulations are not sufficiently clear with regard to the obligations of the customs authorities and operators ' liabilities .
The Commission proposes that the operator 's liability should end when he has performed his contractual obligations , in other words , on presentation of the goods and documents to the office of destination .
Release would thus take place at destination , even if the inspection to ensure that the operation has been conducted properly takes place in the country of departure .
The amendment tabled by the rapporteur does not specify the point at which the operator is released from his obligations and does not therefore improve on the current situation .
Release would , in fact , continue to depend on an administrative document issued by the office of departure .
The second amendment the Commission cannot accept is Amendment No 7 .
This relates to a simplified transit procedure , which the Member States can establish through bilateral or multilateral agreements or apply to transit operations within their own national territory .
The Commission recognizes the need to ensure flexibility at Member State level , but considers that the fundamental principles of the transit procedure should always be observed , particularly the guarantees it offers .
The amendment proposed by Mr Peijs suggests that these fundamental principles do not need to be observed in the case of simplified procedures applied to national transit movements .
In other words , goods could be moved under the transit system , for example from Hamburg to Munich , without observing the Community transit guarantee system , or without any guarantee at all come to that .
But in a market without internal frontiers , how can we ensure that these goods do not end up in Vienna or Paris instead ?
Within the single market , the same guarantees should be applied to transits between Strasbourg and Bordeaux as to those between Strasbourg and Stuttgart , as the same financial interests are at stake in both situations .
The Commission 's approach to guarantees is therefore closer to the spirit of Mr Peijs ' Amendments Nos 4 and 5 , which specifically aim to ensure a more standard approach to the implementation of guarantee provisions .
I will not stop to comment on all the other amendments which , as I have said , the Commission finds acceptable , but I am prepared to answer any questions .
I would like to add two further points . One of the reasons why we can accept most of the amendments tabled is that we share the desire to specify the regulations in detail in the code .
This leaves less room for regulations decided by the committee . The other aspect I wish to clarify relates to the serious and important problem of computerization .
As Parliament knows , and as Mr Peijs is well aware , implementation of the new computerized transit system has been delayed . This is essentially due to problems with the contractor .
It is therefore impossible to begin implementing the new computerized transit system in 1998 .
The Commission and participating countries have agreed a new system implementation strategy .
The idea is for the basic functions to be initially introduced in five selected countries - the Netherlands , Germany , Switzerland , Italy and Spain - , so that the central services , network and database are available by the end of the first quarter of 1999 . This will mean that the system can at least be fully operational for the five countries I mentioned by the beginning of the year 2000 .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Monti .
Mrs Peijs requests the floor .
Is it to ask a question ?
Mr President , the story is that Germany has dropped out of the pilot project , which would be an enormous disaster , because Germany accounts for the largest share of destinations , arrivals and departures .
If Germany has dropped out of the project , I would like very much to hear from the Commissioner how Germany is going to be replaced or that you are going to put extra pressure on Germany to take part after all .
Now I will mention the refinement of Article 92 .
At the moment , the time that documents have to be back or in any case known to the customs office at the place of departure is unacceptably long .
All in all the time before the business community knows whether it is susceptible to fraud or that fraud has been committed is extremely long .
We did not want to set a time period , but if the Commissioner wants to have a period , I would suggest three months : after three months the documents must be back .
As regards the Commissioner 's last comment on Article 97 , I am a bit surprised .
I think there is a translation error somewhere , Mr Monti , because what I wanted to do in that amendment is precisely what you are saying that I am not doing .
What I tried to do was precisely to restrict the flexibility of Member States , as far as difficult cases of security are concerned .
So I think we have done exactly what you would have wanted and that there is a translation error somewhere .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would remind you that you can only ask questions , not open a new debate .
Please ask your question as quickly as possible , Mr Rübig .
Mr President , I have only one question : how much of a saving does the new system represent for the economy of Europe ?
As regards Germany , I can confirm that the idea is to introduce the basic functions initially in five selected countries , including Germany , so that the central services are available by the end of the first quarter of 1999 . This will mean that the system can be up and running - at least in the five countries I have mentioned - by the beginning of the year 2000 .
We are checking this entire operation so that no further delays arise .
The last question on the quantitative benefits of the system is very difficult to answer .
All the technical investigations - and we know that the matter has been discussed with all parties concerned - suggest that the benefits will be considerable .
However , I am unable to offer specific quantitative estimates .
The long delays , Mr Peijs , are certainly a problem and it is precisely for this reason that we are placing so much emphasis on computerization .
Finally , on the point relating to the simplified procedure proposed in one of the amendments , I have to say that the amendment would have been more acceptable to the Commission if it had found - perhaps it still can - a way of offering the same guarantee , a satisfactory guarantee .
As I emphasized in my speech , it is the lack of guarantees that concerns us , particularly in an environment that is no longer able to distinguish clearly between transit within a Member State and transit between Member States .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.44 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I would just like to point out that my vote on the first amendment , which is No 26 , in the Rothley recommendation , was not recorded .
I intended to vote against the amendment .
Very well .
It will be recorded , Mr Delcroix .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , I rise on a point of order for a meeting , which will take place on 14 , 15 and 16 May in my colleague , Mr Smith 's constituency at Turnbury .
It is by a group called the Bilderberg Group .
This is a very strange group because it does not allow any press or interference with its meetings .
My point of order is on the central register of Members .
Could I ask the Bureau to inform Members that , should they be participating in this group , then they should declare that under the ' Members ' interests ' .
This will ensure that the same transparency and openness exist in this Parliament as in other parliaments , such as in Britain , where members of the Labour Party , i.e. Tony Blair , Giles Radice and Denis Healey , have all declared their interests in the operations of the Bilderberg Group .
I trust that other Members of this House will take note and do likewise .
Thank you , Mr Falconer .
I have made a note of it .
Madam President , I refer to Rule 127 in conjunction with Rules 95 et seq of the Rules of Procedure and welcome the Conference of Presidents ' decision to include on today 's agenda , in place of the Council and Commission statements on safety in cities , items on the dramatic events taking place in Kosovo and the nuclear tests in India .
Nevertheless , like many of the other members of this House , it is my view that safety in the cities of Europe is also an important and urgent matter .
Just this weekend a jeweller in Vienna was murdered by the Russian mafia .
I therefore believe it is important that we debate the Commission 's statement at the next part-session .
Madam President , yesterday we were told in this House about a dreadful incident in Turkey where a very prominent human rights activist , in fact the President of the Human Rights Association of Turkey , Akin Birdal , had been shot in his office in Ankara by unknown civilians .
Akin Birdal is known to many of us in this House as somebody who , with great courage and integrity , has been leading the fight to enhance and strengthen human rights in Turkey .
This , as you know , is one of our major demands to the Turkish authorities .
I would ask you to speak with President Gil Robles immediately and ask him to send to Akin Birdal - who is critically ill - and his immediate family , firstly , our sympathies and , secondly , our best wishes for his recovery .
Secondly , he should write to the Turkish Government urging them with all speed to bring to justice those who have perpetrated this act and also to take on board the criticisms that have been often made in this House about the way in which human rights are regularly abused in Turkey .
This sort of paramilitary activity must cease .
Thank you , Mrs Green .
I think the President has already planned to take that action , further to Mrs Roth 's speech yesterday , but having said that , I will of course discuss it with him .
Appointments to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank
The next item is the recommendations by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the appointments to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank ( Rapporteur : Mme Randzio-Plath ) .
Madam President , on 1 July 1998 the European Central Bank will be able to start work on preparations for a successful and independent single monetary policy for the euro zone with eleven of the Member States .
This is the result of the hearings of the various candidates for appointment to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank held in the European Parliament .
I propose that the appointment of these six candidates be confirmed .
They were each able to convince us of their personal integrity , their professional experience and their high level of technical expertise .
They hold clear positions on economic and monetary policy which correspond to the objectives of the European Central Bank as defined in the Maastricht Treaty .
In short , they will provide the European Central Bank with the Executive Board it deserves .
They all emphasized the priority they would accord to price stability , whilst at the same time indicating that with an inflation rate of 2 % it can be assumed that the goal of price stability has effectively been achieved .
Europe 's historically low inflation rates mean that the European Central Bank will not have to start its life with a policy of raising interest rates in order to prove its credibility .
The candidates also implied that there would be no need for an excessively rigid interest rate policy in order to prove the ECB 's independence and trustworthiness .
The European Central Bank will be able to build on the confidence enjoyed by the existing national central banks .
Finally , the future single monetary policy will be shaped by the European System of Central Banks , not by the European Central Bank and its Executive Board alone .
At the hearings , all the candidates expressed their reluctance to see monetary policy used as a tool in the struggle against unemployment beyond the achievement of price stability .
They stressed that monetary stability represents the greatest contribution the European Central Bank can make to combating unemployment in the euro zone .
Only with a guarantee of continued price stability can further measures , such as the reduction of short-term interest rates , be considered .
However , all the candidates gave fairly clear indications that they are familiar with the provisions of Article 105 and Article 2 of the Maastricht Treaty which , alongside the primary objective of price stability , also bind the European Central Bank to supporting the economic policy of the European Union and the objectives stipulated in Article 2 , that is the achievement of a high level of employment and economic and social cohesion .
In fact , their importance is such that they are self-evident .
The task in hand is to examine , within the framework of monetary dialogue with the European Central Bank , how this contribution can be shaped .
The duty of democratic accountability laid down in our resolution on the democratic accountability of monetary institutions in Strasbourg means that we can expect the European Central Bank to report to us , detailing how it is exercising its scope for independent action in matters of monetary policy .
Exercising this scope for independent action in matters of monetary policy will be both possible and necessary .
Unlike American legislation on the US central bank , the Maastricht Treaty stipulates that the European Central Bank must pursue the objective of price stability as its primary task .
The US central bank is obliged to pursue the objectives of price stability and growth and employment .
This results in a different type of monetary policy and consequently creates a different role for monetary policy .
Thus , over recent years , it has been possible for US monetary policy to make a greater contribution to creating an appropriate and balanced policy mix in the interests of investment , growth and jobs .
As has already been mentioned , the candidates made it clear that monetary policy can be used to support growth and employment by preventing interest rate speculation through the safeguarding of price stability and thereby guaranteeing macro-economic stability and , above all , a low level of long-term interest rates .
On the basis of the hearings it was clear that the European Central Bank - and this is something which was stressed particularly by the candidate for the presidency of the European Central Bank - will exercise its scope for independent action on matters of monetary policy once inflation targets are reached and sustained development looks probable .
For the first time , this will allow us to use monetary policy to support economic policy in the euro zone and to pursue the secondary objectives which the European Parliament will consider particularly important in its debate on the annual economic report and the economic guidelines .
These issues will be particularly important in the dialogue between the ECB and the European Parliament .
We must ask the European Central Bank to provide statements on resolutions relating to monetary policy in order to assess its contribution to the creation of a balanced policy mix .
This will also prove to be a useful yardstick by which we can measure the quality of our selection of candidates .
As a result , practical dialogue with the European Parliament will be very important .
The events which took place in the European Council on the weekend of 2 / 3 May have done nothing to further public confidence in the independence of the European Central Bank .
The hearings in the European Parliament , on the other hand , have helped to redress this lack of confidence and to that extent our hearings were a confidence-building measure which benefited both the European public and the future European Central Bank .
Of course , the Maastricht Treaty provides for the political appointment of candidates .
And that is rightly so .
However , the political decision was reached by means of a procedure which has left behind it an unpleasant aftertaste since neither the age nor the nationality of a candidate should be seen as a condition for the success of the common monetary policy and therefore , quite rightly , neither are stipulated in the Treaty as selection criteria .
The sole selection criteria are personal and technical competence .
The President of the ECB 's eight year term of office is proof of his personal independence .
This is something which the European Parliament had continually stressed .
And this is why , at the hearing , we sought confirmation from Wim Duisenberg that he alone and nobody else would decide when his term of office would end .
( Applause ) The candidate made it quite clear that he sees his independence as completely uncompromised .
He was persuasive in his determination , the clarity of his arguments and his plain speaking , thereby underlining the fact that this political nomination and the establishment of the European Central Bank will put an end to the exertion of political influence on monetary policy by individual governments and mark the start of independence from political instructions .
So the hearing showed that there must be no renationalization of the decision-making processes and illustrated that the requirement of unanimity has once again pushed the European Parliament to the limits of its tolerance and the people of Europe to the limits of their patience and understanding of the process of European integration .
This procedure must be changed !
We would particularly like to welcome the fact that the appointment of Mrs Hämäläinen will see a woman on the Executive Board of the ECB , enabling more women than has previously been the case to make their voices heard in important decisionmaking bodies .
( Applause ) The hearing , like the future monetary dialogue , has contributed to the credibility and perceived trustworthiness of the democratic European system , but also to the credibility and perceived trustworthiness of a future European Central Bank .
As such , it is to be welcomed that , alongside the debate on the ECB 's annual report , there will also be a debate on the annual economic report and the economic policy guidelines and that regular monetary dialogue - on a quarterly basis - was supported by all the candidates .
Of course , the negative response to the proposed publication of the Minutes of the ECB 's decision-making bodies after a lapse of five years was unsatisfactory since their publication is necessary to achieve greater transparency in monetary policy .
In my view , these hearings have shown that the end of the confirmation procedure marks the start of a new era in which the first federal European authority will have to justify its actions to the European Parliament in the interests of communication with the European public .
( Applause )
Madam President , this is the second stage of the consultation which began on 2 May , when I addressed the European Parliament with the recommendation that 11 countries had fulfilled the necessary conditions for the adoption of the single currency .
In line with the democratic traditions we value in this continent , it was right that this Parliament was able to play such an important part in this significant event .
Following that debate , to which almost 50 speakers contributed , this Parliament voted overwhelmingly in favour of the eleven .
The results of this historic vote were reported by your President to the Council and , on behalf of the Council , let me say how much we valued the opinion of this Parliament .
Let me also formally report that , in line with the views of Parliament , the Council unanimously decided that 11 countries should join the single currency .
As a result of these historic decisions , in which the European Parliament has played its full part , the vision of the founders of the Union at the Messina Conference that called for the coordination of monetary policies permitting the creation and development of a common market , will become a reality on 1 January .
It will be a single currency which covers around a fifth of the world 's trade .
Let us remember also that this single currency is designed to achieve the stability that will help us meet our shared aims of higher employment and greater prosperity for the peoples of Europe .
Our aim for Europe is high levels of growth and employment , and the precondition of that , in a global economy where countries have to draw their investment funds from all round the world , is stability with low inflation .
It is because of the need to deliver that stability that the debate on the appointments to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank is of such central importance , as was recognized by your rapporteur only a few minutes ago .
The European Central Bank will be established by 1 July ; it will assume responsibility for the monetary policy of participating Member States on 1 January next year , and the Treaty , of course , requires the Council to nominate a president and vicepresident and up to four additional members of the Executive Board .
The Council has recommended that Mr Wim Duisenberg should be appointed as the first President of the ECB for a period of eight years .
This Parliament has had a chance already to hear Mr Duisenberg answer questions before it .
The detailed proposals which we have made , including Mr Duisenberg 's own personal statement about his intentions , are now before Parliament .
Mr Duisenberg will make his own decisions about retirement , and this procedure is in accordance , and fully in accordance , with the Treaty .
The Council recommends that Mr Christian Noyer should be appointed as Vice-President for a term of four years , and the following should be appointed to the rest of the Executive Board : Mr Otmar Issing for a term of eight years , Mr Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa for seven years , Mr Eugenio Domingo Solans for six years and Mrs Sirkka Hämäläinen for five years .
I say to Parliament that , whatever the evidence you have taken in the last few days on individual members , their views and their comments , this should also be seen in the context of the Treaty 's commitment to make for proper and regular reporting , scrutiny and accounting to the European Parliament .
Let me remind Parliament of the importance we attach to the role of Parliament in ensuring proper reporting from the European Central Bank to the people of Europe through this Parliament .
The European Central Bank must address its annual report to this Parliament , as well as to the Council and Commission .
The European Central Bank President must , in future , present the annual report to Parliament , as well as to the Council ; the European Central Bank President and other Board members may be called before the expert committees of this Parliament ; and this Parliament is , of course , consulted on all future European Central Bank Board appointments .
Your resolution as a Parliament on 2 April included some helpful and constructive suggestions on how this Treaty might be implemented in practice .
In particular , I welcome your suggestion that Executive Board members are invited to participate in quarterly parliamentary meetings on monetary and economic developments .
This is a good way forward .
It is a positive signal to Europe 's citizens .
The people of Europe , as the rapporteur said only a few minutes ago , need confidence in their new Central Bank , confidence in its independence , confidence in its proper accountability , and that is what we are seeking to achieve through Parliament and governments working together .
Let me make one other remark that is of significance for the long-term future : the movement for greater openness and transparency in monetary policy is now becoming a powerful movement right across the economic world , an idea whose time has come .
There is now a recognition that the clarity of objectives and the setting of operational rules , that is central to credibility in modern monetary policy decision-making , requires also to be underpinned by greater openness in economic government to ensure that maximum credibility is reinforced .
Last month all the countries represented in the interim committee of the IMF proposed a new code of monetary and financial practice that requires greater openness .
This new momentum for openness , transparency and accountability is now a force for change , being recognized throughout the world .
I welcome the role of the European Parliament in its future dialogue with the European Central Bank , a role that will be important in ensuring that there is proper reporting to a democratically elected institution .
Let me say in conclusion that we should never lose sight of the fact that the arrangements for the single currency are for a purpose : they are to achieve the stability that will give us the high levels of growth and employment that we need and we want to see in Europe .
Let us , as a Parliament and as governments , never lose sight of our duties and responsibilities to include those who are socially excluded and to help back to work the 18 million unemployed who need , deserve and should have our support .
From its beginnings in the search for peace , its birth in the commitments made at Messina , 43 years ago , this movement for greater economic coordination and integration , a movement that has as its purpose greater growth , employment and prosperity throughout Europe , is now reaching a new point of decision-making this morning .
I urge Parliament and governments to continue to work together to make these new institutions work and ensure that this is the opening of another chapter in the progress of Europe .
( Applause )
Madam President , I should like to warmly welcome the Chancellor of the Exchequer 's words .
To hear the President-in-Office spell out support for the role the European Parliament will play over the years in the supervising role of the European Central Bank is very welcome to all parts of this House .
The European Parliament behaved in a very responsible way in conducting the hearings for all six candidates .
Our approach was to ensure that all candidates gave a commitment to price stability and independence and , indeed , all six candidates fulfilled that obligation .
But in the Socialist Group we also place great emphasis on full respect for Article 105 of the Treaty which means that when price stability has been achieved the Central Bank helps in the broader objectives of the European Union , in particular in job creation and growth .
We also place great emphasis on the question of democratic accountability .
This played a crucial role for us in the hearings and all candidates were questioned very carefully on this matter .
We have to ensure that beyond the achievement of inflation control at a low level monetary policy can make its contribution towards fighting unemployment .
I was glad that the President-in-Office mentioned that this morning .
On democratic accountability we heard from Mr Duisenberg his views on how we will deal with the European Central Bank in the future .
On behalf of the Socialist Group today , I would like to say that we need to meet with Wim Duisenberg before the summer recess of this Parliament to flesh out and spell out in detail the way in which the European Parliament will in future deal with the European Central Bank .
We cannot allow this to slip later into the year .
We need to start spelling that out now and working out the method of operation in ensuring democratic accountability .
I should like to make a few remarks about the procedure and about the hearings .
On Monday evening the Socialist Group expressed a reservation about one of the candidates .
I know some people in this House were angry about that .
The purpose of confirmation hearings is to hear the candidates and to assess them objectively , not on nationality or on politics but on their views as potential members of the European Central Bank .
Our group did that and we will not suspend judgment on any of these candidates simply because of the historic importance of this moment .
Therefore , on Monday we expressed our reservations about one of the candidates .
Having said that , and I made the point on Monday , our group last night discussed this fully and we feel that all six candidates are competent members of the European Central Bank and we will be voting for all six today .
We believe that this Executive Board has a crucial role to play in building confidence for the euro amongst our citizens .
The way they have to do this is by setting interest rates that are going to maintain stability and also , as the President-in-Office said , setting interest rates that will guarantee growth and full employment in the European Union .
We want an interest rate policy for all of our citizens , not only for the rich heartland of the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , some interesting observations were made at the hearings .
The six candidates amply satisfy the selection criteria stated in the Treaty .
They are on the whole well qualified , but they obviously have individual differences , sometimes surprising , of which we should be careful .
Every teacher knows that the most brilliant pupils do not always achieve the most brilliant careers , and we all know of less able pupils who have later turned into real high-fliers .
If Harry Trumann had had to appear before our jury , he would probably not have attained the highest grades .
I shall not be unkind enough to remind my socialist colleagues of their former unflattering opinions of some of our commissioners to whom they pay tribute today .
Secondly , judging from both their oral and written replies , the six candidates have a relatively coherent view of their future roles .
Despite attempts by some of our colleagues to show contradictions in their respective statements , these only appear to be slight , the result of differing experiences , rather than any real differences .
We should not have any serious concerns about the homogeneity of the future management team .
I should like to add at this point that the socialists are not alone in having stressed that once objectives relating to stability have been achieved , the bank must also focus on the other objectives of economic policy . I believe that most candidates agree with this point of view .
This should not be a party political matter .
Thirdly , I will make an interesting observation , positive as far as Parliament is concerned , which is that all the candidates have recognized the need to maintain a special relationship with the European Parliament .
They all believe that the European Parliament is the institution to which they are accountable for their activities , to which they must explain and declare their intentions and announce their opinions on various subjects .
They all agree on the need for transparency , they all recognize that accountability is the normal counterweight of their independence and their considerable power .
All , with some small differences , accept that it is the European Parliament , not national parliaments , to whom they must pay special attention , but they have also emphasized the role that central banks , which will not disappear , will continue to play with regard to national parliaments .
It will therefore be by means of the governors of the central banks , which will still be in existence , that the relationship with national parliaments will continue , which is entirely true to the principles of subsidiarity and the federalist system .
I should like here to address my hearty thanks to the President-in-Office of the Council for having expressed what has now become important in the light of the Asian crisis : ' transparency is central to credibility in modern monetary policy ' .
I am glad that this is recognized today and that , at the same time , the European Parliament 's role has been recognized , and I hope that we shall be worthy of it and that we will take part in this debate in as responsible a manner as possible .
I should also like to thank all the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , who have helped to make these hearings serious , responsible and objective . Madam President , in order to comply with your request to be brief , I will end here .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on 7 and 8 May , under the firm yet courteous authority of President Karl von Wogau , we conducted a hearing of the six candidates for appointment to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , in an atmosphere of mutual trust and esteem .
It seems to me that we must consider the Council 's decision concerning them by asking ourselves three questions .
Are they the best candidates , are they the advocates of stability , and will they form a coherent team ?
I answer the first question as follows : the nominee for President is obviously , and above all , the governors ' choice .
They have chosen him because they consider him to be the most capable of carrying through this tremendous change in the European banking system .
Everyone knows that in our political groups and parties , we always choose the person we consider will best defend our ideals and our interests .
By analogy , I do not see why it should be any different for central bankers .
In fact , I cannot see why the Peter Principle should apply to such an institution .
I must confess that I have some doubts about the smoke screen that he has raised with regard to the length of his term of office .
But , he has undoubtedly adopted François Mitterrand 's motto that to be unambiguous can only be to one 's own detriment .
Be that as it may , by the end of the hearing , we could have no doubt as to either his competence or his integrity .
And that remark with regard to competence and integrity is also valid for the five other candidates .
Now for the second question , are they advocates of monetary stability ?
It seems to me that the six candidates unanimously agree that inflation will fluctuate between 0 and 2 % .
In fact , it would have been surprising if one of them had announced that his model was the Albanian Central Bank , with its formidable loan pyramid system .
Or again , that his greatest ambition was to increase inflation for the slightly sadistic purpose of bankrupting savers .
Having been reassured on that point , we therefore come to the third question : will they form a coherent team ?
Without doubt they seem quite compatible , but as with all teams , time will tell .
This is why I personally would have preferred , and I think the Union for Europe Group would have unanimously preferred , an overall vote on the whole group of candidates whom , in all probability , we would have massively supported .
We will therefore not object to any of these candidates , as they are all well qualified , remarkably experienced , and have excellent reputations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on Saturday 2 May this Parliament celebrated the constitution of monetary union with eleven Member States of the Union .
Monetary union brings with it a single currency , the euro .
This decision marks the consolidation of a new and important advance in the economic and monetary dimension of the Union , which also has enormous political importance .
The issuing of a currency implies sovereignty , and the single European currency expresses a European sovereignty which should result in a greater deepening of the political dimension of the Union .
Unfortunately , when the time came for the European Council to propose the president , the vice-president and the other four members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , after the European Parliament had made its decision , elements of uncertainty were introduced .
What should have been presented as a historic agreement was distorted in the public eye by a controversy which should never have happened .
Luckily , the substance proved more important than the means , the international financial community has clearly demonstrated its acceptance of monetary union and the euro , and the proposed team has been warmly congratulated by the most internationally outstanding and prestigious economic and financial institutions .
As regards the hearings held in the European Parliament , I want to say that the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party supports the proposals in the report presented by Mrs Randzio-Plath , the chairman of the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs .
And as for the specific proposal about the president , we stress our full respect for his independence , including the mandate for which he has been proposed .
At the hearing , the current president of the European Monetary Institute confirmed his qualities and personality , which we already knew from the contributions he had made in that capacity .
We welcome his independence from any pressure which might limit the fulfilment of the objectives set for the European Central Bank by the Maastricht Treaty .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a new and very important stage in the consolidation of the euro is now beginning .
The European Central Bank is the keystone for the fulfilment of the objectives set for it by the Treaty and we will watch to make sure this process is complied with in full transparency , and that the obligations the Board members committed themselves to at the various hearings are also complied with .
Madam President , the role and status of the European Central Bank have been defined in accordance with the aims attributed to the single currency : to attract capital to the financial markets , to the detriment of social welfare and democracy . Their absence is becoming critical and less and less acceptable to the people .
Price stability , the main aim attributed to the European Central Bank , was achieved by reducing the creation of money and credit , to encourage better returns on investment .
That has destroyed employment and increased government deficits .
We believe that this system of economic warfare should be replaced with a strategy of cooperation , particularly at the monetary level .
That means that the ECB 's objectives should be quite different , based on growth and employment .
Transparency and the democratic control of the activities of the European Central Bank must be achieved , along with accountability to the European Parliament and the national parliaments and a public debate on the main issues .
In this respect , the controversy relating to the appointments to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank is surprising , to say the least .
Judging by some comments on this subject , it would have been better to accept without reaction the coup by the central bankers who had decided that their candidate should be the President of the ECB .
But the Treaty states that the Heads of State and Government are responsible for appointing the Executive Board , and I think that it is useful to reaffirm that the Member States have more authority than the banks .
Madam President , I should like to start by reminding the House that our group voted , by a large majority , for the timely introduction of the euro with eleven Member States .
I mention this fact by way of introduction , since this whole debate is taking place in the midst of a media circus where individual issues are drowned out by the argument for or against the euro .
The question which needs to be addressed is a specific one . What is our reaction to the outcome of the hearing ?
In order to assess this , we have to be clear about what we actually are .
Are we a personnel recruitment commission ?
No .
Are we the board of a central bank ?
Hardly .
We are a democratically elected political body .
Which means that we have to discuss the political programme advocated by the candidates .
If we were a personnel recruitment commission , we would have to vote for the candidates .
They were all competent individuals .
If we were the board of a central bank , we would also have to give a positive signal , because a negative signal at this time would encourage speculation .
As a democratically elected political body , however , we have to look at three questions .
Firstly , what is our view of the nomination procedure which Mr Duisenberg himself described as having left " an unpleasant taste in the mouth ' .
As far as I can see , the unpleasant taste is still there .
And whatever efforts are made to get rid of it , the fact remains that Mr Duisenberg felt obliged to assure us that no political pressure had been exerted upon him .
That in itself leaves a rather nasty taste .
Secondly , we need to be aware that this nomination procedure , which is far more restrictive than the provisions of the various treaties require , was rushed through at great speed .
That , too , leaves a nasty taste in the mouth .
Then there is the big problem of monetary policy .
The Maastricht Treaty provides for a small amount of leeway which is in fact greater than the candidates like to admit .
Fighting deflation cannot simply be equated to playing down inflation !
Yet that is what most of the candidates - including Mr Padoa-Schioppa - did .
We highlighted this distinction in our amendments and we must not forget it in our responses to the arguments put forward by the populists on the Right that the euro will be weak .
Lastly , we must also see that on matters of transparency and democratic accountability the candidates were arguing mainly with a view to the financial markets and the general public , and that they envisage only a loose form of dialogue with the European Parliament .
For this reason the only response can be a negative one .
In our own group , opinions on the matter are divided , not in terms of the actual analysis , but in terms of the question which is actually being asked .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is the duty of Parliament , when the European Central Bank is being set up , to assert clearly its role as the single legitimate body of democratic control of the new European monetary authority . Parliament must confirm just as clearly its commitment to the construction of a monetary and economic Europe , in compliance with the treaties .
The treaties state that the Heads of State and Government , that is , a political authority , should appoint the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
They also state that the European Central Bank is independent .
The compromise somewhat labouriously reached in Brussels by the Heads of State and Government , and taking Mr Duisenberg 's oral statement into account , ensures compliance with these provisions of the treaties .
The information given by the future President of the European Central Bank to this Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , reinforces belief in the independence of the European Central Bank , without jeopardizing the gentlemen 's agreement made in Brussels .
It therefore seems to us that to dispute the terms and conditions of that agreement would be detrimental to the efficient launch of the euro .
We hope that today 's debate will not provide an opportunity for that .
The democratic control of the European Parliament has been exercised extremely resolutely by means of the hearing procedure during which the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs listened to each candidate seriously and at length .
There is no need , in this respect , to look for any form of higher authority to confirm that the body in charge of democratic control played its part responsibly and efficiently .
All the candidates at the hearings showed different , but complementary , personal qualities , and the competence and integrity necessary to their function .
Moreover , they have shown that together they will form a team worthy of Parliament 's trust .
We are therefore in full agreement with the relevant conclusions of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report recommending the approval of these six candidates .
It remains for us to express two hopes : firstly , that in future , members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank will continue the debate with the European Parliament as readily as they have done during these hearings .
Secondly , that the European monetary authority which is being set up will be complemented and counterbalanced by means of budgetary and fiscal instruments that will enable the Council of Ministers to ensure efficient economic management of the Union , to promote growth and employment within a context of stability ensured by the European Central Bank .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations I attended all hearings with the prospective candidates for the Executive Board of the European Central Bank last week .
There were some striking differences in the way both the written and the oral questions were answered .
Some candidates knew exactly how to deal with the questions .
Mr Duisenberg , Mr Issing , Mr Padoa-Schioppa and Mrs Hämäläinen gave clear answers in writing and / or orally , and made it convincingly clear in the time available that they were well to excellently qualified for their job .
The prospective Vice-President , Mr Noyer , and Mr Domingo Solans fell short of this .
What conclusions should we draw from this ?
If we are talking about an opinion here with a limited judicial review , or about the assessment of a team as a whole , I do not have much difficulty with the rather noncommittal opinion that we are dealing with a strong team .
If we are talking about a serious opinion , and if we are asked to give a thorough assessment of each individual candidate , then a problem does arise .
Can we distance ourselves sufficiently from the nationality and the political colour of the candidates nominated ?
I rather doubt it .
It seems to me that , likewise , the Council 's prime focus is not really on capability and quality , but rather on regional spread ; a German , a Frenchman , and an Italian , in any case , and another three members from different countries , but obviously spread out .
Does this provide us with the strongest team ?
Mr Duisenberg is Dutch and a Social-Democrat .
Neither the first , Dutch nationality , nor the second , being a Social-Democrat , qualifies him for this function .
What is relevant is that he is an experienced central banker , is capable of achieving price stability , and does not shy away from lecturing governments . He did so for eight years in the Netherlands , thoroughly and consistently .
He knows how to inform the public , and communicates in a relaxed and transparent fashion with the European Parliament .
It appears that to the French government the nationality of the President of a bank does matter .
It is a little strange that there should already be consensus as to who should take over from Mr Duisenberg .
The next four to eight years of professional experience no longer seem to matter .
Incidentally , it gives us the opportunity to start a comprehensive file on all Mr Trichet 's actions .
We have at least four years , hopefully even eight , to prepare ourselves for the hearing with Mr Trichet .
The rapporteur , Mrs Randzio-Plath , chose not to give a differentiated assessment for each candidate .
She prefers a brief , general evaluation which is the same for each member .
On reflection , this is extremely unsatisfactory , and does not do any justice to the candidates .
The candidates are not equal , after all .
The only possibility we have left now for expressing this difference between candidates is to do so during the vote .
Madam President , the independence of the Central Bank , of the first truly federal institution of the European Union , should not be the independence of isolation , solitude or irresponsibility .
Nevertheless , the institutional provisions contained in the Maastricht Treaty and the changes made since then , form a minimum starting point .
In this initial institutional balance , the powers of decision given to politicians must be used to the full .
First of all , there is the power to appoint the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
Because this appointment is political in nature , the Heads of State or Government cannot and should not merely accept a co-option agreed between central bankers .
They should also take into account the geographical balance of the euro zone .
In the future , it will be the responsibility of the euro Council and of the Ecofin Council to set up a dialogue with the European Central Bank .
Then there is this Parliament 's power of consultation .
It seems to me that we have successfully completed that first stage .
The responsibility and professionalism with which we have prepared , conducted and today evaluated these hearings must reinforce this institution 's legitimacy and authority as the main parliamentary interlocutor of the European Central Bank .
Our use of this power will be based on a strategy of prevention rather than a strategy of conflict .
I am delighted to say that .
With regard to the actual evaluation of the candidates ' proposals , my group has highlighted two questions .
Under what conditions do you envisage a dialogue with the European Parliament ?
This question relates to democratic responsibility .
How do you interpret Article 105 of the Treaty which , when price stability has been achieved , asks you to support the economic policies of the European Union and its objectives as defined in Article 2 of the Treaty ?
In short , a high level of employment .
On these two points we must have serious discussions with the European Central Bank .
The evaluation we have undertaken today of these six candidates provides us with a unique opportunity , given that the length of the terms of office of the members of the Executive Board is variable .
Their proposals vary , but they have obviously shown great independence and great coherence of thought .
For the rest , opinions differ , depending on how used we are to this kind of procedure .
Although we are not expected to give them marks , I should nevertheless like to commend Mr Padoa-Schioppa in particular .
Having made such a good start , we must now adapt our schedules and our structures so that , alongside the main orientations of economic policy , we can attentively ensure that our monetary policy is compatible with coordinated economic policies , in order to benefit employment .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , here are some thoughts that stem from the experience gained in these extremely interesting and important hearings .
I would first of all like to say that , with regard to the procedure followed by the Council between Saturday 2 and Sunday 3 May , what is important is to take note of the fact that the markets , that is to say European savers , welcomed the appointments with satisfaction , and therefore the European Parliament - expression of the people 's will - must also take account of this fact , which also represents a desire for the euro that is probably much greater than the opinion polls show .
However , the Council 's behaviour at the political level will have to be assessed , and thought will have to be given to the inadequacy of a muddled decision-making process that is not very transparent and continually the hostage of the principle of unanimity , totally anti-historical factors considering the gradual assertion of the common European dimension .
Other Members - the rapporteur in particular - have already dwelt upon the issue of commitment to stable prices .
I would now like to make a few observations on another important issue that has arisen , that of the accountability of the European Central Bank .
The problem is of the utmost importance , in that it concerns the need for democratic control and transparency as well as the need to strengthen the reputation and credibility of the ECB .
It is therefore important , in my view , to focus mainly on appropriate behaviours for such purposes rather than on formal rules which would risk providing only a bureaucratic and superficial solution and jeopardising the independence and good functioning of monetary policy .
In the course of our hearings , the problem also arose of the overall strengthening of the management of the European economy , a problem that can no longer be put off , not only because there has to be a better balance between monetary policy and the other economic policies but also in the light of the need - as a result of Economic and Monetary Union - to give a common dimension to problems until now considered national .
In such a context , for example , I could dwell at length - but I will not - on the need to speed up forms of coordination for fiscal policies .
In conclusion , Madam President , I think that not only is it possible to judge positively the team selected to head the ECB but it is an extremely satisfactory one .
That is of course a good prelude to a successful launch of the euro .
Mr President , when interviewing the candidates for the Executive Board of the European Central Bank last week , our primary goal was to assert a principle , that of the need for the confidence and , exceptionally , the right of censure of the Parliament with regard to the Central Bank : for its formation today , for its operations tomorrow .
Indeed all the candidates presented themselves at our hearings with credentials of exceptional value : the candidate for president , Wim Duisenberg , is also an old acquaintance of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , where he has always been known for his expertise and direct language .
It was extremely important , however , to set the precedent of interinstitutional dialogue between the Parliament and the Bank , laying part of the foundations , not yet well defined , of the Bank 's democratic responsibility .
I think that the chairmen von Wogau and Randzio-Plath also contributed substantially to the success of the hearing .
The other priority of the hearing was to verify the role and political space that the new institution - the Central Bank - intends to cover in observance of the treaties : relations with the Ecofin and euro 11 , with the governors of the banks of the European countries that want to and will want to be part of the euro , since with the Central Bank 's creation we find ourselves truly confronted with the first federal-like achievement of Europe .
It seems important to me as well to understand what Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa said - I believe better than anyone else - , which is that even the European Central Bank , though independent and autonomous , will have to have an idea of European construction and take into account the Ecofin and Parliament .
For the Bank too there is a connection between monetary policy and European project , between the need for stability of which it is the guardian and the reforms for employment with which we are all concerned .
This is the ground on which the dialogue between the Central Bank and the Parliament can give the best results .
I therefore give a positive reading of this as well and confirm the confidence in the bankers .
Mr President , the hearings in Parliament and the confirmation vote which we have later today on the president , vice-president , and Executive Board members for the Central Bank mark for this House the last significant step in the beginning of a very significant and historic enterprise for Europe .
The quality of the proceedings in the House , I believe , has restored some dignity to the appointment process which unfortunately , because of the prolonged and rather bitter exchanges on 2 May at the European Council , was rather marred at the outset .
The Council recommendation to the House , consistent with the Treaty , commends a term of office of eight years for Mr Wim Duisenberg as nominee for Central Bank presidency .
We will pass a resolution confirming the appointment of the president later today on these terms .
One has no objection to that .
However , I recognize that the reference to an eight-year term for the president is no more for all of us than a fiction , since clearly Mr Duisenberg is unlikely to serve for that length by his own admission .
In a statement on 2 May Mr Duisenberg explained that in view of his age he did not want to serve a full term but added that in future , the decision to resign would be his , and his alone .
Our hearings helped to elicit further understanding of this matter . The nominee for president intends , health permitting , to serve at least until the switch-over from national notes and coins to euros has been achieved .
Furthermore he stated he did not intend to stand down at a specific moment in time .
On further questioning he added : ' I can assure you that there is no link between the terms of one executive director or vice-president and that of any other .
There is no link that I am aware of - no link whatsoever . '
In terms of the complete independence and discretion that should go with this high office , this latter quote is an important reassurance .
In this light the Liberal Group emphasizes the desirability for continuity of leadership in the Board of the bank and suggests that an early or simultaneous succession of both the president and vice-president should be avoided .
Of course this matter is entirely in the hands of Mr Duisenberg himself .
I accept his reassurance that there is no link whatsoever between the terms of one appointment and those of any other .
But we , in the Liberal Group , think there can be no more graphic way of confirming this in substance than by his remaining in office to ensure a smooth transition from the first appointee as vicepresident to that person 's successor in office .
Mr President , with today 's proceedings the European Parliament is participating in the constitution of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , a body which , as the preceding hearings have substantiated , will be independent from the instruments of political and democratic control of the Member States and of the European Union itself .
It will also be independent of informal centres of power , as was shown by the political accommodation reached in Brussels , a body which regards itself as committed to implementing a tough monetarist policy , aimed at monetary stability and low interest rates , and fundamentally ignoring the effects this policy has on the social condition of the people of the European Union .
In the name of all those who , in the most dramatic way , pay for the consequences of this unpopular , neo-liberal policy , we refuse to use our vote to legitimize this body and the role that has been assigned to it .
Mr President , I hope the procedure used to appoint the board of the European Central Bank will never be repeated .
The insistence on unanimity among Member States is extremely damaging , and only serves to allow one large country to put pressure on others .
The unofficial agreement to share the president 's term of office is fortunately only part of an unworthy show , as it will not be legally binding .
Let it serve as a warning , however , that monetary policy in the euro area cannot be subordinate to national interests .
I would like to make a few critical observations regarding the hearings .
Firstly , the nominees displayed a pretty incredible mood of reserve when it came to demands for openness on the part of the Central Bank .
Wim Duisenberg even went so far as to say that the contents of the Minutes of the Board could only be made known in sixteen years ' time .
This we simply cannot accept .
The European Parliament must immediately initiate talks on this subject with Board members .
The nominees also stressed the need to fight against inflation , even more than is required of the Maastricht Treaty .
But I would say , let last week 's hearings serve as a starting point for future dialogue between the Central Bank and the European Parliament .
Such talks must lead to establishing a balance between targets for inflation and targets for employment .
They must also give weight to the fact that the ECB , described as the world 's most independent bank , must in the future operate in such a way that it is accountable both to the European Parliament and to the general public .
This will be quite a challenge for the European Parliament .
But I am convinced that the general public will also agree on how important it is for the European Parliament to monitor the work of the Central Bank .
Mr President , on behalf of the National Alliance , I express approval of and satisfaction with all the candidacies proposed and among these I would like to underline the particularly prestigious nomination of Mr PadoaSchioppa . Nevertheless , I must stress the need to review some of the mechanisms for the future appointments to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
Indeed , even though in a context of virtually widespread consensus , there is also widespread dissatisfaction on the part of the Parliament .
With regard to the principle of democracy , in fact , the Parliament must have a more decisive role in selections that like this one have direct consequences on the individual economies of the States .
It must be recognised as having the possibility to re-examine these candidates and submit them to a more detailed verification , candidates who initially do not provide an executive framework of their attitude on monetary policies , on democratic control and on the transparency of the work that they are called upon to do on behalf of and in the interest of the European Union .
I confirm , as already stated at the sitting of 1 April , my total agreement with the autonomy of the Central Bank , but in addition to providing for dialogue with the European Parliament and dialogue at the time of the appointment of the Board and at the time of the debate on monetary choices of particular strategic importance , it is essential that we advance to a situation of political cohesion that alone can guarantee that we will not risk being faced with a giant that is purely economic , but lacking any political dignity .
Madam President , before we held the hearings with the candidates for the European Central Bank last week , we obviously already knew that , legally speaking , we had no veto right against the candidates .
In the meantime it has become clear that , politically speaking , this veto right does exist .
None of the candidates is able to function as a Member of the Board if he or she does not have the confidence of a large majority within this Parliament .
Even this Parliament does not seem to be sufficiently convinced of this important fact .
The discussions about one candidate , who clearly performed less well than the others , have made this clear .
What conclusions can we draw from these hearings ?
Firstly , that proper preparation pays off .
A few months ago my group approached leading European experts who acted as advisors and sparring partners for the social-democratic interviewers .
We commissioned independent experts to compile political profiles of all the candidates .
Some of us sought advice in the United States , from the Senate and the FED , on the American experiences .
The organization of the hearings worked well .
Our own approach with one leading interviewer per candidate , always from a different Member State than the candidate , is undoubtedly worth following .
The method used by some of the other groups , whereby the interviewing was preferably done by people from the same country as the interviewee , who , to top it all , prided themselves on their friendship or joint activities with the candidates , clearly does not bear repeating .
Secondly , it seemed to me that there was sufficient awareness amongst all candidates of the importance of openness , active communication and good relations with the European Parliament .
Only a few weeks ago we , the Group of the Party of European Socialists , had to put up a tough fight over the Randzio-Plath report in order to emphasize the need for openness . Many of our conservative colleagues were still associating openness in the ECB with infringement of its independence .
These misunderstandings have now clearly been dispelled .
I can even see agreement being reached on the anonymity of the Minutes of the European Central Bank .
Thirdly , it has become very clear during the hearings that price stability , the necessity of which my group also expressly endorses , is being achieved at the moment . It has also become clear that the ECB will immediately be faced with the question as to how it is going to give shape to its secondary task , namely supporting general economic policy .
Unfortunately I have to note that the answers to this question were always very vague .
It seemed as though , as far as those in the Central Banks were concerned , the interest rates could only go up .
My final conclusion is that the candidates demonstrated sufficient awareness of the uncertainties entailed in monetary policy at European level , and that they did not proffer traditional , national solutions for European problems .
This openness of spirit gives me enough faith in the fruitfulness of the constant dialogue which we will enter into with the ECB .
For this Parliament this dialogue will become one of the most important tasks .
It is a fascinating challenge which we will gladly accept .
Mr President , listening to Mr Peijs leaves a bit of a bad taste in the mouth .
As if the Group of the Party of European Socialists are the only ones here in this Parliament who defend openness and transparency where the Central Bank is concerned .
Let no one be under any misapprehension , the Group of the European People 's Party was only against this Parliament being able to dismiss the Board of the Central Bank .
I would like to remind everyone of Mr Metten 's fine words about dismissing one of the candidates , or rather , abstaining from voting , but tomorrow or this afternoon he will be voting in favour again .
Strange , Mr President , I do not think Mr Metten lives up to his fine words .
Mr President , on the subject of the hearing , Mr Duisenberg 's replies to my questions reassured me .
He will decide himself , he says , when he should resign his office .
He thinks it is absurd to start talking already about the nationality , let alone the name of his successor .
Despite much tooth-brushing at Mr Duisenberg 's suggestion , the bad taste in the mouth caused by the weekend of 2 and 3 May has not yet entirely disappeared .
It also appears that being president requires a truly professional approach in such circumstances .
Some suspicion continues to linger in the minds and hearts of the people .
To remove all their doubt , I call from within this Parliament on Mr Duisenberg to stay in place until 2003 at least , as a way of demonstrating beyond doubt to the political world that the European Central Bank is independent .
The replies to questions about democratic accountability occupy a central position for this Parliament .
The candidate for the Presidency of the Bank is prepared to appear before the European Parliament four times a year .
The quarterly report will then be discussed .
The Vice-President , Mr Noyer , says he also sees the importance of this accountability .
The Presidents of the national central banks are able to explain the monetary policy in their national parliaments .
It is sensible of Mr Duisenberg , who is ignoring the wishes of the French Parliament , to make the members of the Executive Board of the ECB appear in the national parliaments .
Just imagine , Mr Duisenberg in the French Assemblée .
Marianne would topple from her virginal pedestal .
I have one comment and one question .
My comment is the following . From a Dutch perspective the 1987 Currency Act will have to be amended by law , and this could be an excellent reason for using the new resource of the referendum , as every Dutch person has to deal with the guilder .
This would be the opportunity to ask the Dutch people whether the majority wants to get rid of the guilder or not .
That was my comment .
Sufficient mandate has been given to the minimum of 40 000 people who are required by law to initiate a referendum .
The question I wanted to ask is the following .
In the wake of the two previous Dutch speakers I want to know whether we will be assessing a president who will make use of his sovereign will to step down midway ? Or are we giving a judgment about a president who makes use of his sovereignty by staying put for eight years , as argued for by Mrs Peijs ?
Because this uncertainty exists . The Prime Minister spoke in this spirit , but the Minister of Finance seemed to say something else .
Mr President , in the talks Members have conducted on the nomination of the ECB Executive Board , it has been frequently mentioned that the Bank must endeavour to achieve the greatest possible openness and always keep Parliament informed of its activity .
I would like to mention another aspect of the matter , namely that such openness will be of benefit to the Bank itself , and even vital at the beginning .
In its endeavour to succeed , the European Central Bank will need the confidence of the public in addition to that of the market .
In this respect the European Parliament could act as one side in an excellent partnership .
Open dialogue on monetary policy with Parliament will furnish the Bank with the feedback from the Community that it needs , and will help reduce the distrust that people have of the Bank .
I hope that the nominees for the Board , all of whom I give my support to , will appreciate the advantages of openness and democracy .
Mr President , I was pleased and honoured to attend all the hearings of the Central Bank governors and the remaining five members of the Executive Board held in Brussels last week .
These hearings were a resounding success for the European Parliament and hence for the people of the European Union .
Moreover I believe our hearings went some way to assuage the appearance of uncertainty which characterised the meeting of the Council in Brussels the weekend before , where the eventual choice of Duisenberg and Trichet for a 12-year incumbency of the ECB governorship was a success but the nature of the deal which buttressed it left something to be desired .
Why were Parliament 's hearings a success ?
First of all our forensic questioning evinced from Wim Duisenberg the clarion call of his independence .
There was no going Dutch with this Dutchman .
He has been given an eight-year mandate and he alone will decide any date of any departure .
Secondly , Wim Duisenberg placed on record , as did Mrs Hämäläinen and Mr Issing , that in accordance with Article 105 of the Treaty , once the overriding principle of price stability has been secured and established then it is an obligation not just an option - wisely exercised using all instruments available to it - for the ECB to support the broad objectives of the European Union to promote growth and employment .
There are 18 million unemployed , as mentioned just now by President-in-Office Gordon Brown .
This obligation can entail lowering interest rates across ' Euroland ' to stimulate growth .
Thirdly , the EB established a clear and future dialogue with the present board of the ECB .
As Chancellor Brown has just exhorted us , we will conduct purposeful hearings on a quarterly basis with the ECB , not to infringe its executive independence but instead to invoke the necessary public accountability to which even this August and powerful body must submit - it will indeed be ' August ' for the people .
In this respect I deplore the leader in Monday 's Times which in its habitual ignorance scorned the coming importance of the EB in effecting democratic accountability .
The European Parliament is coming of age .
After these hearings its first grey hairs are appearing , and in a few months time the éminences grises of Parliament will begin their historic task of entering into regular dialogue with the ECB .
This is the task which will put the European Parliament on the political map forever .
I believe , on the evidence of the hearings , that we are up to this task and I look forward with pleasure to the European Parliament working with Mr Duisenberg 's team for Europe 's common and exciting future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we should compliment the Council on its excellent proposal for the first Executive Board of the ECB .
Its proposal has successfully met all the obligations stipulated in Article 109 a of the Maastricht Treaty .
It is my conviction that any further debate on the term of office of the future president is unnecessary since Mr Duisenberg has been appointed for eight years and this is in accordance with the Treaty .
However , the Maastricht Treaty requires a unanimous vote in the Council , in other words the appointment is a political decision , and so there must also be negotiations with regard to the individuals involved .
The independence of the Executive Board is guaranteed exclusively by the fact that re-election is not permitted .
This is not a matter which we really aired with Mr Duisenberg , although we did discuss the length of his term of office .
The hearing revealed that the six names proposed are all excellent candidates .
Although there were differences in their statements and in their presentations to the House , there can be no doubt as to their qualifications .
All the candidates explained quite clearly that they would advocate a mixture of monetary control and inflation targets as the number one tool in ensuring the monetary stability of the euro .
In actual fact , contrary to what Mrs Randzio-Plath said earlier , under Article 105 the primary objective is monetary stability , to which the question of employment is only secondary .
Only a stable euro , a coordinated finance policy and strict observation of Article 104 taken in conjunction with the stability pact can offer a guarantee of sustained success .
Inflation is not the key to labour market problems as we heard quite clearly at the hearing .
Allow me to make one further comment on Mr Metten .
The members of the socialist and communist groups questioned the qualifications of one of the candidates .
I have the impression - and this was borne out in the vote - that this was due not to a genuine question of suitability , but rather to the fact that the candidate in question was an adviser to a Christian Democrat prime minister and , in addition , had worked for many years for the Employers ' Association .
I would ask you to leave these arguments to one side and to vote together for a good , sensible Executive Board .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has conducted the hearings of the candidates for the administration of the Central Bank in , I believe , an exemplary way , which does credit to our Parliament .
With regard to the candidates , the Treaty lays down that they are pan-European personalities of known repute and professional competence .
Nationality does not and must not play a role in our judgment but , naturally , their conception of economic policy does .
This is something we cannot ignore .
But perhaps these are all issues which take a back seat in the face of the fact that there are now two large central banks in the world ; one is the new European Central Bank and the other is the Federal Reserve in the United States .
We hope that these two large institutions will cooperate to stabilize the international money system and the global economy .
However , if we compare the constitutional aims of the two institutions , I am forced to acknowledge the superiority of the American institution .
The aims which are defined in the charter of the European Central Bank are one-sided and somewhat clumsily phrased .
In their haste to emphasize the need for price stability , which we all sympathise with when it is carried out in a logical and responsible way of course , those who drew up the charter forgot the main technical objective of any central bank , which is to supply the economy with money , and relegated employment to the side lines .
On the other hand , the starting point of the charter of the Federal Reserve is the autonomous need for a central bank to supply money to the economy , taking care equally of price stability , employment and a logical level for interest rates .
This one-sided nature of the charter either forced or allowed the candidates to present a united front on the issue of price stability and essentially , like other Pontius Pilates , to wash their hands of the matter of employment .
There were certain undertones to this issue .
The role of Parliament , in the context of the general acceptance of all of the candidates and in the context of respect , naturally , for the independence of the central bank , is to point out to them that , with whatever policy they practice , they must rectify the one-sidedness of the charter and move towards the position of the American Federal Reserve .
I want to believe that this was the meaning of the opinions expressed about the candidates by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and I hope that the voices of criticism which have been heard will be taken into consideration by the future members of the Executive Board .
To date , price stability in Europe has been borne on the shoulders of the 20-30 million unemployed .
It is high time that a part of that burden was borne by an economic and monetary policy which is more efficient and more sensitive , and it is hoped that the members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank will play their role in this .
Mr President , British Members of the Group of the European People 's Party intend to vote against Mr Duisenberg and Mr Noyer .
This is not a vote against them personally : it is a vote against the deal struck at the Brussels Summit on 2 and 3 May .
It is also not a vote against monetary union .
Members know that I could never tolerate that .
On the contrary , it is a vote for the success of the single currency .
That success depends not just on the credibility of the new Central Bank but on the credibility of all the European institutions , not least on the credibility of this House .
We voted on 30 April overwhelmingly against any modification of the President 's eight-year term and against any setting in advance of the nationality of the President 's successor .
Less than three days later , these votes were just thrown back in our faces by the Council .
Mr Duisenberg 's off-the-cuff remarks to us subsequently do not alter this fact at all .
I know many of you share our outrage at this .
Some have spoken out and then gone silent .
Some , to their shame , have sought to hide their submission to the Heads of Government by picking on Mr Solans .
That is the coward 's course .
Some of us must have the courage to reveal what this Parliament believes but cannot say .
Mr President , the Treaty , as you all know , contains a clear design for the way the European Central Bank should work . It stresses the autonomy and independence of the Central Bank , which should be immune to all sorts of pressures or political instructions .
At the same time , however , the Treaty reserves a special moment for politics - that is , the moment of nomination .
That nomination falls to the Council , but there is also a provision for Parliament to express its view following hearings or interviews with the candidates proposed by the Council .
Well , at the moment I am pleased to say that the European Parliament has played its part correctly , and has thus been able to correct the bad impression caused by the meeting of Heads of State and Government the previous weekend .
Mr Duisenberg 's responses to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy have removed the doubts on some aspects which had not been cleared up at the Summit , especially with regard to his possible retirement .
To quote Mr Duisenberg from the verbatim report of proceedings : " I do not intend to stand down at a specific moment in time ' .
And he went on to say : " I want to emphasize that the decision to step down will be my decision and mine alone ' .
I think that is an important clarification , especially in relation to what Mr Stevens was just saying .
The second point I want to mention is of particular importance to Parliament , especially for those Members of this House who are of a progressive or left-wing persuasion . It concerns the willingness of the candidates to make sure that the basic function of maintaining price stability and low inflation is compatible with the general objectives of the economic policy promoted by the Union - or which should be promoted by the Union - aimed basically at growth and job creation .
In general , we obtained satisfactory replies from the six candidates in this area , although with different shades of opinion , of course .
My third point is especially important for us . It concerns the relationship with the European Parliament , which from now on is going to be - has to be - the privileged partner in the task of democratic supervision of the future European Central Bank .
In this area too , we obtained satisfactory answers from all the candidates , who assured us of that important point : the European Parliament 's role as a privileged partner .
The national parliaments will have their role with the governors of the national central banks , which will still exist of course , at national level .
Lastly , there is another matter which is also very important for us : transparency and public information on monetary policy decisions and the reasons underlying them .
That is an essential point , as we have often said . In this area too , we were given satisfactory replies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once before in Europe , 128 years ago , to be precise , there was another position which needed to be filled .
On that occasion it was in Spain .
And on that occasion the French government sent a telegram to Bad Ems which , as a result of a few changes , created the necessary mood to start preparations for war .
Once again there has been a dispute over an appointment . Once again it has involved the Germans and the French in particular .
But this time , two days later , the two main protagonists sat down together in Avignon and made plans on how they would proceed in Europe in the future .
This shows , I believe , how enormously different things are this time . In other words , how much progress we have made in Europe .
Issues which once led to wars are now argued out in joint institutions , then differences are set aside and work is resumed .
This shows the level of political stability we have achieved in Europe today .
This political stability represents a foundation stone for the economic and monetary stability we are endeavouring to achieve within the European Monetary Union .
It is not simply a question of personnel . The Maastricht Treaty , the Stability Pact , stipulates a framework which includes the independence of the Central Bank , the European System of Central Banks and so forth , and , in my view , guarantees that it is built on solid foundations .
However , we should also make it clear that the independence of the European Central Bank will have to be defended .
Mr Duisenberg 's paper gives the first possible date for stepping down , but not the final one .
So he is correct in his definition when he says that after four years things will start to look up and that we will then be able to defend the independence of the Central Bank should any national government try to exert unreasonable pressure on its head and his good team .
Allow me to make one final observation .
There is only one reason for the great fuss which surrounded the appointment of the President of the Commission and which has surrounded this case , and that is that these questions still have to be decided unanimously .
For this reason , in the next institutional round , to ensure that the situation is not repeated , Parliament must stress the fact that in future such personnel appointments should be decided by a majority decision at Council level .
Mr President , I wish to thank Christa Randzio-Plath for her excellent work in producing this splendid report .
The Central Bank will have greater freedom than any other institution in the world : its executives will wield immense power .
It is therefore obvious that power cannot be completely unaccountable .
Money , especially monetary policy , is not at all a neutral subject .
It is hot , it is electric , it is all-powerful , and it affects every citizen in the Union .
The hearings were important .
We did not take a position , as if we had there would have been five unsuitable candidates , in our opinion .
One candidate did not fulfil all requirements , in the view of our interviewers .
It must be said that the Bank system must be awfully delicate if it cannot allow one no-vote , not even in Parliament .
Fortunately , the market thinks differently .
The positive side to all this is that we have initiated intensive talks with the Central Bank and you can be sure we will be thorough when we discuss financial and employment policies .
I am wary of the opinion that the European Parliament should be some kind of press outlet for the Central Bank .
Parliament will create a procedure and will present frameworks within which the ECB can practise monetary policy .
I think it is very important that the ECB makes it part of its monetary policy to report back on its assessment of how much monetary policy has given real support to common economic policy . Its key target should be greater employment .
That is the biggest problem in the Union .
The euro is not always going to be stable if it is based on such mass unemployment as there is .
Certain candidates for the Central Bank 's Board have not conceded that monetary policy could have different effects in various parts of the euro area .
It is well known , however , that countries find themselves in different economic cycles at different times .
The economic cycle experienced in small countries like Finland and the employment situation there are different from those in the larger countries .
The European Central Bank must also take account of the possibility of asymmetrical shockwaves affecting the economy when it determines appropriate monetary policy in Europe .
Now we have embarked on a partnership with the Bank , I hope and believe that something good , vital and significant will come of it .
Mr President , on the basis of the candidates ' CVs and their written and oral replies to our questions , we have been able to conclude that each of the proposed candidates deserves our support .
I am convinced of the qualities of these five men and one woman , of their integrity , and their determination . I am also convinced that they will ensure that the Treaty will be complied with in all its aspects , and that the candidates possess suitable experience to fulfil their mandate with dignity .
The candidates have all shown their willingness to enter into permanent dialogue with our European Parliament as the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
Moreover , the candidates have shown in advance that they have the predisposition to operate as a team .
After having heard the candidates and having read the conclusions of the European Council , we can only conclude that the Treaty and the Statute of the European Central Bank are being respected .
I will therefore vote with pleasure in favour of the appointment of each of the candidates .
Unfortunately I am not able to express the same pleasure about the way the European Council has acted .
The people of Europe have few words of praise for those who are responsible for the poor preparation of this Council . Nor do they have much praise for those who , even at such a historic moment , did not manage to suppress their inclination to give priority to the national prestige of their country over a well-understood general European interest .
But the government leaders who summoned the patience and courage to lunch for hours on end , and in doing so managed to achieve the result which we will endorse today , do deserve our congratulations .
Our congratulations are also due to those who organized the work in our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I hope , Mr Metten , that the groups will retain the political freedom at the next opportunity to each organize themselves internally as they see fit .
The decision-making procedure of the Council must of course be changed .
We can no longer have a situation in which one country is able to exercise its veto when appointments are being decided on .
Mr President , the creation of the euro is an event of the greatest significance .
It will be a new reference currency of great economic potency , and I very much hope the euro will help to turn that into great political potency .
The euro will be managed by an independent Central Bank , and our interviewing of the members we appointed to manage it was among the high points in the life of the European Parliament .
The process by which the Council selected the President of the Central Bank , however , was lamentable .
Yet the credibility of the appointed members , and the solidity of the European economies , were sufficient for the financial markets to erase the memory of some nationalistic decisions which , we hope , will not be repeatable .
Taken overall , this is not the ideal form of governing body we hoped the European Council would present us with .
Nor did I have an equal opinion of all the candidates ; that was to be expected .
But the interviews we conducted enabled us to obtain the necessary assurances that all members of the Executive Board , especially the President , Wim Duisenberg , will recognise that the legitimacy and credibility of the European Central Bank and the strength of the euro will depend for their security on the quality of the accounts submitted to the European Parliament and the seriousness of the monetary dialogue they will set up with us .
All the members we interviewed convinced us that they are highly knowledgeable on the subject and have a proven track record of lifelong integrity .
I would particularly congratulate Mrs Hämäläinen , not only on her birthday , which she celebrated on the same day , but also because of the pleasure it gives me to see a woman on the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
Let us hope that others will join her in the future , as is natural in a democracy .
Thus , just as we have come to know the Board of the European Central Bank a great deal better , so they have undoubtedly realized that for us monetary policy is neutral , and that , in their dealings with national Parliaments , European Members will be attentive and vigilant in ensuring that the operation of the European Central Bank fulfils all the obligations imposed on it by the Treaty : price stability , but also war on unemployment , support for economic growth , and economic , social and regional cohesion in Europe .
Mr President , may I start by congratulating Mrs Randzio-Plath for her tireless efforts as rapporteur and Members and staff from the secretariat of Parliament for their work .
A successful single currency will improve the single market , which will contribute to growth and high levels of employment , commensurate with Article 2 of the Treaty of the European Union .
In the long term it will provide for both monetary and economic stability and low inflation .
I believe that this Parliament has conducted itself with dignity .
Our efforts on Thursday and Friday last week , during the hearings , have given both ourselves and others in the wider world a glimpse into the hearts and minds of our future ECB governors , in a way which has never been witnessed before .
The commitment to openness and transparency is , as the President-in-Office mentioned earlier in his speech , an idea whose time has come .
In addition , all the candidates gave their commitment to a variety of forms of democratic accountability , which is to be welcomed with open arms .
All the candidates were competent and some held views which some of us did not agree with .
But to pretend , as Mr Stevens did , that to vote against the presidency of Mr Duisenberg helps either the euro or the role of this Parliament is a misrepresentation of the truth and is a deception .
Mr Stevens ' comments are more a courtesy to his leader , Mr Hague , at home in Westminster .
We are all Europeans and decisions made in this House are made in the interest of Europe as a whole - this is not an intergovernmental institution .
We are on the threshold of an era - which , I believe , in the next few years will include all 15 Member States - an era which will bring employment and prosperity to Europe in a way we have never seen before , and give the people of Europe a weight and an influence in the world commensurate with their importance .
I look forward to that era .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the first weekend in May was a weekend of great historic importance for the European Union .
With the decision by eleven of the fifteen Member States to introduce the single currency on 1 January 1999 , the European Union has set its course for the 21st century .
However , this historic event was overshadowed by the debate on the future President of the European Central Bank .
The only question for discussion in the media was : will Wim Duisenberg 's term of office be four or eight years ?
This is something I regret wholeheartedly .
It was not , indeed it is not the most important question .
It is true that the six members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank have different terms of office .
This was organized so that the entire management team will not be forced to stand down at the next election .
It ensures that their joint experience can be passed on .
So , a shorter term of office bears no relation to the level of independence of the European Central Bank .
Its independence will be evident in its daily activities .
It is also true that the appointment of the President of the European Central Bank is a political decision .
This is the same the world over .
However , in its activities the European Central Bank will be completely independent .
At the end of the day , what was the cause of the debacle on the first weekend in May ?
One thing is certain - preparations for the Council meeting on 2 May 1998 were far from ideal .
As we know , it is the task of the presidency to take a leading role in advance preparations for personnel decisions which must be unanimous .
The Luxembourg Presidency started the process by putting forward a suggestion which was , in fact , very similar to the solution finally adopted .
The British Presidency then continued these efforts .
Unfortunately , the proposal which British Prime Minister Tony Blair finally put to the Heads of State and Government at lunch on 2 May 1998 failed to meet with general agreement .
Unfortunately again , a crisis meeting with the Dutch and French heads of state , who were effectively blocking each other with opposing candidates , failed to achieve an outcome .
Finally , Chancellor Helmut Kohl was forced to take on the role of mediator .
In a meeting later designated as the longest lunch in the world - lasting from 2 pm to 3 am the following morning - he managed to achieve the solution which is now on the table .
For this Helmut Kohl has earned our thanks and our recognition .
Applause please !
( Muted applause ) In Wim Duisenberg the first President of the European Central Bank will be the preferred choice of 14 Member States and the preferred choice of the European Parliament .
This is particularly important during the first , formative years of the European Central Bank .
At the start of his professional career Mr Duisenberg collected academic experience .
Then he moved into the world of international monetary policy through his work at the International Monetary Fund .
He was the Dutch Finance Minister , then a highly successful president of the Dutch Central Bank .
He is currently President of the European Monetary Institute .
Thus Wim Duisenberg has the very best credentials for the post of first President of the European Central Bank . He will bring his whole life experience to the job .
Furthermore , we must not forget that a whole team is being appointed and that the President of the Central Bank will not be making decisions alone , but with his team .
This team has an excellent captain in the shape of its President Wim Duisenberg .
The team will also contain two other very strong players : Padoa-Schioppa from Italy , an excellent individual whom we all know , and Mr Ottmar Issing , Chief Economist at the German Central Bank and the author of the standard reference works on monetary policy and monetary theory .
I myself read his works before I started dealing with monetary policy .
As I had to tell him at the hearing , by rights it was not really I who should have been examining Professor Issing , but rather Professor Issing who should have been examining me !
So he is a most excellent person .
Professor Issing has been appointed for eight years .
So he will be on board for the whole eight-year period .
Then we know - and Mr Donnelly also knows this - that at the end of the day interest rate decisions will not be taken by the President and the Executive Board alone . In fact , the Executive Board and the Central Bank Council will take these decisions together , and Trichet and Tietmeyer will therefore also be represented .
In other words , we will be starting with a great team .
I can only advise you to vote for this great team !
Mr President , this debate and , indeed , the proceedings of Parliament have been an exercise in both accountability and consensus-building which does great credit to this Parliament .
This means that the future relationships between Parliament and the European Central Bank will be in very good order .
I believe I speak on behalf of all the Council of Ministers when I pass my congratulations to this Parliament for the excellent way in which these proceedings have taken place .
I want to add only two things .
Firstly , I will pass on not only the vote of Parliament but also its views to the next meeting of the Finance Ministers on Tuesday .
I will tell them what I believe has been said by all speakers here - your view , my view , the view of all the Council of Ministers - that the Treaty will be , and should be , upheld and upheld in all respects .
The second thing I will pass on is that this is an exercise in consultation which is not the end of a process but the beginning .
The transparency , accountability and openness which almost every speaker has referred to in their remarks is , in my view and in the view of these proceedings , absolutely essential , not just in itself because it is good for the working of the single currency , but because it will make for the greater stability that will allow for high levels of growth and employment in Europe .
It is , therefore , on that basis that the consultation has been effective and will in future be effective that I urge you to pass on your consultations to the European Finance Ministers and the European Council in the spirit of the speeches we have received today .
Mr President , I am personally affected since I was unable to distinguish between irony and sincerity in Mr von Wogau 's speech , particularly if I take Mr Brok 's reaction into account .
Mr President , Mrs Thyssen has attacked me on two points .
Firstly , she says that the Group of the European People 's Party has always favoured more openness .
She has a short memory .
I invite everyone to read what she said on the previous Randzio-Plath report . This provides the definite answer .
Secondly , could I say something about the strength of my backbone with regard to the criticism which I made in respect of a few candidates ?
I invite everyone to consult the result of the roll-call votes shortly , then it will become clear how strong my backbone is .
Mr President , as Mr Wolf addressed me directly , may I assure him that I would be more than pleased to make available to him a written copy of the speech I have just made .
If he then compares it to the actual events , or asks Gordon Brown whether that is how things actually happened , he will find that the current President-in-Office of the Council will confirm my version of events .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Euro-Mediterranean cooperation ( joint debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0466 / 98 - O-0111 / 98 by the following Members : Viola , Fabra Vallés , Martens , Friedrich and Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council , on Euro-Mediterranean cooperation ; -B4-0288 / 98 - O-0083 / 98 by the following Members : Speciale , Terrón I Cusì , Napoletano , Roubatis , Swoboda and Carlotti , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council , on the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements ; -B4-0290 / 98 - O-0092 / 98 by the following Members : Azzolini and Pasty , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council , and B4-0383 / 98-0-0093 / 98 , to the Commission , on Euro-Mediterranean cooperation ; -B4-0384 / 98 - O-0094 / 98 by the following Members : Elmalan , Carnero González , Papayannakis , Ephremidis , Alavanos , Gutiérrez Díaz and Sierra Gonzalez , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , to the Council , and B4-0385 / 98-0-0095 / 98 , to the Commission , on the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements ; -B4-0467 / 98 - O-0112 / 98 by the following Members : Fabra Vallés , Viola , Theato , Lambrias , Martens , Friedrich and Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on Euro-Mediterranean cooperation ; -B4-00389 / 98 - O-0099 / 98 by the following Members : Aelvoet , Cohn-Bendit , Gahrton , Tamino and Orlando , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council , and B4-0390 / 98-0-0100 / 98 to the Commission , on the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements ; -B4-0465 / 98 - O-0103 / 98 by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Council , on the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements ; -B4-00469 / 98 - O-0114 / 98 / rev.1 by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , to the Council , on Euro-Mediterranean cooperation ; -B4-00471 / 98 - O-0116 / 98 by Mr Caligaris and Mr Fassa , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Council , and B4-0472 / 98 - O-0117 / 98 to the Commission , on the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Euro-Mediterranean process is today facing the difficult and important moment of resumption after the weakness of Malta , the labourious agreement with Jordan , the delay in the ratification of the Euro-Mediterranean agreements already concluded , the dramatic events in Algeria , the stalling of the peace process , the complex candidature of Cyprus and , finally , the difficult blocking of the MED programmes .
Euro-Mediterranean dialogue will resume in Palermo where , in June , the informal Summit of Foreign Ministers will be held , a summit that should open the way - hopefully downhill - to the forthcoming Conference in Berlin .
This return is beginning under favourable auspices : first of all the resumption of the MED programmes , and therefore a regained confidence in the possibility of once again giving civil society the necessary strength to link the two sides of the Mediterranean and providing it with the adequate funds .
Another positive sign is the imminent creation of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum which is nothing other than the completion of the Barcelona declaration itself .
These good auspices notwithstanding , the risk remains nonetheless that the arduous peace process between Israel and Palestine , which lately has also been showing all its problems and the inadequacy of a European diplomatic presence in the negotiations led by Washington , will negatively affect - as has already occurred in Malta - the European attempt to consolidate a dialogue with the southern rim of the Mediterranean .
The Middle East issues are arising in the Barcelona process , but they are inevitably part of its passage to completion and continue to be perhaps one of the weakest points of this process .
If the Union 's common foreign policy is still not up to such tasks , perhaps the future Euro-Mediterranean Forum will be of help in keeping the channels of dialogue open between all sides .
Today , we are also discussing the resumption of the MED programmes .
It is my wish that this be complete and efficient .
There will be complete resumption once the emergency phase is entirely over and if we follow what was voted last year by the Parliament on the report by Fabra Vallés .
Total resumption of Euro-Mediterranean dialogue through decentralized cooperation will actually be complete only when all the MED programmes have been resumed , in particular those aimed at a greater involvement of civil society and the small and medium-sized enterprises along the Mediterranean rim .
There will only be efficiency when the European Commission has enough staff to clearly prevent those operators who in the past had made cofinancing commitments but then did not keep their word , from participating in the new programmes .
I hope that the Commission has understood the high cost - not only in quantifiable financial terms but also in the difficult-to-quantify terms of the loss of trust in the European Institutions on the part of the Mediterranean non-member countries and especially on the part of civil society - caused by the inevitable blocking of the MED programmes , blocking that , mind you , was rightly sought by Commissioner Marín and effectively monitored by this Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control which gave its own positive opinion that decentralized programming could resume only when the Commission provides sufficient guarantees that there will be a resumption of sound programming and financial management .
I have dwelt upon the resumption of the MED programmes because the debate that we are holding today arose from this , anticipating the discussion already scheduled in June on the situation in the Middle East .
The Group of the European People 's Party is obviously not avoiding such a debate , considering it in any case useful and timely .
The colleagues of the group following me will address the individual issues more specifically .
In conclusion , I consider it both useful and timely to arrive at a joint resolution on which all agree .
As far as our group is concerned , I believe that such an objective is easier to achieve if an agreement can be reached on the compromise resolution , which could take the form of two simple oral amendments which make recital G positive and update paragraph 10 which today could be objectively surpassed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all allow me to remind you of the importance of the European Union 's actions in favour of the associated countries of the Mediterranean .
With the MEDA programme alone , up to 1999 , we are talking about ECU 3400 million .
That money is aimed at providing help wherever the worst problems are encountered : that is , in the area of essential basic services for the welfare of the people .
Priority is given to projects in the fields of education , professional training and health .
Although I fully agree with the Commission on the basic principles , there are still some question marks over the implementation of those principles and the way in which the money provided in the Union 's budget is spent .
In that context , we all know that the moment of truth has not yet arrived , even though , in an exemplary demonstration of transparency on the part of the Commission , the implementation figures for the budgetary planning for the Mediterranean are currently available on the Internet .
That is good .
The figures are excellent as regards commitments , but the question goes further than that .
Will it be possible to respect those commitments ?
Will the available money be spent ?
In other words , will the promises be kept ?
Or will we run into the same problems in the future as we met in the PHARE and , especially , the TACIS programmes ?
That is the question on which the Commission will be judged in the end .
The Court of Auditors ' report on financial and technical cooperation with Mediterranean third countries which was presented a few weeks ago may give rise to doubts , for example about the Commission failing to provide enough human resources to implement the programmes , and about the lack of clarity between the Commission 's various services on the one hand , and between the Commission 's headquarters in Brussels and the territorial delegations , on the other .
And that Court of Auditors ' report ends by saying that these problems could get worse if we lose sight of the importance of the MEDA commitments and the ambitious payment rate .
What is the Commission 's reaction to this risk ?
And remember , we are talking about the MEDA programme , where there was no problem , and everything was done absolutely by the book .
My second worry is about the decentralized cooperation programmes - the MED programmes .
Here we need to know if the Commission is planning to do everything needed in order to follow up Parliament 's resolutions on the MED programmes .
It is good that these cooperation programmes have been relaunched on a new basis .
Nevertheless , three questions arise in this context . Will the Commission respect all Parliament 's conditions ?
Will the Commission act in such a way as to allow the recovery of all moneys from those projects which were cancelled because of irregularities ?
And will the Commission provide the judicial authorities with all the information at its disposal , so that possible criminal responsibilities can be determined ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I wonder if people need reminding that this is a sine qua non for authorizing the discharge of the 1996 budget .
Mr President , in 1995 when the Intergovernmental Conference in Barcelona was opened , conference that was followed by other ministerial meetings - Malta in 1997 and the civil forums in Barcelona in 1995 and Naples in 1997 - the government and parliamentary institutions as well as civil society expressed unanimous support for closer and more profitable Mediterranean cooperation .
Indeed we cannot underestimate the fact that the Mediterranean basin , in addition to being a geographical area , is a strategical area in geopolitical terms , increasingly sensitive to migratory flows and of growing interest for economic , trade and cultural relations .
However , after these past three years , we cannot say that we are satisfied .
Having personally participated in a parliamentary delegation led by the Member , Gutiérrez Díaz , at the Intergovernmental Conference in Malta in 1997 , we recognize that a lot of problems , including political ones , in certain areas of the Mediterranean basin are an obstacle or at least a brake on the launching of substantial cooperation .
Nonetheless , we believe that these obstacles must not become an excuse to halt a process of collaboration that is becoming increasingly more urgent and pressing .
But I notice from the compromise situation agreed by the Socialists , Liberals , Left and Radical Alliance that there is a desire to relegate the European Union 's action to a wait-and-see role or a role of judge .
Instead we believe that the European Union must play a much more important role , especially by developing a capacity to mediate that is more than just passively taking note of the problems that are afflicting the democracies of certain third countries of the Mediterranean basin , not taking into due account the fact that the harmful effects are for the entire Euro-Mediterranean system .
We too strongly condemn the systematic violation of human and civil rights and note with regret that the peace processes are at times rendered more and more difficult ; but it is precisely with realism and a sense of responsibility that we must look at phenomena of such scope and complexity , especially since they go far back in history .
It is indeed true that the intertwining of political , religious , economic and cultural reasons can make disentangling this intricate situation seem arduous , but it is precisely here that we measure the role and capacity of our Institution .
Our mediation work and our role of promoting closer and more profitable collaboration must be based precisely on these objective facts , which must not cause rupture and discrimination but lead us to careful reflection to find the most appropriate and responsible solutions .
Mr President , I am going to talk about the main difficulty that is impeding the Barcelona process - the crisis in the Middle East .
Let us not forget the image of Yitzhak Rabin at his last meeting , and what a meeting it was - with moving lucidity uttering the pacifist words he once condemned .
At that time , not so long ago , the prospect of a peace process was in sight , in Israel as well as in Palestine , as a feeling of interdependence had grown up between the two peoples .
One of President Arafat 's favourite sayings summed up their mutual interests : territories in exchange for peace .
Mr Netanyahu 's irresponsible policy is in the process of annihilating that prospect and that dynamic process , to the point of rejecting a plan by Israel 's main ally , which asks for a modest 13 % military withdrawal from the West Bank .
So what does the ultra-right want ?
To force the United States to withdraw ?
To push the Palestinians to exasperation point ?
Neither side seems prepared to provide an excuse to drop the Oslo process officially .
But for how long can this unprecedented situation last ?
I hope that the European Union will become fully involved in the vital issues of this serious crisis .
The traditional reluctance of some European leaders to do anything to annoy their American allies is out of place here .
Collective pressure must be brought to bear on those who seriously threaten to break the peace , so that the implementation of the Oslo agreements can be resumed .
Now is also the time for Europe to show those in doubt that Europe can play a useful part in the decisive negotiations , where the most important questions will be discussed , particularly the question of colonies , refugees , Jerusalem and , naturally , the State of Palestine .
This is an excellent example of common European diplomacy which is within our reach .
For the sake of peace and for Europe , I very much hope that it can be put into practice and that it will be successful .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to repeat what has already been said on the subject of the role of the Middle East peace process or on the subject of the Euro-Mediterranean agreements . I believe that we all agree that there is a hard core which is capable of blocking or unblocking the situation .
I believe that , in general , as far as the Euro-Mediterranean problem is concerned , we should understand and accept that Europe will not play a fundamental role in resolving contradictions unless it has the tools to implement its policy .
Therefore , the fact that Europe pays , but is incapable of using political pressure to ensure its objectives are put into practice , shows that there is a need for a common foreign policy with common structures . This applies not only to human rights but also to other problems , and here , if you do not mind , I will turn to the situation in Algeria , as another example .
We can see that there have been extraordinary changes in that area , in Morocco in particular .
At the same time , the Algerian problem forms another hard nucleus . It is , in fact , obstructing the whole process for the simple reason that today , in Algeria , despite all the negotiations that have taken place , there are so many contradictions that Europe has to become fully involved on three levels .
First of all , it must admit that the social and economic problem in Algeria which was imposed by the World Bank is also Europe 's problem and that Europe must clear up that problem .
Secondly , it must agree that a policy of prevention of any form of terrorism , in Algeria , can only be implemented in compliance with human rights .
Thirdly , it must take civil society into consideration : in Algeria you must learn to count to three !
There are not only soldiers and fundamentalists there ; there is also a civil society , not just a diabolical dichotomy .
Europe also needs to get involved .
If we do not understand that , we will not be able to play our part in a vision of Europe based on the concept of social welfare and freedom .
Mr President , I think we can really all agree at the moment that , throughout this debate , we are clearly seeing the importance of making sure that the conclusions of the Barcelona Conference of November 1995 and the Malta Conference of April 1997 are respected , made concrete and put into practice .
That is necessary in order to remove the paralysis currently affecting the proposals contained in these resolutions .
The results of both conferences are vital for preserving peace and economic and social development in the Mediterranean basin , which undoubtedly benefits that region 's relationship with the European Union itself .
Furthermore , we applaud the Commission 's decision to relaunch and give fresh impetus to the MED programmes - URBS , MEDIA and CAMPUS - as requested by this Parliament . We need these programmes in order to tighten Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
We must stress that Euro-Mediterranean association is even more important at the moment , if that were possible , because the blockage in the Middle East peace process is threatening the conclusions agreed at the Barcelona Conference .
So the EUROMED parliamentary forum , which will take place all this year , becomes especially relevant since it should strengthen and complement the Barcelona process , ensure that its resolutions are complied with , and increase political dialogue .
Despite everything that has been said , Mr President , and despite being in agreement with the Barcelona conclusions , I want to underline that any strengthening of the Euro-Mediterranean association must take full account of the repercussions for the Objective 1 regions of the European Union . As you all know , most of those regions are located in the Mediterranean basin and their industrial activity is similar to that of the associated third countries .
Specifically , we are talking about textiles , ceramics and agriculture .
A free trade which took no account of these regions would only harm them and endanger economic and social cohesion , which is such a fundamental part of the European Union ideal .
Mr President , the decentralized cooperation programmes , developed by countries of the European Union in order to help improve the structure of partnerships between the North and South of the Mediterranean area and thereby contribute towards the stability of the Euro-Mediterranean zone , are going to be resumed . This will take place after the actions already undertaken and the methods of implementation have been evaluated .
It is important for us to know about these , to know what practical actions the MED programmes have lead to , what stabilizing effects they have had , particularly in the fundamental area of the development of SMEs .
Have they managed to avoid damaging the farming and fishing industries by adopting codes of conduct to prevent possible destructuring effects ?
The implementation of the MED programme must be exemplary .
Have the serious irregularities found by the Court of Auditors in its 1996 report on the Commission 's management been corrected and , if so , how ?
Remember that the Commission subcontracted the whole of the financial and administrative management of the MED programmes to ARTM , an international non profit-making association under Belgian law , created by the Commission , whose income comes exclusively from contracts granted to it by the Commission .
This delegation of the Commission 's competence to a third party , without legal basis , without a decision on principle , without competitive tendering for contracts , which are mostly awarded by mutual agreement , has created a very serious confusion of interests . The same firms of consultants were involved in the design of the programmes , in the preparation of proposals for financing , in the management of ARTM and in the technical monitoring of programmes .
The delegation of competence , the weakness of the design of the programmes and the unsuitability of the Commission 's management and monitoring tools have been rightly criticized by the Court of Auditors .
This type of practice , for obvious reasons with regard to transparency , has been prohibited in most Member States because it is a permanent source of financial mismanagement , corruption and nepotism .
Does the increase in the number of programmes managed at Commission level and the continual widening of their scope not mean that there is often likely to be a lack of control ?
We would like to know , in this case , what solutions the Council has implemented or intends to implement in order to safeguard the efficiency of MED Community funds and re-establish transparency in their use .
Mr President , now that the euphoria over European Monetary Union has died down , it is only right to turn again to common foreign policy , aspects of which are certainly no more encouraging .
This is especially true for the Mediterranean basin , still marginalised on the edge of Europe and today the source of such potential and existing crises that they eclipse the extraordinary potential which exists .
Moreover , it does not seem out of place to recall how the Holy Roman Empire , frequently held up today as a model for European construction , really failed precisely because it was incapable of combining the reality of Central Europe with that of the Mediterranean .
The past can also serve as a lesson for the present .
In the immediate post-War period , the Mediterranean 's marginalization began again and its certainly harmful effects are today palpable .
Barcelona showed that the course had to be resumed in a positive manner , but the meeting that followed in Malta was certainly disappointing .
The bilateral relations between the European Union and the individual Mediterranean third countries have been conducted until now in this context , but it is doubtful that this could be of fundamental importance in the context of general Euro-Mediterranean policy .
Our resolution , which supports resumption , therefore ends up being an over-ambitious cahier de doléances barely offset by some reasons for hope , including the unblocking of MEDA funds , the meeting of the 27 Foreign Ministers and the launch of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum .
Although these steps must not be underestimated , it is certainly not like this that the process of European Monetary Union was approached , and probably if it had been approached in this way , no one would even hear about it today .
In short , without a common foreign policy for Europe , from the North Sea to the Mediterranean , little will truly be able to change and resolutions like this one will be repeated without offering great expectations .
I am grateful for the opportunity to take part in this debate to try to respond to the questions which have been raised , although I will leave it to my colleague , Commissioner Marin , to deal with the technical points .
Before I try to set out some of our responses to those points in a more general context , I should like to mention a related matter - the assassination attempt on Mr Akin Birdal , the chairman of the Human Rights Association of Turkey , whom I met when I visited Turkey in the autumn of last year .
I believe that decent people throughout Europe will be shocked and outraged by this tragic incident .
I know that the hearts and minds of those good people of Europe will be with Mr Birdal and his family at this difficult time .
We all wish him a speedy recovery .
The presidency and all decent people in Europe will , I know , want to give every support to the Turkish Government and the judiciary in bringing to justice those responsible for this atrocity .
On the general context of the EUROMED process , I should like to begin by stating that I believe that this partnership is of the highest priority to the Council .
As regards ratification of the Euro-Mediterranean agreements so far signed , the Council can only note that the ratification process by national parliaments of the agreements already signed is indeed a very long one .
The presidency has , on several occasions , urged Member States to speed up their ratifications .
The Council has , however , no power to interfere in the internal procedures for ratification by those Member States .
The Barcelona Conference in November 1995 agreed the goal of the EUROMED free trade area by the year 2010 .
We are now working hard to reach this target .
A key element in this strategy is the negotiation of the new EUROMED Association Agreements .
As far as negotiations on agricultural products are concerned , the Council notes that notwithstanding the sensitivity of certain products , negotiations were successfully concluded with Morocco , Tunisia , Israel , the Palestinian Authority and Jordan .
The Council hopes that the remaining negotiations will soon be successfully concluded .
A new negotiating round with Lebanon took place on 23 and 24 April , and with Egypt on 7 and 8 May .
I can also tell Parliament that negotiations with Syria are scheduled to start on 14 May .
In December 1997 the Agricultural Council adopted conclusions on the Commission 's study on the impact of concessions to the Mediterranean countries .
It stressed the importance of taking into account the socio-economic repercussions of the proposed concessions on the Community agricultural market .
It also noted the need to develop a consistent overall strategy when defining the Community position in negotiations with third countries .
As regards the fight against terrorism , the negotiating directives for an association agreement with Algeria , as adopted by the Council in June 1996 , do not provide for the inclusion in the agreement of provisions concerning this issue .
In the framework of the European Union / Algeria dialogue the Algerian authorities have underlined their interest in pursuing discussion on what might be done to prevent and combat terrorism .
The Council has repeatedly reaffirmed its interest in a broad-based dialogue to discuss any concerns and proposals that the Algerian authorities might seek to bring to its attention , including on how to combat terrorism .
That is in line with the draft resolution which is before Parliament .
The Council is now looking at the best way to start a political dialogue on this sensitive issue both at bilateral level and within the EUROMED context .
The Council has strongly condemned terrorist attacks against the Algerian population , including massacres , other murders , abductions and rapes .
At the same time , it has expressed solidarity with the Algerian people and , consequently , has repeatedly called on the Algerian authorities to make every effort to actively protect the population from attacks .
Equally important for the Council is the promotion and protection of human rights in Algeria .
To this end , in the context of the 54th United Nations Human Rights Commission , the Presidency , on behalf of the European Union , urged the Government of Algeria fully to respect human rights and to approach the fight against terrorism within the rule of law and international standards .
In this respect , the Council is also concerned at allegations of arbitrary executions , arbitrary detentions and torture and has urged the Algerian authorities to redress these issues .
The Council has encouraged , and will continue to encourage , the Algerian Government to promote transparency through dialogue on human rights with the international community .
It has called on Algeria to facilitate early visits of United Nations ' special rapporteurs on torture and extra-judicial summary or arbitrary executions .
The MEDA programme is an essential component of the strategy of cooperation between the European Union and its Mediterranean neighbours .
The Union has committed ECU 4.7 billion for 1995-1999 to assist the process of economic transition now under way .
After in-depth discussions between the Commission and the European Parliament , the Commission has recently announced its intention to relaunch three decentralized Mediterranean cooperation programmes : MED CAMPUS , MED MEDIA and MED URBS .
The MED Invest Programme itself was not relaunched but its main objectives have now been incorporated into the wider MEDA programme .
The Council notes with satisfaction this decision taken just a few weeks before the Palermo ministerial meeting .
This will enable substantial cooperation to be developed in line with the Barcelona Declaration between actors of the civil society promoting better mutual understanding .
The ad hoc ministerial meeting which will take place in Palermo on 3 and 4 June will be an opportunity to assess jointly , with all the Mediterranean partners , the activities undertaken under the Euro-Mediterranean partnership and to give it a renewed impetus in view of the next formal ministerial meeting in Germany in April 1999 .
Concerning the risk of contamination of the Barcelona process by the Middle East peace process , the Council stresses that the partnership should be sustained along the lines agreed in the Barcelona Declaration which sets out long-term objectives .
The present difficulties encountered by the peace process should not be allowed to overshadow this perspective .
The two processes are complementary but separate .
The recent visit of Prime Minister Blair and Foreign Minister Cook to the region and the talks held in London on 4 and 5 May are a concrete sign of the Council 's close diplomatic engagement in the Middle East peace process .
Again , it is in line with what is contained in the draft resolution which is before this Parliament and we hope that that will be a basis on which the dialogue continues and there is some optimism that there will be a way forward shortly .
Thank you , President-in-Office .
I would thank you , in particular , for raising the matter of the recent assassination attempt in Turkey .
As you probably know , it was raised in this House on Tuesday and again this morning .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Henderson , President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to start my speech by reminding you of something which is sometimes forgotten .
Up until just two and a half years ago , when the Barcelona Conference took place , the European Union 's Mediterranean policy was relatively modest and limited in scope .
All we offered to each Mediterranean third country was a series of trade concessions and an amount of bilateral financial aid .
Many very important areas did not even enter into this relationship .
I am thinking of political dialogue , economic transition , free trade , cultural cooperation and cooperation with civil society .
Also , the financial aid was of a conventional nature .
It consisted of financial protocols , normally with a slow disbursement and priorities which were basically decided upon by the Union , with no real spirit of association between the north and south of the Mediterranean .
The Barcelona Conference brought a real change of direction . It was there that we established an association strategy formulated and implemented jointly with our Mediterranean partners , based precisely on commitments freely entered into by all parties .
Association is a far-reaching project which now addresses all sectors of common interest , from questions of politics and security , through economic and financial cooperation , to the social , cultural and human dimension .
So nobody should be surprised if the changeover to this new system has given rise to certain teething problems or problems of implementation , which the Commission cannot hide .
Firstly , it is no secret that the MEDA regulation was blocked in the Council for eight months , for strictly political reasons that you are all aware of .
That eight-month paralysis in the Council was caused by the situation which arose in connection with the problem of our relations with Turkey and the veto of a Member State .
Secondly , the exponential increase in aid at the Cannes Summit came at a time when politically it was not possible to increase even slightly the Commission 's human resources for implementing that aid .
The Cannes Summit , which resulted in a very considerable increase in the MEDA programme , was held just at the time when the Council and the European Parliament were deciding on zero growth for the European Commission in terms of personnel .
Furthermore it is true that , because of the management problems we found with the decentralized cooperation programmes , I myself made the decision to suspend them until we could be completely satisfied with their transparency and good management .
Today we have a policy with coherent and ambitious long-term objectives , based on the establishment of free trade , support for economic transition , and the promotion of direct investment .
In short , with the phase we are in at the moment - and it is good to be having this debate in the European Parliament - it could be said that we have reached cruising speed .
Despite the difficulties - and the additional problem of contamination by the peace process , which is causing us many difficulties in our everyday work - the MEDA programme has reached cruising speed , after two and a half years .
In the first place , we have now managed to sign five Euro-Mediterranean agreements . The rest are progressing rapidly , though I cannot hide the fact that there are difficulties in the sections on agricultural trade and the readmission of illegal immigrants .
Those two areas have become the two biggest political problems in the association agreement negotiations . Even so , I have to say we must be consistent .
To ask for Euro-Mediterranean policy to be implemented , or to be in favour of EuroMediterranean policy , on condition that the countries of the region cannot sell a tomato , a lettuce or a cucumber in the Community market , is simply to be against Euro-Mediterranean policy .
You cannot ask for something and its opposite both at the same time .
That needs to be said straight away .
In commercial terms , the Euro-Mediterranean policy involves a cost for the Community economy .
To fail to understand that is to deny the evidence of the process itself .
As for the national indicative programmes , there has been substantial progress now that they have all been approved .
The fact is that , as has been rightly pointed out , there is of course an imbalance between the commitments and the payments .
Naturally , the final balance will have to be found at the end of the process , but I must point out that many of the payment operations are linked to operations of structural adjustment , so the money will be paid if those countries fulfil the objectives of the macroeconomic programme signed with the World Bank and the European Union , as regards privatization law , changes to banking legislation and public sector reorganization .
If they do not comply then obviously those sums will not be paid , because in this specific case the Commission 's obligation is , precisely , not to pay .
I have to make that clear right away , because I have already made a negative decision about one Mediterranean country which has not fulfilled its privatization law . That meant I had to say we could not pay for the adjustment programme , although negotiations are underway .
I want to confirm another important point , Mr Wurtz : the problem of the peace process is seriously contaminating the Barcelona process .
You have no idea what miracles we often have to perform to get the Barcelona committee to carry on working , simply because the situation in the Middle East has a very negative influence on the whole process .
Our objective is to remove that contamination from the Barcelona process as far as possible at Palermo , at the summit meeting of foreign ministers from both parties .
We cannot have a repetition of what happened at Malta , where we had to get up from the table without even making a final statement .
We cannot carry on like that , because it is very negative and causes us a lot of difficulties .
I now want to make a few quick remarks .
The Court of Auditors ' comment about not having enough human resources is absolutely right .
It is true that Parliament 's decision in favour of MEDA - to install what is known as technical and administrative support - is helping us . It has already been implemented at headquarters and in each delegation .
However , in the matter of personnel we once again have a situation where it is very difficult for the Commission to explain what is going on . The Court of Auditors has noticed that we do not have enough staff .
The European Parliament has noticed that we do not have enough staff . If in October this year the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament decide on zero growth , then you already have the answer for next year : I will still have no staff .
So in October I will say once again to the European Parliament and the Council : " If you have observed that I do not have enough staff , then give me more . Otherwise , you already know the answer for next year : I have no staff . '
So , what have we done ? We have relaunched the decentralized cooperation programme .
In doing so , as we have explained and will do so again to the Committee on Budgetary Control , as regards Mr Fabra Vallés ' report , we have satisfied all the conditions set by the European Parliament , except one .
And that is just because we do not have the staff .
That one condition is the one concerning direct management of the programmes .
What we have done - and there can be no doubt about it because it was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities - is to subcontract with external assistance both technical and financial management .
And that has been done through a process of public bidding , announced in the Official Journal and via the Internet , and is subject to the new strengthened contractual conditions approved by the Commission in July last year .
Why did we decide to do that ?
Because we have no staff . In any case , we have taken the greatest possible precaution , which is to separate technical and financial management .
They are going to work independently , besides which the Commission has limited the contract to just two years to see how it works .
Of course , I would like to be given more staff in the October budget so we can run these programmes directly .
As for the decision on whether or not to refer these cases to the judicial authorities , the Commission is going to deliver a report about this to the Committee on Budgetary Control on 20 May during the debate on the discharge of the 1996 budget .
As regards Algeria , about which Mr Cohn-Bendit has expressed concern , we are in a situation right now where we need to decide which approach to take with the government .
This very week , a delegation from my services , from the DirectorateGeneral , is in Algiers trying to find out what we should do .
This is a problem which also concerns not commitments , but payments . It is no secret that at the moment ECU 400 million from the Algerian budget heading , the Mediterranean protocols and the new MEDA programme have been frozen .
And the problem needs to be stated there .
If we open a tender for a rural development programme in Algeria and nobody puts in a bid because of the security situation , what can the Commission do ?
I cannot make the Member States ' technical staff go there , because they refuse to do so .
I cannot make the technical staff who normally work in Brussels go there , because they think it is a very difficult country to work in , for internal reasons .
Nevertheless , we are working in Algiers this week , in order to find a solution .
Then there is another reason for the delay in implementing the programmes , which is never talked about but which I must mention : the delay on the part of the Member States in ratifying the association agreements .
I have spoken again to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs , because the average time taken to ratify the Mediterranean agreements in the national parliaments - Tunisia was the first case - is two years , four months .
And the agreement with Morocco has still not been ratified by all the national parliaments .
So that part of MEDA which is concerned with cooperation committees simply cannot be put into operation .
It cannot be put into operation until there has been ratification by the Member States .
And in that sense , I hope our Member States will try to ensure that they can explain their position when they arrive in Palermo on 6 June .
I have to say that Morocco is the most worrying case - not to mention Palestine , Israel or others .
In conclusion , do not forget that while we continue to apply the Maastricht Treaty 's provisions in relation to mixed agreements , it is very difficult to work on the implementation of cooperation agreements . I think this is a peaceable debate for another intergovernmental conference .
I am experiencing this with MEDA , but exactly the same thing is happening with PHARE and TACIS .
The average time for ratification by the national parliaments is currently between two and a half and three years .
That is very serious indeed from the point of view of the European Union 's general image .
We cannot do anything else because of what the Treaty says , but I expect - because it is just common sense - that in the future the whole system of mixed agreements will have to be revised in the context of a new intergovernmental conference . Because believe me , working like this is very , very difficult .
Thank you , Commissioner , for what you have just said .
I want to say that I heartily agree , especially with the last part of your speech . It saves me having to say some things I had planned to say .
I think it is right to begin by stressing how pleased we are that the MED programmes have been put into operation . They are greatly valued by this Parliament , which is always very keen that the citizens of the Union should be able to participate in decentralized Community initiatives .
They have been put into operation - and this needs emphasizing - in compliance with the requests this Parliament made to the Commission .
As pointed out by Mr Samland , chairman of the Committee on Budgets - which , by the way , is not well known in Parliament for being particularly kind or charitable - the Commission is showing an exemplary degree of transparency in this field , and I believe it should serve as an example for the other cooperation programmes we have underway .
The high level of implementation of the MEDA programmes is also very positive .
And I want to ask a question in this respect . Does it make sense , with this high level of implementation , to propose less funding for 1999 to comply with the Cannes agreements ?
What effect will this have on the continuity of the programmes after 1999 ?
I think reducing the immediate funding for the MEDA programmes despite the high level of implementation is a negative political signal .
The situation in Israel is worrying for us all .
The Council representative told us that the political situation in the Middle East should not make us forget our long-term objectives .
Obviously , we want the long-term objectives of the Barcelona Conference to be complied with , but if we do not know how to implement the agreements signed with the Palestine National Authority because nobody even knows what territories they will apply in , then it is difficult to deny what the Commissioner said so clearly : that the failure to comply with Oslo is contaminating the Barcelona process .
I want to conclude on the positive note with which I started , by welcoming the fact that the EUROMED parliamentary forum is going to take place .
Mr President , as an inhabitant of Melilla , I live next door to the friendly country of Morocco and a few kilometres from the Algerian border . As such , and as a Spaniard , I consider myself particularly sensitive to the questions which affect the two coasts of the Mediterranean .
Next week , this Parliament 's delegation to the Maghreb will be visiting Morocco and Mauritania to promote political and parliamentary dialogue with these countries in the spirit of the Barcelona Conference and the association agreement with Morocco , which certainly has an ambitious development plan underway in the north which deserves our attention .
The problems of debt , immigration , drugs , lack of mutual cultural familiarity , mistrust and understandable concern about fundamentalist movements - which are unfortunately leaving bloodstains on countries such as Algeria - require a mutual effort of collaboration and aid .
For that purpose , various procedures have been developed , such as those arising from the MEDA programmes and the bilateral agreements on economic , cultural and social development .
Whether or not Mediterranean cooperation achieves good results depends on the parties concerned .
The European institutions should put in place the necessary means so that aid can reach these countries as quickly and transparently as possible , and so that a suitable information policy can allow interested businesses , organizations or individuals equal access to the planned programmes .
In the area of regional and local cooperation , it would be a very good thing for the third countries of the Mediterranean to make real efforts as regards the participation of civil society in the field of human rights and freedoms , women 's equality , and special attention for young people , as well as making their administrations more flexible , removing bureaucracy and making their actions more transparent .
During the visit of this Parliament 's delegation to Algeria , we gained a lot of experience . We came to the conclusion that together with economic cooperation - with the difficulties explained to us by Commissioner Marín - there should also be a profound political cooperation .
That is essential in order for us to be able to talk openly about terrorism , human rights , and social and cultural cooperation .
The European Parliament has offered this political dialogue , which we have already started in the context of the delegation to the Maghreb .
In order to do this , as Commissioner Marín said , we need the association agreements to work effectively .
It is very important , as has been said here , to speed up the process of ratification in the national parliaments , including those agreements currently being negotiated , as is the case with Algeria .
These agreements constitute the basic instrument to act as a framework for political dialogue , which should of course not end with their signing and ratification .
Mr President , in three days time I will be leaving for Egypt as rapporteur on the association agreement , but I realize that the political aim of the Barcelona initiative is in danger , and along with that the development of a zone of stability .
Mr Henderson illustrated the powerlessness of the Council just now when he mentioned that the ratification of the agreements already signed cannot be pushed any further .
Yet this is essential , as Mr Marín has just said .
On the subject of agriculture ; what is being done on the eve of enlargement to harmonize the adjustment of the common agricultural policy with the legitimate demands concerning agricultural exports in Northern Africa ?
As far as human rights are concerned , Morocco is making great improvements , but other countries are lagging behind .
Something should be done about this , too .
As far as terrorism is concerned , I agree that terrorist activities are carried out in many countries , yet London is constantly mentioned as the point from which terrorist initiatives make their way to the countries of Northern Africa .
London is mentioned over and over again .
London keeps quiet .
London should do something .
Only Belgium has done something .
To conclude , it is not right to hang the entire Mediterranean policy on the blockage of the Middle East peace process .
This seems wrong to me .
Mr President , it is obviously necessary to speed up the negotiation process with Mediterranean countries , otherwise there is a significant risk that the United States , already in that area , will have everything their own way .
The area in question is a sensitive area in terms of stability and peace and it is also a vast commercial area .
And although I regret Europe 's protectionism with regard to agriculture , which does not really make integration possible , I regret as much , if not more , the attitude of some of the countries involved . Those countries seem to have lost sight of the principles of peace , of respect for human rights and of the rule of law described in the Barcelona Declaration .
It is true that the European Union is partly responsible for the slowness and mismanagement of the programmes , not to mention financial corruption and inadequate supervision of the management of projects .
The differences between the Fifteen , which are sometimes comprehensible but often prejudicial to any real prosperity in the Mediterranean region , do not help to solve migration problems , social , environmental and cultural problems , as well as problems of security and terrorism .
It is clear that Europe must get more involved in the Middle East peace process and in solving the problems that are rife in Algeria .
We have to admit that Europe has not played a major role in the Algerian situation .
Whether that is due to different political positions on how to resolve the conflict or to economic reasons , the result is very disappointing .
Terrorism is more rife than ever , so are violations of human rights . I refer , of course , to torture and to the many missing persons .
The Barcelona Declaration states that all signatory countries must respect the principles of peace , democratization and human rights , in a spirit of freedom and dialogue in civil society .
I sincerely hope that Europe will increase its cooperation with Mediterranean countries and speed up the process of ratification of the agreements .
But I also call upon some of those countries to cooperate more fully with Europe .
It would be of benefit to us all , and would contribute towards stability , prosperity and peace .
Mr President , the process of dialogue begun at the Barcelona Conference represents a new pattern of regional dialogue between the peoples of the Mediterranean , committed to achieving three main objectives : political stability ; security , based on the strengthening of democratic institutions ; and economic development .
But at the moment , this association dialogue lacks credibility .
It is suffering constant attrition due to the Middle East situation , the infringement of human rights in Turkey and the instability in Algeria .
As regards the Middle East , the peace process has been blocked by the Israeli Government , and by that country 's lack of commitment to having a meeting in the near future in order to continue with efforts towards peace .
This attitude reveals obvious contempt for the United Nations Security Council resolutions , the Oslo Accords and the principles agreed at the Madrid Conference on the Middle East .
The European Union must demand that Israel complies with these obligations .
If that does not happen , we should reconsider the limits of our agreement with Israel , whose government is endangering the region 's stabilization and integration .
To move on to other questions , we also need to demand an end to human rights violations in Turkey , and support Algeria 's democrats .
In planning its future strategy , the European Union should examine its part in the Middle East peace process and its political role in the Mediterranean area , with which we have ancient historical , cultural and human ties .
The European Union should not just be an economic partner , but also a political mediator .
On that role depends not just the credibility of Mediterranean dialogue but also the very construction of Europe as a political project .
The debate will be resumed this evening .
Mr President , I rise on a point regarding the imposition of the Rule on the 50 % voting on roll-call votes .
You will recall that you advised this House that this new procedure was going to run for a trial period for three months .
That three-month period is now over .
May I ask you if you will be putting to the House any change in these procedures so that the House can then take a democratic vote on it ?
We are about to discuss the appointment of the Board of the Central Bank .
Much has been made of the openness and transparency of the operations of the European Central Bank .
It is only right for Members of this House to expect the same openness and transparency in the conduct of the work of the Bureau .
I would advise you , Mr President , that while I seem to be alone in my objections to these particular impositions , I can assure you that many Members of this Chamber from all political groups are as concerned as I am about the imposition of Rules from a Bureau which does not make itself accountable to this House .
Therefore , I would conclude by asking if you will be placing before this House any procedures which will authenticate the current , obscene and daft 50 % ruling , as you have done on the current voting system ?
Mr Falconer , I shall be submitting this matter to the Bureau during one of the next sessions so that it can review the system following the three-month period .
I have no intention of removing from the Bureau its power to review the system after we have been practising it for three months .
Mr President , yesterday during the vote on the Pirker report there was an amendment tabled by the Green Group in the European Parliament , two parts of which had been adopted by the majority in this Parliament .
These were additions or amendments to the existing paragraph 8 .
Afterwards the President of the sitting at the time asked for a vote on the original paragraph 8 .
I then intervened in the part-session to say that this could only mean that everything compatible with the already accepted amendments had been adopted .
Now it turns out that a substantial part of an approved amendment has not been included in the approved text .
I must raise a formal objection to this .
It is contrary to every parliamentary practice . It is also contrary to the rules of this House .
I therefore ask for a rectification , so that justice will be done to the decision taken by a majority here .
Mrs Aelvoet , we will check the Minutes to find out what happened , although this is not the right time to comment on the Minutes .
Nevertheless , this matter is so important that it will be checked .
Mr President , I am still not entirely clear .
Are you advising this Chamber that you will be consulting the Bureau to look at the position of the voting system but you will not be putting the decision to the House as a whole ?
Are you prepared to put any recommendation from the Bureau to the House as a whole ?
That was my question .
Honourable Members of this House have a right to debate and vote on these matters in their groups and to vote on them in this Chamber .
You cannot change the conditions without honourable Members ' rights being abused .
I ask you again if I am correct in my understanding , namely that what you said was that you will put the matter to the Bureau .
You have had the three-month review .
I would have thought the Bureau would have discussed it last month .
If , however , you are going to put it to the Bureau again , are you saying that you will put the Bureau 's decision to this House ?
Mr Falconer , when a Member of this House or anybody else is calling for their rights to be respected , the first thing they have to do is make sure they know them .
So please read the Rules of Procedure , which describe the rights of Members of this House .
And the Rules of Procedure , as they stand at the moment , bestow that competence on the Bureau not Parliament .
There is a very easy way to change that : by proposing an amendment to the Rules of Procedure .
I will not oppose that .
Propose an amendment to the Rules of Procedure , as any Member is entitled to do , so that Parliament takes these decisions rather than the Bureau .
I am bound by the Rules of Procedure just like yourself and the 626 Members here , and while those Rules say that the Bureau takes such decisions , I am obliged by Rule 5 to abide by that .
Votes
Mr President , Members from the European Right did not take part in the vote because we do not agree with the principle or the composition of the Executive Board .

Mr President , before we move to complete the vote on Mr Duisenberg , I would like to ask you if Mr Duisenberg is here to declare his respect to the European Parliament when we vote on our position on whether or not he is appointed to the European Central Bank .
Is Mr Duisenberg present ?
Mr Alavanos , I cannot see him and I am told he is not here at the moment .
I would remind you that he is not being appointed today . It is a question of whether Parliament is in favour of his appointment , which will be a matter for the Council in any case .
( Parliament approved the recommendation )
Mr President , I wanted to speak before the roll-call vote opened .
I am sorry that you did not invite me to speak when I made the request .
It is customary for votes on appointments to be taken by secret ballot .
That is the case , for example , with appointments to the Court of Auditors .
Here we are giving an opinion on people who are nominated for appointment to the European Central Bank .
I think that it would be right for us to follow our usual practice and , even in the event of a roll-call vote , to vote by secret ballot .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , as a member of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , you know that a secret ballot has to be requested by one fifth of the Members before the vote opens .
I did not receive requests from one fifth of the Members .
Furthermore , this is not an election , or even an appointment , it is an opinion on the basis of which the European Council will decide whether or not to make an appointment .
Therefore , the provisions you refer to are not applicable .
Mr President , I do not propose to say what the other Members have said .
Since I voted against this recommendation and the meaning of the recommendation , I wish to justify my position , because I realized that Parliament had made a parliamentary ...
( The President cut off the speaker ) ... this supreme post was surrendered to a Mr Duisenberg , who despises us and is not even present ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Because of a seating problem - I still have not found the right place - I want to say that I was here for the last vote and my vote is a ' yes ' .
Please take that into account .
I also want to point out that the seats we have been provided with have no microphone , which makes it very difficult to make your presence known .
So , Mr President , please count me among the votes in favour , because I was here and , if possible , please could we have a microphone in these seats .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , that will be sorted out once we have the new hemicycle .
While the seats remain as they are in the present hemicycle , those who arrive first will enjoy that privilege .
Mr President , I do not want to miss this opportunity to make the following remark , which should also be reiterated as insistently as possible in the forthcoming budget debate . We are about to vote through these various proposals for the SAVE Programme for the promotion of energy efficiency without a report .
You must all be aware , however , that in actual fact it is dishonest of us to include these six countries in the SAVE Programme as we do not have a single penny for them !
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , this is not the time for an explanation of vote or a debate .
We shall begin the vote .
( During successive votes , Parliament approved the six Commission proposals )
Mr President , as you rightly reminded us , this text requires a qualified majority .
We have just voted on an amendment to the first indent , which was rejected , but in my opinion the original text of the first indent should now be put to the vote to see if it obtains a qualified majority .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , the Treaty stipulates that , at second reading , amendments have to be approved by a qualified majority , but nothing else does .
The text itself is not put to the vote .
It does not have to be voted on and , furthermore , it is based on an idea expressed by a French President during the discussions on the Maastricht Treaty .
( The President declared the common position approved ( as amended ) )
Mr President , I simply wanted to draw the attention of the House to the fact that Mr Cabrol , the rapporteur on tobacco advertising , is , in fact , the third rapporteur of this Parliament to deal with the matter , and he is the one who got it through , and this House ought to congratulate him .
May I remind you that demonstrations in the public gallery are prohibited .
Mr President , following on from the proposal made by the previous speaker , may I ask the President to investigate why yesterday during the vote on Mr Rothley 's report several journalists , including representatives from Reuters , APE , AFP and Nordfoto , were expelled from the public galleries and why the services of the House refused to allow the Italian television company RAI to broadcast pictures of the vote .
This surely amounts to censorship ...
... , and may I implore you to address the question of what is really meant by public accountability and the right of the press and the media to information in this House , which after all calls itself a democratic institution !
Mr President , as I have already done on other occasions , I recommend that you also look towards the right side of the House , where often we have to wave our arms about to obtain the floor .
I would just like to add something to those statements .
It 's true that demonstrating in the House is prohibited , but it 's also true that citizens have the right to be informed of what is happening in the European Parliament .
Furthermore , it goes without saying that the rare occasions when the European Parliament ends up on television in the European countries , especially in Italy , is when there is some demonstration .
I therefore ask that more attention be given to the news services reporting on parliamentary work .
Ladies and gentlemen . I apologize to Mrs Muscardini .
I am becoming shortsighted .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the draft decision .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Mr President , I was a little surprised just now .
I opened what I thought were the amendments in Finnish and I saw that inside were Mr Viceconte 's amendments on a report on the prevention of rare diseases .
I would now like to put right a basic misconception .
My report in no way deals with rare diseases , but very common ones .
Forty thousand people in the European Union die from air pollution every year , so there has been an unfortunate misunderstanding somewhere .
We will of course check the translations to ensure that everything is in order .
Please note that there are two corrigenda , one in the Spanish version , and one in the Portuguese version .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I would like to invite the Socialist Group , in particular the shadow rapporteur , Mrs Van Putten , to withdraw Amendment No 51 .
The reason for this is if Amendment No 52 presented by the Greens , and which has my full support , is approved , we will be certain that the strict criteria of this European eco-label will in no way be inferior to the criteria of national labels .
Now if , as I hope , Amendment No 52 is approved , Amendment No 51 , although not incompatible with No 52 , nonetheless creates some distortion , since it refers to vague criteria such as recognition , long life ; Amendment No 51 therefore creates some distortion in a regulation that is looking quite good , especially if the Commission , at second reading , accepts our amendments .
I therefore invite the Socialist Group to withdraw Amendment No 51 , and if this is not possible , I invite the House to vote against it .
I recall that we have already voted for Amendment No 50 , presented by the Socialist Group .
I understand perfectly the concerns of my colleague , Mrs Van Putten , whom I thank for contributing to the work and moving this regulation along in the committee , but I will request that she withdraw Amendment No 51 .
No , Mr President , as an addition I continue to think that they go together very well , and that it strengthens our hand in respect of the Commission and the Council during the second reading .
I am sorry , I would like to go some way towards it , but in this case I cannot .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , when we voted for the euro on 2 May , in a speech in the House in Brussels I talked about a ship that had finally left to accomplish its institutional duties .
Today we have given that ship the navy officers needed to sail it ; I speak of officers because the seamen are all of us European citizens with our work , with our daily commitment .
Selecting the six members of the Board of the European Central Bank and its first president was the main act to render the single currency operational .
Just one minute after this vote we consented to the practical launch of the euro , confirming the proposals of the Member States on the names of the six directors of the ECB for the forthcoming years .
Let us now look to them with confidence , knowing very well that the job that awaits them is not easy operationally or materially speaking ; let us look at their expertise which comes from previous jobs and let us especially look at their autonomy in relation to political interference which would attempt to disrupt the work of the Board , as it is clearly written in the treaties .
Similarly , we would like the European Parliament to be more involved in future in the work of the ECB .
It is worth recalling that the Parliament is actually the only elected Community Institution , directly appointed by the citizens to whom it is accountable and whom it must inform daily of the Board 's forthcoming activities .
Lastly , we would like to see a rapid solution to the appointment of the new president of the EBRD , the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , a job vacant for some months now .
Here too we must await a choice that unfortunately is not made by this Parliament but by the Ecofin Council , a choice coherent with the Community spirit of forming a team whose members operate in harmony to achieve common objectives .
Mr President , the rapporteur of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , Mrs Randzio-Plath , explained to us earlier that the hearings of the nominees to the Executive Board of the future European Central Bank , had led her to a positive assessment .
All the candidates consider that the price stability objective has more or less been achieved in Europe , which should help , in the future , to keep interest rates low .
Similarly , according to the hearings , the financial competence of the candidates , as well as the legacy of seriousness that central banks will bequeath to the ECB , should ensure the latter 's credibility and also contribute towards low interest rates .
However , we think that some opposing factors should not be concealed . These are very powerful and will doubtless tend to keep interest rates structurally higher than necessary in the euro zone .
Indeed , given that this zone will be economically heterogeneous , given that it will also be psychologically heterogeneous , as there will be no massive united support by public opinion in Europe for the Central Bank , it will constantly have to face divergences far stronger those within a national State .
It will have to compensate perpetually for this lack of credibility by means of interest rates higher than the potential average national rates if they had still existed .
Furthermore , as the price stability objective will be a priority for the ECB , it will have to react each time any slippage is likely anywhere , as it could cause an imbalance in the whole area .
That is another factor of automatic over-estimation of interest rates .
And , once again , the situation will not be accidental .
It will be the result of the very idea of European monetary unification , which will put a single Central Bank in the centre of a heterogeneous area .
That will be one of the costs of the euro , that we are pretending to be unaware of today , and that citizens will discover when they are thrust into the new system .
Mr President , I voted for Mrs Randzio-Plath 's recommendation on the appointment of the six candidates for the Central Bank 's Executive Board .
However , I have no wish to conceal the fact that considerable doubts have arisen as to the regularity of the voting procedure .
Of course , we could ask which high ranking politicians - Mr Chirac or Mr Kohl , perhaps - or which second-string politicians , Mr Waigel or individuals such as Mr Tietmeyer , for example , are responsible for the procedure .


In my view , however , the most important issue is to recognize that the provisions of this section of the Maastricht Treaty need to be changed .
I would make the following plea to the Council , and in particular to the forthcoming German Presidency of the Council . If in the future we want the citizens of Europe to regard the euro as a reliable and stable currency , then the individuals serving in this Central Bank must also have been elected by a procedure in which the citizens can have the greatest confidence .
This means , firstly , that we must move away from the requirement of unanimity .
It is unacceptable that a Member State should be able to delay approval of a decision on the question of who should be proposed by the Council until the end of an extremely boring lunch , as was recently the case .
Secondly , it must be made quite clear that the European Parliament is doing more than making a simple recommendation .
In the future , the European Parliament must be able to elect these candidates in the same way as the Council , that is by a majority .
These candidates will then also enjoy the confidence of the general public .
Mr President , the members of the European right did not take part in the vote on the European Central Bank , because we do not approve of the abandonment of national currencies , or of the devolution of monetary sovereignty to a college of experts cut off from the people .
In this respect , I would like to be sure that the very people who are enthusiastic about the euro today will not be explaining to us that it is necessary to replace it with the dollar tomorrow .
What I mean is this : in 1987 , the single market was proposed and , in 1992 , we were told that because we had a European single market , we needed a European single currency .
Today , Commissioner Brittan and others , particularly some members of the British Presidency , are telling us that we need to create a transatlantic single market .
So , if they get their way , and we do create a transatlantic single market , no doubt the same people will tell us , in 2004 , 2005 or 2006 , that because we have a transatlantic single market , we need a transatlantic single currency , which could of course only be the dollar .
So , we want to protect the franc today , in order to avoid the dollar tomorrow .
Mr President , I welcome the European Parliament 's approval of the appointment of Mr Duisenberg as President of the European Central Bank .
The European Parliament today managed to outvote with a large majority the small-mindedness in the European Council .
In this context I would like stress the importance of the adopted amendment of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , which calls for the avoidance of an early or simultaneous succession of both the President and the Vice-President .
By accepting the amendment the European Parliament is giving a signal that the continuity of the leadership of the Central Bank 's Executive Board must be guaranteed .
The amendment emphasizes furthermore that it is up to the President or a Member of the Executive Board alone , and I repeat alone , to decide when to stand down , and that the mandate of the person in question must not be meddled with from the outside ; all of this is in the spirit of the Treaty .
In conclusion I believe that the appointment procedure followed on 2 and 3 May turned out to be highly unsatisfactory . It should be improved in future if we want to strengthen public confidence in the euro .
The sinister political sparring calls for further powers for the European Parliament in this area .
We can assume that the European Council will not voluntarily relinquish the power to appoint .
It is therefore up to the citizens of Europe to exact more democracy .
Because Sweden is not taking part in EMU , we are abstaining from the vote on the recommendation regarding the appointment of the above persons .
It is the participating countries that must decide whether these persons ' competence and political outlook are appropriate for this commission of trust .
We are unfortunately moving towards a common currency , the euro , and Economic and Monetary Union , with an increasing democratic deficit , an all-powerful and unaccountable European Central Bank and a European Parliament which has a minor role and exists for decorative purposes only .
On 2 May the European Parliament convened an extraordinary sitting , for the first time on a Saturday , to endorse the decisions of Ecofin concerning the 11 countries which were to take part in the euro .
Whether the European Parliament endorsed them or rejected them , nothing would change since its opinion was simply advisory .
I cannot agree with the direction taken by the Chair of our Parliament to participate in these rituals , albeit without powers , albeit without competences , in order to obtain some crumbs from the unprecedented publicity campaign that is being waged for the euro .
We should not have consented to the construction of an Economic and Monetary Europe , without a Parliament with the powers to express the sovereignty of the peoples of Europe .
For this reason I too elected to absent myself from this " school speech-day ' which was decided upon at the last minute simply for the media which , in my opinion , made a mockery of rather than supported the European Parliament .
Today , during the part-session in Strasbourg , it is assumed that we will endorse the administration of the European Central Bank .
During the hearing which took place in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and , when asked what he would do in the event that the European Parliament did not endorse his appointment as president , Mr Duisenberg replied that it was not a matter for him but for the Council .
And the Council , under the presidency of the British Chancellor of the Exchequer , Mr Brown , confirmed this morning that the role of Parliament was " advisory ' .
We are moving forward , we are setting up the European Central Bank and in parallel we are going backwards into parliamentary shadow , which is reminiscent of the parliaments prior to the French Revolution which exercised an " advisory ' role to the monarch .
Under these circumstances I will not take part in the appointment of the administration of the European Central Bank and I will abstain in the vote .
Of course we are voting for the recommendation on the appointment of the President and other members of the European Central Bank 's Executive Board , because the common European currency affects development in all European countries .
We wish to contribute in every way towards EMU becoming a successful project since this benefits all of Europe 's citizens , including the Swedes .
What took place on 2 May at the Brussels Summit has caused great dissatisfaction and bad feeling .
The squabbling between Member States has relegated the birth of the euro to second place and has diminished its importance as an event .
It was nevertheless worth holding a debate on who should have the authority to make decisions .
It took place , but it was unpleasant and far too nationalistic .
It must be resumed when tempers have cooled .
Politicians must make the decisions , not governors .
Since then , Parliament has done its job by conducting high quality hearings .
Should we have been less lenient with regard to any particular nominee ?
The question was raised in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and on Monday evening , I myself abstained from voting for one of the candidates .
It was a necessary warning .
But today we have no major reason for not approving the proposed team .
From now on , we shall have to ensure that Parliament exerts real control and , in particular , works determinedly towards a political Europe .
If administrators are experienced and independent , more responsibility has to be taken by politicians on behalf of the citizens they represent .
That will be our task over the next five years .
The European Parliament 's resolution on the appointment of the President and members of the ECB has , at least , made it possible to create a team of monetary experts whose professional qualities are recognized by all .
The main objective described during the hearings was to ensure the strict application of the Treaty , that is , the absolute stability of the euro .
Furthermore , note that the ' independence ' of the ECB remains unclear and vague .
Independence with regard to whom ?
But , even if the debates organized over the last two days have allowed Members to cover quite a wide range of subjects , from the individual situations of the nominees to their concept of the role of the ECB , including technical questions on the money supply or on the euro / dollar parity , it is still particularly difficult to judge the ' theoretical ' competence of each nominee at a single hearing .
We will have to judge the competence of each nominee on a day-to-day basis , within the framework of the implementation and application of monetary policies and the solutions they will have to find in order to react to the fluctuations that are sure to affect the financial markets .
Of course , recommending monetary stability in order to institute a ' healthy ' economic environment is commendable , but in no event should we lose sight of the aim , which should be a priority for both politicians and monetarists : to reduce unemployment .
Because , finally , in order to remain credible in public opinion , and remember that our aim as elected representatives is to defend it , it is imperative that the policies adopted provide an efficient solution for the twenty million unemployed , because they have little interest in the independence and supervision of a European institution in charge of monetary matters .
They are more concerned about having a decent quality of life and a decent standard of living .
Finally , may I add that it is too early to worry about the ECB President 's age . Why are we talking about his successor when he has only just been appointed ?
Wait until we have implemented a policy which is operating satisfactorily .
France was the driving force behind the construction of Europe for many years , but little by little has lost its touch .
It still has the ability to make what looks like a compromise but , on the big issues , despite all the jokes prior to the appointment of Mr Duisenberg as head of the ECB , that is where France 's power stops .
This soap opera has done little to advance Europe 's cause and our country 's .
g . ( SV ) The undersigned have abstained from the vote on the above report for the following reasons :
We oppose the EMU project per se ; all previous projects with common standards of value and / or fixed exchange rates have collapsed.-Sweden is not involved in EMU , and we therefore have no reason to consider the appointments of persons to posts within the ECB .
We believe that EMU 's policy of economic restraint may lead to social and political unrest within the EU and is therefore an enormously high-risk project .
EMU also rules out an economy that is sustainable in the long term for " green ' reasons .
The six candidates proposed for the European Central Bank 's Executive Board must follow this constitutional economic policy .
During the hearings none of them have given the slightest hint of an interpretation that takes ecological and social factors into consideration . They all follow the " hard ' line .
Furthermore , when asked whether the ECB 's operations will be characterized by openness and democratic accountability , the candidates once again answered NO .
The candidates for the ECB 's Executive Board all defend the Bank 's independence , while at the same time disputing the idea that they should be accountable to the European Parliament for their actions .
They also all underline the need for all of the Bank 's business to be conducted behind closed doors , which prevents the European Parliament and the people of Europe from being kept informed of what is going on .
We feel that the ' horse-trading ' that has taken place regarding the ECB President 's term of office and the manner in which the European Parliament has been consulted is unworthy and degrading .
As a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of the European Parliament , I welcome the key decisions that were taken during the weekend of 1-3 May by the European leaders which have given the final green light to the introduction of a single European currency in Europe .
I welcome the fact that 11 countries are set to join the new currency which will encompass a population of over 290 million people .
If only six or seven countries were to have joined up to the new currency then this would have only resulted in the building of a two-speed Europe .
I am pleased that Ireland has joined up to the new currency because this will result in lower export costs for our manufacturers .
Lower interest rates are certainly going to be a result of our membership within the European single currency regime which is good news for small and medium-sized companies , and the fact that transaction costs are eliminated will be good news for the Irish tourism industry .
The European Central Bank will be run over the next 12 years by two of the most experienced bankers in Europe , Mr Duisenberg and Mr Trichet .
Both gentlemen have impeccable credentials in international banking finance and administration and are well suited for the respective position as head of the European Central Bank .
The debate about the new head of the European Central Bank must not detract from the achievements to date in bringing about a new European single currency .
We must also remember , however , that real challenges lie ahead with regard to Irish participation in a new European single currency .
Interest rates are now controlled by the European Central Bank .
Therefore , if Ireland is to succeed within the arrangement of a single currency then we must remain competitive within the marketplace , keep prices down and ensure that inflation is kept low .
In conclusion , I am confident that Britain will join up to the new currency in the near future because British industry wants it and because Britain will be a big loser in terms of attracting outside direct foreign investment as long as it stays out of the new euro zone .
The Danish Social Democrats are abstaining from the vote on appointments to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
We voted on the list of countries that are to have the common currency because that falls within Denmark 's qualification of not wishing to prevent other countries from having it .
Nevertheless , we find it difficult to take a stance on the quality of the management to apply to participating States .
Moreover , we are abstaining because the result of the nominations of candidates is still under discussion .
Voting in favour would go beyond the stance based purely on principle that we took on 2 May .
The appointment of the President of the ECB has already been ratified by the markets and public opinion - and that is a very important evaluation factor , on the democratic as well as the economic level .
While Duisenberg 's half-mandate may devalue the presidency , it can enhance the standing of the institution , the Board of which is , furthermore , competent and has generally shown itself to be convincing .
Apart from this , the suspicions that have been aroused will inspire the institution to be more vigilant .
And it is a positive element that , owing to the statement of superior political will revealed by the appointment process , the ECB 's principal objective - the control of price stability - can now be placed in the wider context of the stability , balance and cohesion of the European Union as a whole .
In any event , it is not worth brooding over the past . We should start filling in the ' flesh and bones ' of the European Union by completing it politically and socially .
We have been consulted with regard to the appointment of the President of the Central Bank .
But we have only been consulted .
We have no authority to decide , which shows the small extent of our power , and the contrasting large extent of the European Central Bank 's .
It has full , independent and exclusive competence .
The total independence granted to it by Article 107 of the Maastricht Treaty really means an absence of control .
Furthermore , it was both revealing and pathetic to watch the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy beg for scraps , at a hearing of a senior official , Mr Duisenberg in this case .
I quote : ' How often , Mr President , would you be prepared to meet the competent committee of Parliament ? ' . Note the words ' would you be prepared ... '
Furthermore , Mr Duisenberg replied that he would agree to meet the Committee once every quarter .
He will even condescend to accept ' any invitation to Committee meetings ' .
But as far as the ECB 's accountability is concerned , he considers that it is only accountable ' to the general public ' .
In practice , it will only be accountable by means of ' an open and transparent communication policy ' , which is unlikely to lead to very severe sanctions by the ' general public ' ...
With a sincerity that nobody can doubt , Mr Duisenberg even agreed that the ECB was ' accountable to Parliament ' .
Indeed , in response to the Committee on Monetary Affairs ' nineteenth question which asked whether he would wish to continue to solicit the appointment if the European Parliament were to recommend his rejection , his answer could not be clearer : ' I cannot adopt a position on that question ' .
Is there any real accountability , if a responsible person clearly refuses to leave when his accountability has been questioned ?
So it is easy to see that , without control , the ECB will be all-powerful .
So the monetary and economic government of Europe will no longer be based on democracy but on oligarchy .
This will cause the decline of the institutional history of Europe .
The hearing of the candidates for the Executive Board of the European Central Bank and the corresponding vote for their endorsement by the European Parliament is indeed an important political moment in the necessary completion of EMU and the euro .
However , this precise moment reminds us of the political deficiencies of the progress so far towards European integration .
The vote of the European Parliament is purely consultative .
The national parliaments do not have the competence to decide the appointment of the head of the ECB , whereas they do decide the appointment of the president of their own central banks , as the Greek Parliament recently did .
The head of the ECB is thus appointed by governments , often with transactions of low quality , and parliamentary supervision is taken away from national parliaments but is not given to the European Parliament .
This demonstrates yet another of the inconsistencies which arise from the inadequacy of the progress that has been made so far towards the political integration of Europe .
This inconsistency will become even more noticeable the more the evolution of EMU progresses .
We will soon have to face up to it : either EMU does not lead to the political integration of Europe along federal lines , in which case we must worry about its future , or it de facto and inevitably leads towards that objective , in which case we must say so clearly and prepare ourselves appropriately .
On these grounds I prefer to abstain in the vote without naturally calling into question the suitability of the persons that are being proposed to us and even less the historic importance of EMU and the single currency .
We are delighted with the vote , by which the European Parliament has made yet another significant contribution to making the euro credible .
This has followed our work on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in connection with the assessment of CVs and the interviewing of the candidates .
Having freely reached a positive judgment on each of them , we have helped to strengthen the credibility the market has given the euro by consigning to oblivion the less felicitous proceedings at the Brussels Summit ; that credibility will not be dented in the slightest by Mr Duisenberg 's voluntary early retirement ( which constitutes no violation of the Treaty ) .
The credibility of the euro will be even further strengthened by the rotation system agreed at the Summit , with a date already set for a Portuguese member to be on the Executive Board , together with the permanent participation of the Governor of the Bank of Portugal on the Bank 's Board , which will meet at least ten times a year and will take all the most important fundamental decisions by a simple majority vote ( in principle ) , each vote having the same weight .
After the ' foundation ' and the appointment of the ' founder members ' of the euro , the process of installing the first Executive Board of the ECB exceeded our worst fears , displaying a totally undesirable degree of short-sightedness and opportunism .
The show that was put on to impress public opinion was followed by a spectacle generally acknowledged as depressing , but only one or two commentators stressed the revealing absence of democratic mechanisms and processes .
For our part , we have not discussed personalities , the sharing-out of influence among the ' grandees ' , combinations and ' setups ' .
As a matter of mental hygiene , so to speak , and of keeping policy exemplary , we abstained from those votes which decided nothing , those ' makeweight ' votes which continue the same pretence ' for the benefit of public opinion ' , although they cannot hide what they do not wish the public to see . This must be denounced as a matter of urgency .
We must show that the taking of decisions is being removed further and further from the people , even though they are informed and responsible participants .
A majority of our group has voted against all the Executive Board members nominated , because they consider that the monetary policy and the central bank practice that all these candidates stand for , with some subtle differences in Mr Padoa-Schioppa 's case , are unacceptable and urgently need to be reexamined .
Combating inflation when there is no inflation is not a sensible option in monetary terms , whereas avoiding deflationary trends is .
Opening up the central banks to the public at large and in particular to the ' specialized public ' of the financial markets may appear humdrum , but democratic anchoring of the independence of the central bank in a structured monetary dialogue to be institutionalized at both European and national level is a task that remains to be achieved .
A considerable minority within our group did not consider that it made sense to vote ' No ' in such a critical situation .
Now that the European Parliament has approved the nominations by a large majority , we Greens will make full use of the scope Parliament offers to formulate political demands and objectives , and of every kind of institutionalized dialogue , to work towards rectifying political guiding principles in future .
We are convinced that clearly and precisely formulated differences - as reflected in our amendments , which were rejected by a majority of this House , and also in our voting pattern - are the right starting point for the discussions to be held with the Executive Board of the ECB over the next few years .
Accordingly , we must now ensure that the limited willingness to hold a dialogue that the candidates have displayed so far is exploited to the full .
We do not , however , intend to go away and sulk : we will try even harder to make sure that our critical stances and demands make a contribution to the dialogue between the ECB and the European Parliament , which is overdue .
The logic of this explanation also applies to the following votes on the nomination of the ECB Executive Board members .
Cabrol recommendation for second reading ( A4-0150 / 98 )
Mr President , the decision taken in this House today marks a great day for democracy and for the health of citizens throughout Europe .
Obviously the Greens would have liked to have seen this directive strengthened , but we know that the tactics of the tobacco lobbying industry were to try to get an amendment put in so that when it went back to the Council the majority there would change it , because of undue pressure by Germany , in particular .
The German Government was pressurized by the print media and the newspaper industry because they were faced with the prospect of losing a huge amount of money from tobacco advertising .
They put pressure on a number of Member States to change their position within the Council .
I think it is appalling that vested interests within governments and countries are totally disregarding the health of people throughout Europe .
It is quite clear that tobacco advertising has an appalling effect on young people in particular .
When you look at the health effects of tobacco and smoking it is quite clear that the number of people who die as a result of tobacco is very high .
For example , an organization in Ireland called ASH estimates that the tobacco industry and its appalling campaign to ensure that more and more young people take up smoking kill six times more people in Ireland each year than road accidents , work accidents , drugs , murder , suicide and AIDS .
It is quite clear that smoking is a danger to health .
Any kind of advertising which promotes something that is a danger to health must be unacceptable in a civilized society .
I am glad to see here today that the tobacco industry did not get its way and that Parliament put the interests of the health of people throughout Europe before vested interests .
Unfortunately in the two larger groups in the European Parliament , many of the German Members caved in to the lobbying by these vested interests and put the interests of money before the interests of the people and their health .
However , we are glad to see that this has gone through .
It is not perfect , but at least it is something .
The Greens were in a difficult position in trying not to amend it because we knew what the end result would be .
It is quite clear that the tactics of some people in this House were very sinister indeed : trying to put amendments in ; trying to get people who are health conscious to vote in favour of them .
When the time came , would these same people support those amendments in another situation ?
I do not think they would .
Mr President , I did not vote for the common position for two reasons . My first reason relates to its legal basis .
Our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has clearly shown that the Treaty does not contain any legal basis for banning the advertising of tobacco products today or of wine , for example , tomorrow .
They are manufactured from agricultural products which are not prohibited . On the contrary , such products are even heavily subsidized within the framework of the common agricultural policy , which is the case with tobacco .
It is not a question of being for or against smokers , for or against the prevention of cancer .
It is almost psychotic , not to say hypocritical , to vote sanctimoniously for a ban on all advertising of tobacco products .
Nobody starts smoking because of advertising and nobody will stop smoking because tobacco advertising is banned . By the by , the ban will be of most benefit to the government monopolies that manufacture the most harmful cigarettes .
Because the ban on advertising in the Community will probably destroy thousands of jobs , particularly women 's jobs , in my country especially , to the benefit of multinationals in third countries , I have decided not be a hypocrite , and have voted against it .
Furthermore , I would like to see Commissioner Flynn show as much enthusiasm and vitality for creating jobs for women as he has shown in this House for the ban on tobacco advertising , which destroy jobs .
Mr President , I voted for the Cabrol report .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the attitude taken by Commissioner Flynn when he closed the debate on this report .
In fact I want to censure this attitude : Commissioner Flynn spoke out against aid to tobacco producers in a rather heated harangue in search of applause from part of this House .
But the problem of aid to tobacco producers was not on the agenda of this debate !
I believe that the two are to be kept separate , as the Commission has done , deciding to maintain aid for tobacco production , something that we will discuss in a forthcoming report by the Parliament .
Secondly , I believe that a Commissioner in this House is always obliged to express the positions of the Commission as a collegiate body , not to express personal opinions .
I know his personal opinion and respect it , but he must also respect the European Parliament and our working rules .
Therefore , Mr President , I ask that you convey my censure to Commissioner Flynn and request , if possible , an answer to his attitude .
I voted for the common position of the Council with regard to the advertising and supplying of tobacco products , since I consider that we must not encourage the use of tobacco products by means of advertising , because of the harmful effects on health , especially for the young .
However , this is a completely different issue from the position of tobacco in the common agricultural policy .
Should tobacco subsidies be abolished , as was proposed yesterday by Commissioner Flynn , this would create an enormous social problem and would lay waste whole semimountainous regions of the European Union .
It would not , however , reduce consumption by even a single cigarette but would simply benefit imports - especially from the USA - to the detriment of Community production .
I voted with the losers on the essential points , particularly on the legal basis .
There is a fundamental reason for this : so long as the production and sale of tobacco products remains a legal activity , there are no grounds for prohibiting them from being advertised .
Advertisements , furthermore , are required to make clear mention of the dangers of tobacco consumption and encourage freedom of choice .
There are also advertisements warning of the illeffects of tobacco .
There is an anti-fundamentalist reason : having given up smoking ten years ago , I do not understand the all-embracing fury against smokers on the part of people who want to impose their moral values .
And I will not tolerate that .
There is a political reason : Commissioner Flynn has expressly associated this decision with measures against the production of tobacco in the European Union and against support for agricultural tobacco producers .
This is an improper position ; it takes no account of the unfavourable economic and social effects of such a measure , which disregards European interests vis-a-vis the United States of America , and finally it is not associated with a thoroughgoing reform of the CAP , particularly in favour of agriculture , fruit-growing and oil and wine production in the countries of the South .
After more than 5 years of legislative stalemate , we are about to vote on one of the most difficult texts in the history of the European Parliament .
Our vote today should make it possible to ban tobacco advertising in the European Union .
This decision is fundamental to public health and expresses our determination to prevent all forms of addiction , whatever they are .
Thanks to Professor Cabrol 's work , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has finally reached a consensus on banning all forms of tobacco advertising and sponsorship .
With the majority of us in agreement , it is the best possible compromise at the present time because it strikes a balance between the interests of all those involved .
Important temporary sectoral derogations and adjustments have been allowed in order to prevent economic losses in agriculture , the press , and so on .
I therefore formally support the common position adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , as described in the Cabrol recommendation for second reading .
I ask all my colleagues in favour of public health to show the same determination .
As an ear , nose and throat specialist , I should like to refer to some of the aspects that have helped us to make this decision , which is not in the least excessive or disproportionate , in comparison with the public health risk .
The advertising of tobacco products is being aimed at an increasingly young audience .
That audience has become the main target of manufacturers , who thus aim to safeguard their markets for tomorrow and to replace the 500 000 smokers who die every year in Europe .
It is intolerable , under cover of the freedom of expression , to allow the behaviour of young people to be influenced , because they do not consider the risks they are taking .
Since 1995 , the United States has adopted severe measures with regard to minors and young adults .
Why should we allow American manufacturers to do in the European Union what they are no longer allowed to do at home ?
As tobacco advertising aims specifically to stimulate this type of demand and to increase this type of consumption , it is important that we control it permanently .
Every year , directly or indirectly , more deaths are caused by smoking than by road accidents , drinking , drugs and suicide put together .
We have united to create a single currency .
Now let us unite to limit the use of this potentially harmful product , which causes a major health problem .
On the whole , the content of Mr Cabrol 's report is very sound , and we certainly endorse it .
Today we have supported a number of amendments , which , if they had been adopted , would have led to the directive being amended to a recommendation .
We did so because we do not believe there is a legislative basis for Mr Cabrol 's report , but because the content is sound we would very much have liked to see it adopted as a recommendation .
Council 's own legal service and Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights have both come to the same conclusion and , because we feel very strongly about defending the rights of Member States to make their own laws , we can only support Mr Cabrol 's report as a recommendation .
On the last occasion when this was discussed in the European Parliament I opposed the proposal to ban tobacco advertising .
I did so on the grounds of censorship .
I was worried that a ban on tobacco advertising would be followed by bans on advertising other products encouraged by those who have very narrow ultra-conservative views .
While I took the decision on genuine libertarian grounds , I have since changed my mind .
My outrage at the manipulative behaviour of the tobacco industry which shows a callous disregard for ethics and public health concerns far outweighs the previous reservations that I had .
Certain tobacco producers have cynically targeted young people .
They increased the nicotine content of some of their products so as to addict young people for life .
They target young people with seductive advertising without caring about the long-term damage that is being inflicted on their health .
Profits take precedence over humanitarian concerns .
I cannot accept these practices and for these reasons I will support the ban on tobacco advertising .
Tobacco is a poison which kills hundreds of thousands of human beings every year and maims , or inflicts serious illnesses on , millions of others .
We know that from a health point of view , a pure and simple ban would be justified , but impracticable .
We cannot therefore ban tobacco production and consumption .
It is contradictory and intolerably hypocritical for advertising alone to be banned , whilst production continues to be supported by subsidies which are larger than the amounts spent on health .
Over ECU 1 billion per year !
Our decisions should be more coherent .
Despite this hypocrisy , which I deplore , I will vote for the tobacco advertising ban and hope that other measures will be approved in the future .
After six years of discussions , the Council has finally , by an extremely small margin , adopted a common position on a total tobacco advertising ban .
Personally , I am in favour of adopting the project as it stands without any amendments .
In fact , smoking should be one of our top priorities with regard to public health .
Indeed , an advertising ban may only be a first step , but it is a step that we can take now .
So , let us stand firm and adopt the Cabrol report !
Furthermore , I think that if we adopt amendments , we will give people who are opposed to the principle of a ban an opportunity to ensure that the project as a whole fails , and I do not want to run that risk .
Finally , it has in all events been explicitly stated that Member States wishing to adopt stricter requirements more quickly may do so .
Each Member State can therefore act under its own initiative if it considers that the time scale indicated in the text is too slow .
Today 's vote is a historic vote .
Today , after a 9 year struggle , this Parliament - the direct representation of the citizens of Europe - by accepting the Council 's common position without amendment , has managed democratically to impose its view .
Today is a historic occasion for the health of all our citizens , despite the fact that the Spanish Members of the Partido Popular voted in favour of encouraging tobacco consumption and its dramatic consequences for health .
On a day like this , it is an honour to be a Member of this Parliament , as I said in the debate yesterday , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Although the common position does not clarify all areas completely and the question of the legal basis is disputed , I did not vote for any of the amendments since I take the view that we must give a clear signal at European Union level that the health of our citizens is a matter of great concern .
I should like to congratulate warmly the rapporteur , Professor Christian Cabrol , for the excellent work he has done in preparing the second reading of the proposal for a directive on banning the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products in the European Union .
I share his convictions on this common position .
In putting health protection before any other consideration , he has chosen to defend a courageous political position .
Six years after the first reading , the Council has finally reached a common position .
The text is the result of difficult negotiations .
Detractors of this proposal for a directive argue that its legal basis should be changed .
I do not agree .
Indeed , although this is a public health problem , it also relates to the approximation of the rules on advertising throughout the Community .
From that point of view , I think Article 100a is eminently suitable .
If the legal basis was a real problem , not just an excuse used by some Members and Member States , it could be referred to the Court of Justice for a ruling .
It is Parliament 's job to voice a political opinion .
That is what Parliament has done today , on the very day after the publication of the WHO 's annual report , which states that 3.5 million deaths are caused by smoking throughout the world every year , and estimates that there will be 10 million deaths per year by the year 2020 .
This increase is directly linked to a foreseeable increase in smoking , particularly in developing countries .
The report also states that the number of cancer victims is decreasing overall .
It should stabilize by the year 2005 , with the exception of lung cancer , the only type of cancer that is on the increase .
I am very pleased with the result of this vote , which shows this institution 's determination to safeguard the health of young people and future generations .
A great step forward has been taken in the area of public health protection .
The European Parliament can today congratulate itself on giving its support to a ban on tobacco advertising in the European Union .
Although the decision , which has dragged on for some time , is an unsatisfactory compromise , it is the lesser of two evils .
Parliament wisely refrained from proposing any amendment to the decision taken by Ministers for Health last December after years of talks .
It thus also evaded a wolf in sheep 's clothing , i.e. mainly German representatives , who are trying to water down the whole tobacco advertising ban issue with arguments relating to health , and legalistic distortions .
The advertising ban is opposed by those who wield massive economic power , such as the tobacco industry and the giant newspaper firms .
EU legislators have brought to light the consistently great pressure they exert .
Now is also our last chance to enact the tobacco advertising ban .
In a few years ' time the Union will be joined by countries in eastern Europe , which oppose restrictions on markets .
The Union must show them too that it seriously intends to improve public health .
As an active non-smoker since birth , I am far from being a supporter of tobacco consumption , let alone an advocate of overlooking its possible dangers .
For this reason , I take the reservations which have been expressed very seriously indeed .
Nevertheless , I also want to see an honest and straightforward policy and cannot therefore endorse the proposal for the directive on the tobacco advertising ban .
The decision for or against smoking is a fundamental one and must be treated as such .
It is hypocritical to speak out against tobacco advertising whilst at the same time accepting tobacco subsidies in the European Union .
This debate is taking place on a side stage which is developing a quite different and dubious direction .
One of the fundamental principles of the market economy , and therefore an integral part of a single market , is the provision of appropriate information about goods which are legally available .
This is in keeping with the treatment of the consumer as a politically mature individual who is able to use information correctly .
This advertising ban opens up dangerous issues for our free market economy .
What about an egg advertising ban ?
Or one for cars ?
Not to mention alcohol or coffee ?
The European Union wants to guarantee the free movement of goods and services and realize the single market .
However , the tobacco advertising ban is the wrong way of achieving these objectives .
Each product which can be freely sold must also be able to be advertised .
As a consumer I have the right to know which products are on the market and what these products offer .
There is no legal basis on which to pronounce an EU-wide tobacco advertising ban .
The fact that smoking damages health is undisputed .
The health dangers of smoking are indicated on cigarette packets .
However , these restrictions must be commensurate with their intended purpose .
The tobacco advertising ban as outlined in the Council 's common position certainly is not .
I am also afraid of a domino effect that will not stop at a tobacco advertising ban .
An advertising ban for alcoholic drinks , fast cars , drugs or toys might be the result .
Where should we draw the line ?
Ladies and gentlemen , a sensible explanation to the public of the dangers of tobacco consumption is a far better and more efficient solution for reducing levels of smoking in the European population than anti-competitive advertising bans .
Therefore we should concentrate our efforts on health initiatives such as the " Europe against Cancer ' campaign .
g . ( SV ) Tobacco is the largest single cause of diseases and fatalities that can be prevented .
Within the Member States of the EU , over 500 000 deaths every year can be attributed to tobacco , 200 000 of which are caused by cardiovascular diseases .
Scientific research shows that tobacco advertising has the effect of encouraging people 's smoking habits .
Research also shows that banning tobacco advertising , in conjunction with other preventive and informative measures , reduces smoking habits .
One question that has been discussed is whether the proposed directive represents a restriction of freedom of expression and therefore of the Constitution .
Contacts with experts in this field show that this is not the case .
There are no valid arguments against the proposed ban on direct and indirect tobacco advertising and sponsorship of tobacco goods .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
While all of us want to see a dramatic reduction in tobacco advertising , it is regrettable that the need for better education among young people has become overshadowed by the superficially attractive argument for a blanket ban on advertising .
If the Commission is serious about its anti-smoking policy then it would serve itself and the European public better by concentrating on education programmes rather than seeking publicity by ill-conceived and badly executed means .
That the matter has not been properly thought through is evident from the fact that Article 100a is not the legal basis on which tobacco advertising should be addressed .
In my opinion , the credibility of the EU is undermined by such manipulation of the Treaty .
It is also unfair to accuse Members , who genuinely believe that the legal basis for this proposal is wrong , of being under the control of cigarette manufacturers .
I have listened to the arguments put forward not only by the manufacturers but also by anti- smoking campaigners and by the trade unions who represent workers employed in the industry in my own constituency .
I remain convinced that a blanket ban is not the answer to the problem of tobacco consumption and that it will not be achieved anyway on a legal basis which cannot be justified .
Doctors are agreed that tobacco smoking endangers health right from the very first cigarette .
And that it affects not only smokers but also passive smokers around them .
Experts have proved that both direct and indirect tobacco advertising are most influential on the young , encouraging them to enter into the " drug ' culture of tobacco .
For this reason a large majority in the European Parliament , supported by a majority in the Council of European Health Minsters , has drawn up an EU directive on the banning of tobacco advertising .
Despite the concentrated opposition of the tobacco industry , which in a massive public relations campaign has left no stone unturned in trying to win politicians over to its arguments , reason has triumphed .
After a transition period of three years to allow time for the reorganization of the economic structures involved , both direct and indirect tobacco advertising and sponsoring will be banned in Europe .
There are some 548 , 000 tobacco-related deaths per annum in Europe .
With 654 victims per year Luxemburg is no exception .
Our task , therefore , is to reduce the consumption of tobacco and to prevent young people in particular - who are specifically targeted by many tobacco advertisements - from acquiring this dangerous habit .
As it is a proven fact that few people start smoking after the age of 20 , stepping up prevention amongst children and young people represents a logical political step towards improving public health .
Strong in my conviction and backed by the moral support of the doctors of Luxemburg and the Fondation luxembourgeoise contre le cancer , I will be voting for the tobacco advertising ban .
Whether or not it can be considered desirable to introduce regulations banning tobacco advertising , the proposed directive should not be adopted .
Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and Council 's legal service have both concluded that the Community does not have the power to issue the directive - regardless of whether article 100a or any other article of the Treaty is cited as the legal basis .
Should the directive be adopted , a complaint would in all probability be brought before the Court of Justice to the effect that the document should be declared invalid under Articles 173 and 174 of the Treaty .
Thus , it must be up to each Member State to determine whether to introduce such legislation .
I am , therefore , voting in favour of the declaration of intent to reject the Council 's common position , tabled by Mr Nassauer and his co-signatories .
As an active non-smoker since birth , I am far from being a supporter of tobacco consumption , let alone an advocate of overlooking its possible dangers .
For this reason , I take the reservations which have been expressed recently very seriously indeed .
Nevertheless , I also want to see an honest and straightforward policy and cannot therefore endorse the proposal for the directive on the tobacco advertising ban .
The decision for or against smoking is a fundamental once and must be treated as such .
In my view , it is incomprehensible that one should speak out against the tobacco advertising ban whilst at the same time accepting tobacco subsidies in the European Union .
This debate is taking place on a side stage which is developing a quite different and dubious direction .
One of the fundamental principles of the market economy , and therefore an integral part of a single market , is the provision of appropriate information about goods which are legally available .
This is in keeping with the treatment of the consumer as a politically mature individual who is able to use information correctly .
This advertising ban opens up dangerous issues for our free market economy .
What about an egg advertising ban ?
Or one for cars ?
Not to mention alcohol or coffee ?
For all these reasons , I will vote for the European single market and against a restriction on the advertising of legal goods .
This question is about much more than the tobacco advertising ban .
I reject the ban on the grounds of basic considerations relating to the procedure used by the Committee on the Environment which has resulted in the European Parliament disassociating itself from an important European legislative project .
Because we are taking it upon ourselves to discuss in this House a draft which was dealt with by the European Parliament over six years ago in a quite different context .
Even more important for our position , however , is the fact that by using the selected procedure the European Parliament is performing a legal act which undoubtedly exceeds the scope of its legal competence .
None of the powers of jurisdiction currently vested in the European Union covers such a wide-ranging ban on the direct and indirect advertising of a product the consumption of which is not only not banned , but - to cap it all - to the production of which the European Union has actually contributed for many years in the form of EU funds , e.g. for tobacco and tobacco products .
We would consider ourselves far more bound by a principle of subsidiarity which does not produce a sort of rarefied EU centralism and in which a European legislator in Brussels does not see himself as authorised to intervene in anything and everything .
Finally , may I say that we fully support the concerns of all those who take the danger to health posed by tobacco seriously .
Above all , we want the European Union and the European Parliament to find other , legally permissible ways of giving this matter the status it deserves .
As a non-smoker , I would have no difficulty whatsoever in joining those who are going to vote today with great enthusiasm for a total ban on tobacco advertising .
But I am not going to follow the recommendations of our rapporteur , Professor Cabrol , because I am not convinced that this ban will have the expected result .
Instead of concentrating all our efforts on trying to persuade our fellow citizens to stop smoking , instead of teaching our young people to make up their own minds with regard to advertising , we have chosen the easy way out , that is , banning advertising . We are showing them once again that they are old enough , for example , to vote for Members of Parliament to represent them , but in everything else they are still children .
Banning tobacco advertising is therefore the easy way out .
But where will it take us ?
Are we really going to regulate everything which in any way resembles an indirect form of advertisement of tobacco consumption ?
In my opinion , we have got it wrong .
In order to remain coherent , are we going to ban smoking film stars from cinema screens , are we going to ban the advertising of perfumes because they are named after a cigar , or an actor or a famous sportsman who is a smoker ?
I sincerely believe that national legislation gives us enough power to regulate the advertising of any product . I agree here with our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and the Council 's legal service , both of whom say that Article 100a cannot form a legal basis for a ban on tobacco advertising .
I am convinced that banning the advertising of tobacco products will harm small producers . All it will do is redistribute the market shares of the large manufacturers of tobacco products , but it will have no effect on direct consumption .
Furthermore , I am afraid that banning the advertising of tobacco products is a step towards banning other products in the future - alcohol , for example .
Is that what we want ?
To conclude , I am against the hypocrisy of subsidizing European producers of tobacco to the tune of several billion ECU on the one hand , and on the other , of banning tobacco advertising , which helps to sell it .
I am sorry that the important amendments to the Cabrol report proposed by the European Parliament did not meet with majority approval .
I can see no legal basis for the common position in the Treaty on European Union .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations is well aware of the very harmful consequences of smoking , and cannot fail to support the strict regulation of the advertising and promotion of tobacco products .
In fact , a reduction in advertising and promotion alone will lead to a reduction in tobacco consumption .
Everyone knows that the habit of smoking is very often acquired at the end of adolescence or at the beginning of adult life .
In that respect , we approve the regulation of the advertising and promotion of tobacco .
European legislation will be useful in order to prevent a sort of relocation of advertising to the more lenient Member States .
In fact , various media with audiences located throughout the Member States broadcast sporting and cultural events .
It is therefore necessary to prevent advertisements , which are banned in some Member States from being broadcast without control by the media of other Member States .
Nevertheless , this group wishes to reiterate its position with regard to European tobacco production .
A large number of Members of this House from non tobacco-producing Member States regularly want to withdraw all aid from tobacco production .
Now , it is important to remember that overall the European Union shows a deficit , and that it imports far more tobacco than it exports .
The withdrawal of aid from European tobacco production would lead to its total disappearance .
Imports would increase , with a negative effect on the balance of trade of the European Union , and it would have no effect on consumption .
Tobacco production is extremely labour-intensive .
It would be wrong to withdraw aid from tobacco production , because that would have a devastating effect on particularly sensitive rural areas .
Finally , the Cabrol report raises an important question of law .
Even if the rapporteur 's intentions are essentially good , he recommends that the Commission should draft a directive which is totally contradictory to the existing legal system , which interferes with national competences , and obviously violates the principle of subsidiarity .
Public health protection does indeed fall exclusively within national competence , not within the scope of the Community , and should therefore not be the subject of any directives whatsoever .
This is an extremely dangerous precedent : it may lead the way to activist intervention by the Community , on the basis of the majority vote , in practically all the areas that fall within the competence of the Member States .
It therefore creates an atmosphere of legal insecurity , by showing that European institutions have little respect for the laws applicable to them , that they overstep their competence and that they consider that the law is subject to a changeable majority vote .
The scrupulous observance of procedures is a guarantee of democracy , and it is important that we should always be vigilant in ensuring that important decisions , which have an effect on citizens ' daily lives , are made in compliance with freely agreed rules .
The question of the legal basis of a text is therefore always fundamental .
In that respect , the intention and , in this case , the use , to which the legal basis argument can be put in delaying tactics , are not insignificant .
The coherence of this Parliament 's political decisions reflects on our credibility and our efficiency , and with a political courage dictated by necessity , we must act as scrupulously as possible with regard to public health risks .
Furthermore , the technological environment has an effect on commercial practices , and when information - and advertising - technologies make it possible to cross borders , the de facto approximation of market rules cannot be considered innocuous .
Having made the above statement of principle , we now have a choice . We have a choice between a society in which freedom - of the strongest and most fortunate - is a doctrine and not an achievement used to protect the most vulnerable , and a society in which accountability is a political asset , even if it threatens some financial interests .
Making this choice does not mean evading the culturally difficult problem of teaching young people to construct their own rules of behaviour as consumers . It does not mean evading the usually difficult and politically obdurate question of the financial involvement of Members States in the tobacco industry and in other public health threats such as alcohol , taxation of income from prostitution , and so on .
But 10 years of discussion , reflection and hesitation is the time it takes for a child to become an adolescent and to discover such destructive and fleeting pleasures , without being ready to measure and to master them . It seems preceding generations have been unable to show them any other way of achieving their dreams .
The approximation of the laws regulating this type of advertising does not require all that much courage .
Let us be capable of taking on this responsibility .
Kenneth D. Collins recommendation for second reading ( A4-0146 / 98 )
The Council directive on the quality of drinking water is of great importance and its de facto application must be ensured .
It is significant that in the second reading the Marinucci amendment was adopted , which transfers copper from Part B to Part C of the Annex , as prescribed by the scientific facts , but which at the same time provides the opportunity to amend prices and to classify parameters on the basis of the evolution of scientific knowledge .
Who could possibly not be in favour of safeguarding the quality of water intended for human consumption ?
That is an objective which Member States , local authorities , companies and individuals should pursue energetically .
But , in practice , in order to achieve the required aims , clear , relevant and measurable parameters must be defined .
It is also necessary for the options adopted during definition and classification to relate to the real world , not to be based on ideological rather than scientific judgements .
The provisions of Annex 1 Part B , relating to copper , in the common position , do not appear to be based on current scientific knowledge or factual information on the effects of copper on the body .
That is why we considered it particularly useful to vote for Amendments Nos 31 to 34 , which were submitted to us .
Most of the Members of this House agreed with us . We cannot help being pleased about this , particularly given that currently there is no easy and safe replacement for copper in the consumers ' water supply .
This morning , the European Parliament has shown realism and responsibility with regard to an issue that is certainly technical , but whose economic consequences are not insignificant .
This proposal for a directive has been examined by the co-decision procedure and was already significantly improved by the European Parliament , at first reading in December 1996 .
The Council 's discussions were completed within a fairly satisfactory time scale .
It only took one year ! !
Compared with other texts , it is quite an achievement .
But , above all , the Council 's common position has incorporated some of Parliament 's basic amendments such as :
the need to develop harmonized methods of sampling for testing the lead content in water , which I introduced on behalf of the PPE group at first reading .
This is essential , because data must be comparable between one Member State and another ; -the definition of points of compliance : the Council has taken up my amendment , which was adopted at first reading .
In fact , with regard to the water provided by a distribution system , the point of compliance must be the ' tap normally used for human consumption ' , which makes it possible to avoid ensuring the conformity of garden taps .
That will facilitate the enforcement of this directive considerably.Nevertheless , some areas of the common position could still be improved .
With regard to copper , the European Commission and the Council have not taken up the amendment adopted at first reading .
Note that neither has given Parliament a reason to justify that decision .
On behalf of the PPE group , I am delighted that the amendment , which moves copper from Annex B relating to chemicals , to Annex C , relating to iron and manganese , has been adopted today .
This change of annex means that if the copper content , like any other parameter in Annex C , is exceeded , paragraph 2 of Article 8 is applicable .
According to that article , Member States must take corrective measures as soon as possible to restore the quality of the water .
That is a fundamental safeguard of the quality of drinking water .
The PPE group is also pleased that amendments have been adopted relating to :
parametric values regarding specific chemical substances , such as trihalomethanes , or physical parameters , such as radioactivity , which will of course have to be taken into consideration in the light of the Euratom directive ; -the request for a study relating to endocrine disrupters .
May I emphasize that it is true that we do not yet have sufficient scientific data ?
But I should like the research programmes set up by the Commission to be speeded up immediately .
That would comply with the principle of prevention that the Union has imposed in environmental matters and with regard to public health.With regard to lead , Member States will have to provide a report on the effect of lead piping on the quality of water .
They have five years in which to develop a plan to replace it .
That is a good solution , which provides a reasonable period of time to plan what needs to be done , in the light of the effects of lead .
It would of course be preferable for the cost of these plans to be calculated and programmed , but that will fall within the competency of each of the Member States .
I would like to point out that with regard to ' lead ' standards , Member States - mainly the United Kingdom , France , Spain , Italy , Portugal , Belgium and Ireland , whose water distribution systems contain lead piping , will need huge financial resources - ECU 35 to 50 billion for the whole of the European Union .
Finally , the possibilities of derogation provided by the common position have been reduced and stricter requirements introduced with regard to time .
We should congratulate ourselves on this .
It was nevertheless necessary , in exceptional cases , for Member States to be able to ask the European Commission for a further derogation .
I should like to congratulate warmly the rapporteur , Mr Ken Collins , for the work he has done at first reading , and now at second reading .
g . ( SV ) The water supply is primarily a national question .
Shortages , environmental problems , natural disasters and such like make it a European and global issue .
I can therefore support a common water policy , providing the Member States are permitted to have higher standards .
This is also proposed in the directive .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
Mr President , it is important that water quality is protected and improved throughout the European Union .
The people have a right to expect no less .
While I feel it is useful to set standards , it must be for the Member States to implement , while they must improve and increase their standards - and there is great scope for improvement .
We must look at how best we can remove all contact with lead piping and each Member State should draw up proposals which will lead to the removal of lead .
The directive on drinking water is one of the most significant legislative initiatives of EU environmental policy .
Key aspects of the directive are the principle of prevention and the principle of making polluters foot the bill .
We must stand by these important criteria if we wish to assure consumers of an ongoing supply of clean water .
It is gratifying to see Commission , Council and Parliament collaborating successfully in the preparation of clear provisions for the directive , which is worthy of full endorsement .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations voted in favour of the common position of the Council on the quality of water intended for human consumption .
However , a hierarchy of water policies must be established in order to simultaneously guarantee the safety of the water supply , restore polluted waters and prevent any further deterioration of water quality .
These three political priorities must be controlled simultaneously in order to satisfy consumers ' needs .
It is therefore important to ensure the coherence of the proposals and efficient auditing of compliance , on the basis of reliable data and methods of analysis .
It is therefore necessary for Member States to comply with the framework objectives established , using appropriate techniques and technologies .
In the water industry , like many other environmental sectors , it is necessary to apply the principle of subsidiarity to the full , so problems can be solved more efficiently .
However , with regard to the purification of polluted water in particular , cooperation between Member States must be facilitated , as catchment basins do not stop at national borders , which form artificial administrative limits .
We all know that the Rhine , after crossing Switzerland , France , Germany and the Netherlands , flows into the North Sea .
Any attempt to establish standards relating to the quality of water intended for human consumption will be futile if cooperation between Member States is not ensured .
Rather than allowing European institutions to adopt ever more stringent standards , cooperation between Member States must be encouraged , to enable decision-making to take place as far as possible at a local level , effectively applying the principle of subsidiarity . It is also important to ensure the implementation of the most suitable measures and technologies .
I am glad to support this report by my colleague , Mr Collins .
Water quality is obviously a vital matter of concern for each and every European citizen .
It is good to see that the EU 's governments have taken up nearly 40 of this Parliament 's amendment since first reading .
This is a good example of people 's elected ministers and their elected MEPs working together to improve consumer standards .
However , I support the rapporteur 's amendments aimed at limiting the scope for Member States to be let off meeting EU standards of water quality .
He is right to argue that whilst they should be allowed to set higher national standards than required by EU law , countries should still have to apply minimum EU standards for the sake of consumers .
In this House we are often busy legislating on issues which although important to one group or another do not always affect many people in their daily lives .
This report should be backed by the House to let everyone in the EU know that we also act to ensure their health and the protection of their environment - I understand that in Mr Collins 's native Scotland the whisky is often called the water of life , but his report shows that he knows the importance of ensuring that drinking water , the real water of life , is as safe as we can make it .
This type of report should not pass through this Parliament .
It does not lie within the competence of Parliament to lay down guidelines on such matters as the level of radioactivity in drinking water .
Parliament should decide on general guidelines but then leave expert bodies to work out specific details .
One major failing with regard to the functioning of this Parliament is precisely that too much time is devoted to details ( within fields where Parliament lacks competence ) , and too little time to general guidelines .
Parliament should set objectives ; the expert bodies should decide on the means to achieve these objectives .
Miranda de Lage recommendation ( A4-0156 / 98 )
I refused to give a positive vote to the European Union-Mexico agreement because of the human rights situation , particularly in the Chiapas region .
Unfortunately the Mexican government has taken a tough stance and is allowing an act of genocide to unfold in the region in question and is placing obstacles in the way of international observers .
Naturally I must point out that it is significant that there is a human rights clause , which has been by-passed on more than one occasion , according to experiences in other countries .
I am , like you , very pleased that the adoption of the interim agreement to which we have given our assent will enable commercial negotiations between the European Union and Mexico to start soon .
It is understood that the modernization of the Mexican economy and its membership of NAFTA make it necessary to reform the framework agreement on cooperation . It was , however , only signed between the European Community and Mexico in 1991 and is still in force today .
The European Union could , furthermore , not fail to react to the increasing instances of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms , social disparities and poverty in Mexico , after the events in Chiapas and the financial crisis of December 1994 .
As our rapporteur says , the new agreement comprises three cooperation arrangements , which aim to encourage the democratization of Mexican society , and which were not included in the 1991 framework agreement .
We are all pleased about them .
However , like the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , one cannot help noticing that , so far , the above-mentioned arrangements , which form part of the political dialogue , are not expected to involve civil society .
That is a shortcoming , which in my opinion , needs to be remedied .
In my opinion , the global agreement should stipulate procedures which ensure the active participation of NGOs and other associations and organizations of civil society in the political dialogue .
More generally , it is important that both parties ensure that democracy has an actual operational role in the final agreement .
With regard to the final agreement , I cannot conclude without saying that I am in complete agreement with the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations .
It is essential that the European Parliament retains the power to give its assent to the whole agreement after the publication of the results of the negotiations which are about to start .
We support extended economic , political and sociocultural cooperation and exchange with Mexico .
In spite of this , we have not voted in favour of this report .
We do not in the present situation believe that Mexico fulfils the requirements regarding respect for human rights .
In Mexico , and especially in the province of Chiapas , infringements of human rights are constantly taking place .
Many tradeunion and human-rights activists have been murdered by paramilitary groups with indirect links to the army .
Mexico also in many cases contravenes human rights with regard to its treatment of several national minorities that belong to its indigenous population .
French Communist and allied Members have declared themselves in favour of the suspension of the partnership and cooperation agreement between the European Union and Mexico .
We have recommended this exceptional measure at the request of many personalities in Chiapas , and in Mexico , for the same reasons that I described to this House , on 15 January , the day after the terrible massacres in Acteal .
We shall therefore not vote for the report .
Since the beginning of the year , serious violations of human rights , the militarization of the area and the presence of paramilitary groups have been common .
The population lives in an atmosphere of violence and constant tension .
The risk of further conflict is increasing , inasmuch as the real instigators of the massacre of Acteal remain unpunished to this day .
Dozens of indigenous people are in prison for demonstrating , or because they took part in the establishment of independent municipal structures in compliance with the San Andrés agreements of February 1996 .
The Mexican government seems to want to ignore the proposed reforms of the Constitution based on indigenous cultures and rights , written by the ' Commission for Concord and Peacemaking ' , which , however , was legally elected .
This attitude is contrary to the spirit of the San Andrés agreements , which aim to find solutions by means of dialogue .
The partnership agreement between Mexico and the European Union was drafted within that context .
To approve it today would mean endorsing a completely different policy .
If we suspend its application , it may help former commitments to be met : that is what we propose .
Peijs report ( A4-0149 / 98 )
The reform of the Customs Code , drafted some time ago , has come at the right time , when the shocking losses in the Community budget caused by large-scale fraud have just been announced .
Europe has to reform this legislative framework .
Indeed , the single market and the free movement of goods were not set up to facilitate large-scale deals by criminal organizations .
The cost of the various types of customs fraud amounted to some ECU 2 billion in 1997 .
Within a context of budgetary restrictions in most Member States , the publication of such losses has a very negative effect on the image of the Union and of national administrations .
The reform of the Customs Code is a reference framework for future proposals and initiatives by the Commission in this area , and is therefore welcome and necessary .
Customs administration officials have been asking for a long time for the legislation and procedures governing their work to be simplified .
Firms will find it easier to comply with transparent and simplified legislation .
Furthermore , it should be possible to amend the provisions of the Customs Code more quickly and more easily .
These aspects of the proposed reform are clearly steps in the right direction and will enable opportunities for fraud to be considerably reduced .
Nevertheless , some remarks have to be made .
First of all , it is necessary to ensure democratic control : it is important that speeding up procedures does not lead to a situation in which the European Parliament has lost all democratic control .
The rationalization of amendment procedures must not mean reducing opportunities for consulting the firms involved , or uncertainty about the content of the Commission 's implementing regulations , or that decisions are reached without reference to elected bodies .
To compensate for the extra time taken to consult the European Parliament , the Commission 's proposals will not only have to be explicit , they must also be detailed and flexible enough to make successive amendments unnecessary .
Secondly , we must prevent confusion : the simplified procedures must reduce the administrations ' reaction times in new situations .
In other words , it must be possible to close any loopholes which had not been thought of quickly , and thus to prevent fraud due to grey areas in the legislation .
On the other hand , repeated , frequent changes over a short period of time could cause confusion for the administrations and could be detrimental to the firms involved , which would have to change their working methods continually .
An atmosphere of confusion is as favourable to fraud as the temporary existence of grey areas in texts .
That is why the extra time required to consult the European Parliament will not necessarily have a negative effect .
By adopting the amendments proposed by the rapporteur , Parliament has adopted a position midway between the rationalization of procedures and the requirements of democratic control , whilst considerably increasing the future efficiency of the system .
One day , when the true story of this rush to liberalization is told , if it ever is , there is no doubt that the efforts of the customs professionals to moderate attacks on the regulations and mechanisms aimed at protecting economies based on national territories against the smugglers who have so promptly and rapidly taken advantage of the new ' facilities ' and the rush to liberalization , will finally be recognized .
This is quite apart from the fact that as a profession they have been the most immediate and worst affected victims of a process for which , furthermore , they have had no preparation in terms of technical training or equipment .
The current edition of the Customs Code once again reflects the general attitude .
The customs professionals ' reservations and suggestions appear to have been overlooked or disregarded , particularly those relating to conditions of representation for declarants , for the sake of the higher interests of the State .
In any event , we must safeguard the customs officials ' role as essential operators in the customs area , particularly as regards the collection of duty and the prevention of smuggling . We seem hell-bent on casting doubt on the very existence of the customs and those who work for it .
We have naturally voted in favour of protecting the public interest , which we still think is served by the customs officials and all professionals involved in the fight against the deregulation of the procedures and indiscriminate access to them , in the context of the urgent need to prevent smuggling , which , for its part , serves interests that transcend all national boundaries .
As a former member of the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry into Customs Fraud I support , in principle , any initiative designed to make the procedure more effective and resistant to fraud .
However , I can only support this amendment to the Community Customs Code with reservations .
I want to see a reasonable and practicable reorganization of EU customs law .
New regulations must meet both SLIM and Fiche d 'Impact requirements .
In addition , it is also necessary to involve all the interested parties - customers offices , buyers and vendors , carriers , banks and insurance companies - in the decision-making process .
Pollack report ( A4-0161 / 98 )
Mr President , I wholeheartedly agreed with the three reports on acidification .
We welcome the proposals by the Commission and the amendments from this Parliament .
We can be quite satisfied with the policy against acidification pursued hitherto .
Since the 1970s , measures have been taken in Europe to control the emission of sulphur and nitrogen oxides .
And this policy is working .
Despite the increase in energy use , the emission from these two chemicals has fallen dramatically .
Let us therefore count our blessings !
Thankfully , reductions of more than 50 % since 1980 are no exception in the majority of Member States .
It might even be possible to achieve the planned reductions for sulphur and nitrogen oxides for 2010 as a result of the new standards for car exhaust emissions .
This is hopeful .
Yet sadly we cannot be solely positive .
Pollution resulting from fine dust particles and ammoniac is extremely persistent .
Pollution as a result of particulate matter , in other words fine dust , is a clear threat to human health .
That is why I am pleased to see that qualitative objectives have been set for this .
I should add straight away , however , that they strike me as ambitious .
As you know , the particles are released chiefly in traffic .
If traffic continues to grow as it has been doing over the past few years , particle emissions will increase as well .
This is extremely worrying , because one particle is already enough to be fatal amongst certain risk categories .
The limit values in the Commission proposal will thus turn out to be " wish values ' .
Ammoniac pollution is an issue in agriculture in particular , and varies from region to region .
We most definitely need qualitative objectives , but a policy aimed at results will have to ensure that reductions are achieved .
Less intensive cattle farming seems the only real solution .
National policies are the answer here , as the intensity of the pollution varies so much from country to country .
My conclusion is that the acidification strategy pursued by the Commission looks good , but I believe we need an additional particles strategy .
I wish the Commission luck , however , because curbing traffic is no easy job .
Those of us who voted for the Hautala report obviously also support Mrs Pollack 's report , since the quality of the air we breathe makes a substantial contribution to protecting our health .
We all realize the harmful effects which the pollutants addressed in this directive have on public health and the environment , and the urgent need for binding limit values .
Indeed , one of the merits of this directive is that it relies for that on the new guidelines established by the World Health Organization .
However , since I do not have much time , I would like to concentrate on two points which I do not think have been adequately resolved in the text being considered today .
One of them is that the number and location of measuring stations is particularly important for the smaller islands of the EU , or islands which form part of an archipelago , since that will probably be the only source of measurement and hence public information .
The other point is how these measurements will be made in tourist areas , which at least triple their population during the holiday period , or in areas with fewer than 250 000 inhabitants .
With the rapporteur 's agreement , we have introduced various amendments to cover this gap in the legislation , since every citizen has the same rights in all matters and , of course , to the quality of the air they breathe .
I am voting in favour of this report today as the people who send us here to represent them have a right to expect that we back measures aimed at cleaning up the air that we all breathe .
Earlier this century my own constituency in Greater Manchester was one of many parts of industrial Britain to benefit from Clean Air legislation by our own governments .
But today we realize that air pollution can harm not only our own children and our own district , but that one nation 's pollution can be carried on the wind to damage the international environment .
This report by my colleague Mrs Pollack represents a classic example of the principle of thinking globally whilst acting locally .
Uniform standards of measuring air pollution across the EU should be used to inform the authorities and the public locally of the air pollution they have to face each day .
This kind of regular information can act as a real incentive to our governments and business to reduce pollution levels .
Alongside national action such as the British Government 's commitment at the recent Kyoto Earth Summit to tackle pollution levels , EU law can also add a weapon to our arsenal in the fight for clear air for future generations .
Hautala report ( A4-0174 / 98 )
The proposal for a directive relating to a reduction of the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels is one of the aspects of the action to be taken within the framework of the Community strategy for the prevention of the acidification of the atmosphere .
Sulphur dioxide ( S02 ) is one of the pollutants that contribute towards acidification as a result of depositing excessive quantities of acidifying substances in soil or water .
The effects of these acid deposits are dependent in particular on the characteristics and the sensitivity of receivers and , of course , on the quantity of the deposits .
I note , by the way , that the combustion of coal is the most important cause of sulphur dioxide emissions .
It is surprising that this fact is not taken into account .
Similarly , I wonder whether it is appropriate to set very low general thresholds with possibilities of derogation or whether it might not be more sensible to do the opposite and set very low thresholds for sensitive areas ?
The question of the fuels used in refineries is also important .
Refineries are already subject to strict sulphur dioxide emission limits .
Is it therefore reasonable to impose additional constraints ?
To conclude , the proposal for a directive submitted to us will lead to large investments in desulphurization units , when many regulations already limit SO2 emissions .
It would be preferable and more efficient to produce a new general strategy of prevention of acidification and establish national ceilings that take into account geographical variations in acid deposits .
We have voted in favour of the report because of its subject matter . However , we are strongly opposed to a change in its legal basis - contrary to the will of the rapporteur - from 130s to 100a , since this restricts the ability of the Member States to take tougher environmental protection measures .
Although I do not always agree with her , I should like to congratulate Mrs Hautala on this report and the work she has done .
I am glad that Parliament has adopted the amendment , which changes the legal basis of the proposal .
In my opinion , Article 100a is a far better basis for a directive establishing limit values for the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels , in order to prevent both acidification and the present distortions of competition in the European heavy fuels market .
In fact , sulphur levels vary considerably between one Member State and another : not only before processing the fuels , because that depends on the area they come from - Persian Gulf , North Sea , and so on - , but also after processing , since requirements vary considerably from one Member State to another .
In this respect , I wish to point out that paragraph 4 of Article 100a allows Member States to enforce more stringent national standards if they are justified for environmental reasons .
I hope the European Commission will take this vote into consideration and will revise its proposal on that basis .
Overall , the European Commission 's proposal was well balanced and did not require any significant improvements .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I deplore the fact that the scope of this directive has been enlarged to include bunker fuel oils and marine diesel oil and that the standard recommended by the European Commission regarding gas oil has been toughened .
These amendments are not economically realistic and are not justified from an environmental viewpoint .
I am , nevertheless , pleased with the adoption of amendments intending to involve the European Parliament in information procedures .
Furthermore , by the end of the year , the European Commission will have to submit proposals for economic instruments which may contribute to reducing sulphur dioxide emissions .
That approach would have been worth including in the present proposal .
Poggiolini report ( A4-0119 / 98 )
Consumers as well as many producers often experience difficulties in finding their way through the myriad of eco-labels currently on the market ( of which there are reportedly over 50 worldwide ) .
In some respects , in fact , it might be said that this lack of regulation quite shamelessly makes light of the environmental consciences of our citizens .
It would be a good thing if , within the European single market at least , there were one environmental symbol on which the consumer could rely .
However , there are no signs that this is likely to be achieved in the near future .
For the EU not only has to deal with the myriad of existing national systems , it also has to fight against deceptive " ecological ' advertising .
This explains why practically no one is familiar with the European eco-label , even though it has been in existence for over five years . There is hardly a consumer who would recognize the flower on the star background symbol .
However , blame for this must be shared with the Member States , where implementation of the first regulation was not a success .
The new approach being taken here should hopefully be more serious , thanks to the creation of a " European Organisation for the Environmental Symbol ' .
In the interests of the consumer , we can only hope that this will indeed be the case .
The most important task is the coordination of national and European symbols .
Quite naturally , countries with high environmental standards do not want to give up their eco-labels simply to introduce a weaker one .
Luxembourg , which does not have its own national environmental symbol and imports many of its goods from abroad , would greatly welcome the final implementation of this regulation .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of revising eco-labelling .
A single common label throughout the EU , based on the same strict criteria that apply to successful national labelling today , is the long-term goal .
National labels should be able to function instead until such times as the EU eco-label is properly operational or even awarded .
Choosing from several flowers instead of one flower is unsuitable .
Instead , we advocate giving the consumer more information as to why the flower has been awarded .
We have voted in favour of the motion to prevent eco-labelling schemes currently used at national level - such as the " Nordic swan ' , the " peregrine falcon ' and the " bra miljöval ' ( " the right environmental choice ' ) - from being abolished , to be replaced by the EU 's " eco flower ' .
We believe that existing eco-labelling schemes should be maintained in parallel .
It would be wrong to decide on a common EU eco label that leads to the abolition of labelling systems that are already functioning well and highly regarded .
The " Nordic swan ' is an example of a label that currently operates in several countries and has come into being as a result of intergovernmental cooperation .
This type of labelling requires public confidence and a link with the environmental movement .
Eco-labelling systems that have been successful on both of these points should not be allowed to be superseded by the EU 's " eco flower ' .
From a consumer perspective the proposal is unjustifiable .
Different labelling schemes can exist simultaneously .
In this case , competition is preferable to a monopoly .
Regarding the proposal to review arrangements for the awarding of a European eco-label , I would like to emphasize two points that I consider to be very positive initiatives .
The Commission 's proposal incorporates important initiatives towards reducing bureaucracy in the procedure in order to speed up the awarding of eco-labels .
This is the only way the European label can assure increased competitiveness to products qualifying for the label .
The parliamentary report proposes that the area of application of labelling should be expanded to include services as well .
This is a particularly relevant initiative that will benefit small craft businesses , for example - when a small company makes a special effort to use environmentally friendly products , for instance .
Whitehead report ( A4-0153 / 98 )
Mr President , Mr Whitehead 's report relates to an essential area , complementary to our vote two years ago on the ' Television without Frontiers ' directive .
The subject here is the protection of minors and human dignity in new audiovisual and information services .
We have a full consensus on the subject of violence and the need to regulate it by means of a number of procedures . But I should like to say something on the subject of pornography , in addition to what our colleague and indeed all the Members of this House have said .
Some have said that we should have more detailed discussions on pornography .
In fact , we have a full consensus on banning and taking legal action against pornography involving minors , or which is likely to be viewed by minors . But we have no such consensus around the fact that pornography , all pornography , involving adults and viewed by adults , is a violation of human dignity .
However , the subject of this report is the protection of minors and human dignity .
I am not talking about eroticism , which may have some connection with art .
Pornography , ladies and gentlemen , is not freedom of expression , it is not art : it is business , a scandalously profitable business in every society , on an international scale .
I therefore look forward to a time when every society will consider that all pornography is a violation of human dignity . I look forward to a time , when , not only at a European level , but also at an international level , at a UN human rights level , ethical standards will be established prohibiting pornography in international society .
The drafting of a Green Paper on the protection of minors and human dignity is an excellent thing in itself and I read Mr Whitehead 's report with great satisfaction .
I should like to congratulate him because his report is not only coherent , it is also discusses the subject pragmatically .
It is one thing to be able exert control over all kinds of audiovisual broadcasts , it is another to expect to control the expansion of the Internet .
With regard to the Internet , all we can do is try to work in partnership with the service providers and hosts of the global system .
But , we must see things clearly . Protecting individuals with regard to information , is a difficult and hit-or-miss endeavour .
There are many examples , which unfortunately support that observation .
In order to be efficient , we must mobilize all the players involved in the problem of violation of human dignity , with regard to minors , of course , but also with regard to any human being .
Every day new sites are created whose only subjects are hatred and violence .
To fight against this scourge , whose form is not new , but whose means of distribution is , it is necessary , as I said before , to carry out a campaign in the professions responsible for distribution . It is also necessary make Net surfers aware of the fact that they too must take part in this combat to ensure that areas of freedom and tolerance are safeguarded .
The production of this report by Mr Whitehead is timely and opportune .
It is important to recognise that the rapid expansion of the Information Society , especially the Internet , raises serious questions and in particular the abuse of this system by sinister groups .
We need to introduce measures especially to protect children and to emphasize human dignity .
I support Mr Whitehead 's proposals for self-regulation involving the industry plus access and service providers .
However , self-regulation alone is not enough .
It must be complemented by national and EU legislation which facilitates prosecution against those responsible for abusing the Internet for immoral and unacceptable practices .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for his extensive and methodical work . I have to agree with him .
As he points out , ' The new services are too pluriform , too novel , to adapt to top-down regulation of the kind familiar in the development of European broadcasting ' .
We must therefore think of something else .
The Commission has suggested self-regulation , asking the industry to cooperate on the establishment of codes of conduct , and to evaluate their efficiency at the national level .
The Commission itself has undertaken to support the creation of a system of national self-regulation frameworks , and to encourage cooperation and pooled experience between the police and the judicial authorities in Member States and with their equivalents in other countries .
Furthermore , the Commission has asked Member States to support efficient self-regulation actively amongst service providers .
This proposal should certainly be supported and implemented ; nonetheless great vigilance is required .
That is why the rapporteur has my full support when he says that national practices vary according to each country 's culture , which means there must be some convergence between codes of conduct .
Similarly , it will be necessary to review these national self-regulation codes regularly , in order to evaluate their efficiency and see whether we can possibly envisage regulation in the future .
Though I shall be voting for Mr Whitehead 's report , I am nevertheless aware that it represents no more than a drop in the proverbial ocean .
We all know that today children and young people are exposed to enormous moral and spiritual pressure and pollution through a whole range of violent images and other trashy products on the Internet and other audiovisual services .
We also know that for many of them this causes serious behavioural problems and stunted intelligence which go on to mark them for the whole of their lives .
But we also know that in a liberal system , given the worldwide spread and networking of communications , there can be no effective resistance .
Because no one wants to limit freedom of communication , and no one could do it even if they wanted to .
There is , therefore , no surefire means of protecting young people and children .
However , it would be catastrophic for our modern times if we were forced to lay down our arms without resistance .
So , the Commission 's regulation , like Philip Whitehead 's report , contains a willingness to choose the difficult route of creating a long-term strategy designed to improve moral standards which will not restrict freedom .
A long-term strategy consists of many small stages : " a soft form of convergence ' as the report explains , with internationally recognized standards , evaluation systems , self-discipline on the part of the large producers , but also active legal and police policies at European level .
We are just beginning to realize the enormity of the problem which faces us .
Global mastery of communications must be balanced by a joint international willingness to practice self-regulation and control .
The Danish Social Democrats are voting in favour of Mr Whitehead 's report .
The Commission 's proposal for the Council 's recommendation is a positive initiative .
And it is gratifying to see such a strong focus on the principle of self-regulation .
This matter is a good example of a problem that cannot be solved satisfactorily at the national level .
New cross-border media require international solutions .
We are delighted that Council has taken the problem of the legal basis seriously in this matter and has re-worded the proposal to harmonize better with article 130 , item 3 .
I am delighted that the Commission has tabled a motion in which Member States are urged to practise national self-regulation to ensure basic rights for children in the matter of audiovisual and information services .
Children are a particularly vulnerable group who deserve special measures to protect them in this area which is so difficult to regulate .
Thus , encouraging national self-regulation is the best way forward .
However , for these measures to work effectively , there also needs to be coordination at the European level .
Specifically , these measures must be monitored to check whether they are producing the desired results . Thus , I am also very satisfied with the proposals to this effect in the report .
It is worthy of full endorsement and I am , therefore , voting in favour .
Mr President , I am happy to be voting for this report by my colleague , Mr Whitehead , today .
The threat posed to our children by obscene images and the like being posted on the Internet is one that is now widely recognized .
Indeed , measures to prevent children being exposed to such material via the new electronic media are part and parcel of programmes in Britain aimed at increasing access to the Internet in schools .
Given the number and variety of such new electronic media the report rightly argues that , for the time being at least , a topdown EU regulation would be unworkable .
Instead the chance should be given to businesses working in these new technologies to show that they take consumer worries about obscene material seriously .
The bright minds behind Internet services should set to work to block such material from children 's access .
I also back the idea of setting out some common guidelines to make possible the identification and labelling of illegal and harmful content .
However , as Mr Whitehead points out , if problems are seen to exist with these guidelines after two years , we should reserve the right to consider regulatory action .
The industry should know that , whilst we back moves to an information society where technology is available to all , we will be watching to make sure that our children are not exposed to obscene material by unscrupulous operators .
Hulthén report ( A4-0162 / 98 )
The Hautala , Pollack and Hulthén reports all relate to the problem of air pollution .
During a previous part-session , we voted for restrictive standards to improve the quality of fuels by reducing emissions of pollutants .
On the same basis , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has voted for the above three reports .
Appropriate solutions are now available , including biofuels amongst other things , which make it possible to reduce emissions of pollutants .
I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate some of my concerns about the Commission 's Agenda 2000 proposal .
In fact , as far as large-scale farming is concerned , nothing is being done to promote the use of agricultural products for non-food purposes .
Biofuels are a possible outlet for agriculture , they are beneficial to the environment , and they must not disappear because the Commission has " forgotten ' about them .
European agriculture has developed a biofuel sector and its efforts must not be reduced to nothing by arbitrary decisions .
Finally , on a technical level , I would like to say that European car manufacturers claim that reducing the sulphur content of fuels is technically indispensable in order to operate the new anti-pollution systems with which cars are equipped , catalytic converters , particle traps , and so on .
The reduction of the aromatics content in petrol seems imperative .
During combustion , the aromatics contained in the petrol are converted into benzene , in particular , which is carcinogenic .
It is therefore indispensable to reduce the aromatics content to acceptable technical limits and , thereby , benzene emissions .
As biofuels do not contain sulphur or aromatics , the overall pollutant content of fuels can be reduced , which satisfies the technical requirements of European car manufacturers .
Perry report ( A4-0166 / 98 )
Mr President , this report raises interesting questions about the evaluation of former programmes and ongoing programmes , with regard to the Commission 's document , but in my opinion it does not go far enough .
The purely quantitative approach is not good enough .
We need to know who is really benefiting from these programmes .
I also think that the rapporteur agrees rather too much with the Commission 's opinion that the massive introduction of new information technologies in schools will solve a lot of problems .
I do not really think it will .
I think that we must very positively and attentively study academic failure , which is endemic in all our countries , and ask ourselves why academic failure exists and how to remedy it .
I do not mean that new technologies cannot help us here but I believe that it is a dangerous delusion to think those technologies will be our salvation .
Furthermore , it is quite certain that the highly desirable exchanges between pupils of all ages throughout the European Union are only of use if the young people involved have full mastery of their own language .
So , why do so many exchanges or programmes not have the expected results ?
Here too , it is because we put the cart before the horse .
We must first ensure that exchanges take place under conditions that are beneficial .
Furthermore , confusion reigns , in all these reports , with regard to the concepts of education , training , a Europe of knowledge , and so on , and one word seems to me to be too often missing .
The word is culture , particularly general culture , which we should be able to exchange between our countries so that many young people , not only from underprivileged backgrounds , have access to the general culture which basically enables exchanges to provide the results we really want .
With regard to the European dimension in education , I am very sorry that more resources are not allocated to meetings , research , and the purchase of modern audiovisual equipment .
All the great events of European history have taken place in the various European countries on a basis of unity and diversity , for example , monarchism , universities , and so on .
It would be very interesting to introduce a European dimension at the level of European culture .
In 1999 , three Community programmes relating to education , training and youth will come to an end .
In its communication , the European Commission has presented to us its guidelines for future actions in these areas for the period 2000-2006 .
It proposes a limited number of objectives - increased access of citizens to educational resources , implementation of pilot projects , wide distribution of good educational practice .
We realize that its intentions are good although they are evasively drafted .
For my part , I do not think that the Commission has really taken into consideration the positions upheld many times in this House .
What about the needs of underprivileged groups , whom the communication ignores ?
I agree with the rapporteur that opportunities to take part in the programmes need to be increased .
Too often , candidates find that management is chaotic , and that selection is based on financial circumstances .
The Commission has not provided any solution .
And yet , that is one of Parliament 's traditional demands .
As far as the budgetary resources for a Europe of Knowledge are concerned , we still want a significant increase .
But no figures have been given .
We should consider that , by means of an efficient education policy , we can give young people a chance to enter the labour market .
We therefore need substantial resources with which to launch and consolidate our educational policy .
The recent publication of the Commission 's proposals for EU educational programmes post 2000 has provided a useful basis for discussion .
I endorse their emphasis on encouraging life-long learning and supporting the employment policies of Member States .
I support also their commitment to developing a concept of citizenship based on common core values and their recognition of enhancing language skills and suggestions for increasing educational cooperation with the countries of central and eastern Europe .
However , I hope that the Commission will take note of Parliament 's proposals that there should be a European content to the curriculum , a separate youth programme with a broader based goal to combat exclusion and racism and an EU lead to promote new technology and the information society .
The value of the EU 's educational programmes in contributing to European integration was brought home most vividly to me when I had the honour of participating in a Comenius project in a school in my constituency .
The school was St Paul 's , Dooradoyle , in Limerick and its partner schools were from Grumbach , Austria , and Trieste , Italy .
The teachers and pupils of this school showed tremendous commitment , displayed many skills , expended much energy and enthusiasm in fostering European cooperation and mutual cultural understanding .
It was indeed a pleasure to be part of this experience and it strengthens my own support for the continuation and expansion of EU educational programmes .
The aim of this communication is to start a debate on the guidelines for future Community actions in the areas of education , training and youth for the period 2000-2006 .
It relates in fact to the new generation of programmes or actions that will replace or continue the Socrates ( education ) , Leonardo ( training ) and Youth for Europe programmes .
The rapporteur has done an excellent job , of which I heartily approve .
The subject is vast and important and I am sorry that the Commission has not given us more time and , above all , that the Commission does not have a more specific vision of the future in this area .
Will the three programmes exist separately or will they be joined together in a more general framework ?
What analyses can we obtain from studying the past ?
Can budgetary resources be increased , or must we be content to act within the limited framework of current funding ?
Our proposals will depend on the answers to all these questions .
These educational programmes are now well known in the various countries , and we must safeguard what has been achieved and increase its repercussions .
Mobility must be encouraged , and new technologies integrated .
The " netdays ' experiment has been very positive and I speak here as the elected representative of the Pas-de-Calais where , thanks to that initiative , we have been able to help primary and secondary schools obtain computer equipment .
Such results should be taken into consideration in the new programmes and / or new actions .
It is also necessary to involve the social partners more , to encourage them to cooperate more closely with the world of education and vice versa so that links between education and training are more accessible and more useful to participants .
This means implementing the conclusions of the Luxembourg Summit on youth and employment .
It is also necessary for us to consider young people as a whole , which means actions or a programme must be set up , which are not associated with education and training .
g . ( SV ) We have abstained from this vote because we believe that the Commission 's text was better .
However , we share the approach that is advanced in Amendment No 2 , which expresses concern at the socially biased recruitment to the study programme .
We do not , however , feel that this recruitment bias will be remedied by doubling the budget allocation .
The Community 's current programmes in the fields of general vocational training and youth policy are set to come to an end in 1999 after a period of five years .
For this reason , the " For a Europe of Knowledge ' report is intended to " set out the guidelines for future Community measures in the areas of general vocational training and youth policy for the period 2000 to 2006 ' .
In my view , it is quite proper that its main focus should be not simply " measures to promote employment ' but also , and with equal status , " measures to promote knowledge ' . For education is not simply an instrument of labour market policy .
Education is much more than that . This is why the wide-ranging definition of education already given in the White Paper has been adopted for use in the programmes .
We must build on the success of the three programmes , for continuity is particularly important in the field of education .
A forward looking approach and new ideas are important , but both Socrates and ERASMUS as well as " Youth for Europe ' have all become highly respected programmes in Europe over recent years and this situation should continue .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to define objectives and measures clearly and above to all simplify administrative procedures .
Nevertheless , it will be necessary to maintain the national coordinating offices for the existing programmes in order to ensure continuity of action at Community level .
Access to the mobility programme must be simplified .
This means more than the appropriate increase in the budget suggested in the Commission 's proposal .
In my view , it would have to be doubled in order to achieve an increase in the level of subscription to the programmes and to achieve a subscription level of at least a 10 % in line with Commissioner Cresson 's target .
This is the only way in which we can achieve the goal of creating a Europe of Knowledge and improving skills for all .
The Commission will submit its drafts for the new programmes to the Council on 4 July , at which time brisk discussions can begin in the European Parliament and the Committee on Education .
I would be particularly pleased if it were possible to submit the common position on the new programmes during the Austrian Presidency , i.e. by the end of 1998 .
g . ( SV ) Point N of the draft report states the following : ' cultural understanding can be fostered by inclusion of a European dimension within the national curricula ' .
To introduce a chapter about such a European dimension into the Member States ' curricula in this artificial fashion by order of the EU would be absurd .
In Swedish schools , for example , we have always had a European dimension .
In both civics and history lessons , Swedish pupils read about a host of European topics , including Charles the Great , Napoleon , the Paris Commune , the development of European Imperialism , the rise of the workers ' movement and of democracy , etc .
There is today a European and global dimension to the instruction that is given in the EU countries .
I am certain that the Member States are themselves best placed to bear the responsibility for educating their citizens without any pointers from the European Union .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

I should like to warn all Members and speakers in this debate that our time is severely restricted .
We have already been unable to hear all the speeches listed for this morning in full because the stipulated speaking times have been exceeded .
To enable the first three points on the agenda , that is to say the Tindemans report , the Council 's statement on nuclear tests in India and the statements by the Council and the Commission on Kosovo , to be debated before ' Question Time ' , in order to ensure that the whole of the proceedings can take place in the presence of the Council , therefore , I would remind all members of the need to observe speaking time limits scrupulously .
Common defence policy
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A4-0171 / 98 ) by Mr Tindemans , on behalf of the Committee on External Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the gradual establishment of a common defence policy for the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is noticeable how in Europe since 1945 the problem of security and defence has kept coming to the fore , but it has usually also led to disagreement .
I can only list the instances , for which I apologize .
1947 : the Dunkirk Treaty between Great Britain and France ; 1948 : the Brussels Treaty ; the Dunkirk Treaty between the Benelux countries ; 1949 : the establishment of NATO .
In 1951 the ECSC came into being and in 1954 an attempt was made to set up a European Defence Community .
This failed , however .
In 1954 the Western European Union was established amongst the countries included in the Brussels Treaty . This enabled the incorporation of the German Federal Republic , which was allowed to set up a Bundeswehr .
In the 1960s there was the Fouchet Plan , in three versions .
In 1970 political cooperation commenced .
In 1976 a report was produced , at the request of the European Council , under my name , which contained the sentence : European Union is unthinkable without a common foreign and security policy .
Then there was Maastricht .
In Maastricht it was decided to give the European Union a common foreign and security policy .
Then , in 1994 we went up to 15 Members .
Presently , negotiations are being conducted with the five plus one , and there will probably be further pressures on security .
At the Intergovernmental Conference in 1996 - when proposals were expected - the institutional problems were not resolved ; nor were they in 1997 in Amsterdam .
This is where we are at present .
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy we decided to devote an own-initiative report to security and / or defence .
The Bureau of this Parliament agreed to this .
Obviously the world has changed since the implosion of the Soviet Union and the events in Central Europe .
We had the decision from Maastricht , with much still needing to be resolved institutionally , and we tried to come to an agreement in the Committee .
The members of the Committee will remember that this gave rise to interesting debates , but also to difficulties , to such an extent that it was split up into two parts .
The first part was to be devoted to security , the second part to defence .
This first part was approved over a year ago .
At the moment we are discussing the second part , defence , and we are called in this Parliament to give our decision on it tomorrow .
In Maastricht it was said , however , that henceforth the Western European Union should be the European pillar of NATO .
This is why we are faced with big problems .
On the one hand we have Economic and Monetary Union .
This is a great initiative , if you will allow me to say so .
As a result we have a say in the global economy , and we will be on equal footing with the dollar zone , the yen zone .
It is difficult to overestimate the significance of this EMU .
It is therefore unthinkable that such an economic and monetary entity would ignore international developments , even those which influence the economic situation .
This would be absurd and is unthinkable .
We will have to reflect even more on these issues now that the European Union is to be enlarged .
How can we help to guarantee peace in Europe without falling into the old factions or ententes , whilst giving credibility to the foreign policy supported by a security and defence policy .
That is the big question .
Amsterdam did not bring the desired clarification .
We are trying to push forward a number of issues , that is , to convey our ideas , especially to the Council , and obviously also to the Commission .
A report was therefore drawn up , and we have already approved it in the Committee .
In my opinion this report stands midway between the actual situation in Europe and the ideal desirability of developing the European personality .
It aims to provide clarity and transparency in the relationship between NATO , the European Union and the Western European Union .
It wants to clarify how this directly elected Parliament sees the objectives of a sound defence , and in which direction a meaningful development ought to go if Europe wants to prevent or resolve crisis situations , even when these concern territorial integrity or the defence of justified interests .
How Europe views peace also affects neighbouring countries and ultimately the whole world .
The report proposes that a White Paper on defence be drawn up every year .
It suggests a European police force is set up , linked to the departments of justice and internal affairs , and with a permanent , but limited planning unit within the European Union .
It calls for closer links between the Union and the Western European Union as suggested in the Treaties , or as is being proposed , at the level of ministers , parliament , assemblée , officials , and for a planning entity for foreign policy through which , according to an earlier decision , this cooperation ought to be realized .
It is obvious that this report does not solve everything , but it lays the foundation for a credibility , a reliability and a selfawareness within Europe .
I venture to conclude this short introduction by saying , Mr President , that those who reject all this - the credibility , reliability and self-awareness in the area of security and defence - are , in fact , rejecting the European idea . These people do not want there to be a European personality , even in this sphere .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgets has taken note of the report by Mr Tindemans with a great deal of interest .
Although we are only here in the second line on this point , it is important , even though much in the Tindemans report will perhaps only be realized in the future , that at this present moment in time Parliament has a clear picture of what this will mean financially and in terms of the budget .
In the context of the Treaty of Amsterdam it is important that the second pillar issues are financed within the framework of the European budget .
We had to fight for this , but it has been achieved .
However , it is also clear that where the Petersberg tasks , the European Armaments Agency , and the integration of new services are concerned , there is obviously not enough room within the European budget .
We see it as our principal task to plead that from the outset , as is the case with the establishment of the European Central Bank , Parliament is fully involved in the preparation and the further elaboration of plans on that point .
It is therefore also an attempt to create the necessary room for this Parliament to exert the influence it is due from the outset , as is the case in other areas .
We gladly agree with Mr Tindemans that after European monetary union has come about , the discussions on the political development of Europe obviously cannot stand still .
It is in this context as well that the Committee on Budgets has drawn up a number of footnotes .
We are delighted that Mr Tindemans has been prepared to submit the two specific amendments which I as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets tabled in the context of his report .
Mr President , this is the contribution from the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Tindemans on the completion of this extremely difficult task and thanking him for the extremely flexible way in which he has approached this debate and for the fact that he has been prepared to take on board the observations of other members of the committee .
This report is without a doubt an important contribution to the debate .
It is important because it is not a flight of fantasy but is very firmly set in the context of the existing institutions which are responsible for security and defence in Europe , notably the OSCE and NATO .
It respects existing members ' responsibilities towards the North Atlantic Treaty .
It is also firmly rooted in existing decisions of the Amsterdam Treaty and the Petersberg , Berlin , and Madrid Declarations .
Then it goes on to signal some of the difficulties we have to overcome in this field in the future : the difficulties of the relationship between the WEU and the EU , not to say the difficulties that would arise if those two bodies were ever integrated .
It also indicates the problems about a European identity in defence , if we are ever to conceive of some form of independent action within the context of the Berlin Declaration : the fact that we miss out on strategic lift capacity , satellite communications and intelligence .
It also emphasizes the importance of trying to get a common armaments policy , because , without an effective technological base , we can never have an effective European defence identity , while at the same time recognizing that we are concerned about disarmament .
Most importantly , it recognizes the differences in the new security situation : the fact that peacekeeping in conflict prevention is now so important .
Our main concern is that the Tindemans report fails to strike an appropriate balance in these matters .
We need to put more emphasis on peacekeeping and conflict prevention ; we need to put more emphasis on bringing other countries outside the European Union into conjunction with us .
It is often said that politics is about providing yesterday 's solutions to today 's problems .
To a degree we have been guilty of that in this report .
We have to address some of the problems that stem from peacekeeping .
For example , the British army is at the moment more fully committed than at any time since the Second World War .
How do we deal with that problem when we talk about extending peacekeeping forces ?
The Tindemans report also makes the mistake of assuming that the WEU and the EU are integrated , while the Treaty only mentions the possibility .
The phrasing of our independent action is a little bit too loose .
We must clearly root that in the Berlin Decisions .
Finally , we must also bear in mind that we should not be too concerned about the harmony of the process but about the effectiveness of the outcome .
On defence , we have to ensure that we can walk before we can run .
We have to take on board what is set out in the Amsterdam Treaty before we can take this debate any further forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this discussion of the Tindemans report comes at a very interesting phase in the development of the European Union .
Since the resolution was passed on 2 May , we have largely completed economic and monetary integration .
We now have to admit that , thanks to the level of internal integration it has achieved , the European Union has become a community of peace unprecedented in world history .
But our ability to secure internal peace has not yet been developed to the same extent outside our own borders .
When talking to our European citizens we often meet with a high degree of disappointment that the European Union is unable - I say unable because it does not yet possess the required instruments - to secure peace outside its own borders .
I believe it is fitting that , at such a vital time as this , a man like Leo Tindemans should have grasped the opportunity to start such a debate , rather as he did in the 1970s with his report on the development of European Union .
It really is in this context that the report should be seen .
With the collapse of Communism and the end of confrontation between the Eastern and Western blocs in Europe , regional wars on the traditional model are once more a possibility .
And we have still to find an answer to them .
Until now we have hoped that NATO , though it was not really conceived for this purpose , would look after things for us .
In Bosnia peace got its chance when a credible military power , the United States , gave its backing to the peace initiatives .
However , we cannot always expect the Americans to be there for us in the future .
It shows great hypocrisy always to be cursing the Americans as some soft of international police force , while portraying ourselves as the great diplomats .
In the interests of burden sharing in Europe and with a view to the credibility of the continued existence of the Transatlantic Alliance , we must develop the relevant capabilities ourselves .
And for this reason we must make the very best of the opportunities offered by the Amsterdam Treaty , though I do have my doubts as to whether the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty will actually prove to be sufficient .
Leo Tindemans points out that the strategy and planning group , for example , is vitally important .
Have we finally managed to get an institution capable of submitting proposals from a community point of view - as is the case with internal community policy ?
The Council of Ministers may deny that this is the case , but it is forced to argue from a Community position .
Moreover , this strategy and planning unit stipulated in the Amsterdam Treaty must be conceived in such a way that it does not become a COREPER-3 organization or a new organization of political directors and their representatives .
It must be shaped to include the Commission in such a way that it represents a Community position rather than simply a collection of national positions .
The same is evident from a range of other examples .
For example , what is the point of a strategy which has to be passed unanimously in the European Council ?
If it relates to a fundamental principle which can achieve unanimous support , then all well and good .
But if it goes into detail , it will surely run into difficulties and fail to make progress .
Therefore , it should pass only general resolutions from which the Council together with the Commission can then develop practical measures on the basis of a majority vote .
The potential is there , it just has to be put to practical effect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I congratulate Mr Tindemans on his truly remarkable and excellent report on the gradual establishment of a common defence policy for the European Union .
At a time when Europe is expanding to reach the confines of the whole continent and the single currency is being established , can we remain unaware of our inability to play a political role on the international stage which is commensurate with our economic power and which , above all , meets all the expectations of the countries bound to us by the ties of history and culture in Africa , America and Asia ?
Those countries expect a great deal of Europe , of a Europe that no longer aims to dominate , that aims to promote balance and peace in international relationships .
The European Union will not be able to play that role if it does not gradually establish a common defence policy to safeguard its territorial integrity , its vital interests , and its ability to take part in conflict prevention and peacekeeping operations .
In order to meet that challenge , Mr Tindemans proposes to bring the structures of the Western European Union and the European Union closer together , with a view to long-term integration of the two institutions , with the WEU becoming to some extent the fourth pillar of the European Union .
This approach has the merit of being pragmatic and gradual .
But it will only succeed if the European Union asserts the political will to provide itself with the defence infrastructures , which are at present severely lacking , and which , unfortunately , make it too dependent on the logistics of the Atlantic Alliance .
Although the US accepts , under certain conditions , the deployment of WEU forces without American participation , using the Alliance 's infrastructures , it is merely the proof of positive forbearance , to which they hold the key .
Do the Member States constituting the European Union today have the will to move forwards towards the establishment of a truly independent common defence policy ?
General de Gaulle 's European Europe ?
Do they have the will to equip themselves with the indispensable resources and infrastructures , particularly satellite communications and radar coverage infrastructures , needed for independence ?
Above all , do they have the will to provide themselves with democratic and legitimate political institutions capable of designing and implementing a common defence policy ?
The proposals to strengthen the WEU and to integrate it gradually into the European Union , submitted by Mr Tindemans , must be discussed in relation to that long-term objective , which probably cannot be achieved quickly .
The majority of the members of the Union for Europe Group support that step , but nevertheless stress that it must not be imposed upon Member States of the European Union that do not wish at present to be associated with it .
The gradual establishment of a common defence policy must take place within the framework of strengthened cooperation , as the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty propose .
The practical proposals submitted by Mr Tindemans are an excellent basis for discussions along those lines .
Thank you , Mr Tindemans .
Mr President , as the former President of the WEU Assembly , I had the honour of meeting the rapporteur , Leo Tindemans , at the end of the Eighties , when he was the Belgian Foreign Affairs Minister .
Since that time , he has given ten years of his life to Europe , and his determination , and the visionary and pragmatic sides of his character remain unchanged . Furthermore , I believe that this is the only way for Europe to move forward in the area of security and defence .
This is an area whose obvious shortcomings become apparent during crises , such as the former Yugoslavia . It is an area , however , in which we do not have the resources to remedy such shortcomings .
We have a long way to go in order to achieve the objectives established in the Maastricht Treaty in this respect . One has to admit that the governments of the Fifteen as a whole and people 's mentalities are not yet ready to accept responsibility for what needs to be done to ensure the territorial defence of Europe and prevent conflicts in peripheral regions .
The great challenge of conflict prevention , the indispensable emancipation of Europe in a transatlantic alliance , without cutting the ties that unite us with the United States , the gradual integration of a Europe of defence , of the Western European Union , into the institutional framework , are well covered in this report .
This debate is very useful because it underlines the political nature of the move towards greater security by showing Europeans , starting with the political authorities , where their responsibilities lie . It is their responsibility to consider from now on that the European Union is predestined .
If that concept were unequivocally accepted , the ideas put forward by Leo Tindemans would have greater chance of success .
Mr President , what is very clear to everybody is that the end of bipolar confrontation means we need to construct a new model of pan-European security - a model which can guarantee peace , consolidate stability , prevent conflicts and manage any crises which may arise .
The European Union has an objective interest in the construction of this new model of security on our continent .
But at the same time , we should realize that it will only be possible to build this model if the Union is fully committed to it , and has a real common foreign and security policy .
Now , for that foreign policy to be effective , it is also essential that it should include a defence policy .
It is clear that the progress in this direction represented first by the Maastricht Treaty and then by the Treaty of Amsterdam is positive but insufficient .
We are talking about a defence policy which is not based on a classical concept , but on a renewed definition , guided by the principles contained in the United Nations Charter , the Helsinki Final Act and the Paris Charter .

In short , this should be a defence policy which is not offensive in nature , but cooperative and shared ; a defence policy which does not create new costs but maximizes the usefulness of those that already exist , and favours their reduction in any case ; a defence policy which is also useful for coordinating the existing arms industries , decreasing their independence with regard to third parties , and controlling any sales outside the Union .
To do that , I think it would be necessary to coordinate the Member States ' armed forces , in order to carry out the so-called Petersberg missions .
And of course I am in favour of integrating the Western European Union into the European Union .
I think there is no doubt that we have to see our relationship with the Atlantic Alliance in that context . At the moment , that institution forms part of the framework of security in Europe , as we all know , but it should not be the only institution involved in that security .
Furthermore , in that same direction , we should also think about regaining a balance in the EU-USA relationship , in security and defence terms .
Mr President , the report ignores the fact that there are different views of what constitutes suitable security plans within Europe .
In addition , it is a great mistake for the European Parliament , during the ratification process of the Treaty of Amsterdam , to be dragging out plans which were rejected by the Amsterdam summit itself .
The idea that the EU can guarantee security in Europe with a common defence policy is a throwback to the time of the Cold War . And the Cold War is over .
The EU has enormous advantages over the institutions of the Cold War .
Why do we not want to use them ?
It has instruments for the integration of good relations between neighbours .
It can create balance , it can build up close economic relations and on this basis offer strong economic cooperation and financial support .
It is also these instruments which will enable the EU to assume the responsibility at world level which it needs to ensure common survival in this world .
With a defence policy , on the other hand , Europe will be living dangerously because the problems of today 's world can no longer be solved by confrontations , threats and provocations .
We have experienced just such provocation in the last few days as India triggered a new race for the production of the machinery of destruction with its nuclear tests .
The Greens absolutely reject this form of employment creation measure for the industrial armaments facilities of the EU States and instead advocate the strengthening of disarmament and conversion projects .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Tindemans did not have to show us that he was a visionary , he did not have to show us that he was stubborn .
I do not think he wanted us to know that he was rather disappointed , but I think his conclusions have made that obvious to anyone who was ready to listen .
The report he submitted to us today is certainly not the report he wanted ; it is certainly not the report that I wanted and that the Group of the European Radical Alliance wanted ; it is a report which has encountered many problems before reaching today 's sitting , and may I say that I detected a certain irony in the speech made by our British friend , Mr Titley .

As far as the relationship between the WEU and the European Union is concerned , it is indeed Mr Tindemans ' wish that these two institutions should be rapidly integrated , and I believe it is also the wish of a majority of the Members of this House , although certainly not of our Socialist colleagues , as they have shown throughout the amendment procedures .
Similarly , a majority of Members of this House wish rapidly to establish a European peacekeeping and peacemaking force , unlike the members of the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the members of the Green Group , who have shown their wishes by rejecting the amendments tabled on the subject .
I should therefore really like to congratulate Mr Tindemans on having resisted them as much as possible and I call upon him , and all our colleagues , to accept the remaining amendments to this report , in order to strengthen it at the last minute .
I think that we are all aware that the British are not part of monetary union today , because they hoped , and I think they are wrong , to enter it with the pound sterling higher than the euro .
That will not be the case .
They have no interest today in joining a European Union of security and defence , because they have not yet understood what its benefits will be .
However , I believe that a majority of Europeans , a majority of Members , understood it long ago .
We hope that it will not come to that , but if tragic developments take place over the next few months we do not want Europeans to have to put up with a Europe that is powerless and shamefaced with regard to Bosnia , as they had to put up with it for three years .
In the coming months , we must be able to react . We must be able to stop the dictator , who is still in power in Belgrade , who was responsible for the tragedies of Croatia and Bosnia , from organizing a third tragedy in Kosovo .
With the Amsterdam Treaty , and the Petersberg tasks , we are not only able , it is also our responsibility to obtain the means of intervention to carry out peacekeeping and peacemaking operations .
This is not a wish ; it is not a vision . This is something we must do immediately .
Mr President , in the 1970s , the Belgian Premier and Foreign Minister gave his name to the Tindemans report on direct elections to the EU Parliament and a political union .
At that time , these plans were rejected in Denmark .
They were said to stand no chance .
Today , almost all the proposals of the Tindemans report have been adopted .
And today our Belgian premier is giving his name to a report on a joint EU ministry of defence , joint weapons production and joint armed forces .
According to the Danish Foreign Minister , Niels Helveg Petersen , this is " a blast from the past ' .
In common with most Danish politicians , the same Mr Helveg has opposed the Tindemans report every step of the way , yet when it comes right down to it , they have voted in favour of every ' blast from the past ' .
In the same way , the Danish government will eventually vote in favour of joint armed forces if Denmark votes " Yes ' to the Amsterdam Treaty - otherwise , that would be the first time a government had remained unmoved .
The Tindemans report on joint armed forces is serious and dangerous .
It suggests a gradual build-up in line with the Amsterdam Treaty .
If there is an attack on an EU country , NATO must defend us , but all other wars are EU business .
The Union can send troops anywhere and at any time , for any purpose .
The limitation is neither legally nor geographically defined .
The only limitation is political , since unanimity is required for the dispatch of troops .
A simple majority in the Danish parliament could relinquish Denmark 's reservations on military matters and a simple majority in the Danish parliament could allow participation in military action following a specific decision .
The Danish derogation expressly permits other States to continue with their joint armed forces .
Thus , Denmark is the only country without the right to veto military action carried out in the name of the Union .
As we can see , the Tindemans report is not simply a paper explaining what is happening .
The Tindemans report will repeat the exercise with the Western European Union .
I hope Mr Tindemans will come to Denmark before the referendum and explain whether he is indeed - in the words of Mr Helveg - simply a ' blast from the past ' .
To me , the Tindemans report looks more like an insight into a scenario of the future if we were to vote " Yes ' to the Amsterdam Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , India has just carried out three nuclear tests , China is continuing its experiments , others countries are equipping themselves with or developing atomic weapons , yet the rapporteur managed to talk about the defence of Europe , without ever mentioning the concepts of nuclear dissuasion or nuclear armament in his report .
And yet , that is a very crucial area with regard to the security of Europe , because unfortunately goodwill and good intentions will not safeguard the external and internal security of our countries in the future .
I also regret that the report does not show any real determination to emancipate Europe from the United States of America and therefore from NATO .
In a spirit of submission , dependency and weakness , France has , on the contrary , made a public act of allegiance by rejoining NATO command , even though the Soviet threat has disappeared .
We believe that the Western European Union should become a tool of emancipation and not an instrument of the new international order and of domination by the American Government .
But that will require financial , technological and human resources . We must stop dismantling our armies , and moral disarmament must cease .
A number of principles need to be reaffirmed : the creation of a new so-called ' European alliance ' treaty , not only uniting the countries of the European Union but forming an alliance of sovereign European States , independent of course from the United States of America but also from NATO structures , the enforcement of the European preference rule in all areas relating to arms , the establishment of a budgetary policy , which enables Europe to regain its security , independence and freedom , taking into consideration new threats such as terrorism and bacteriological threats , the development of training structures , organizational structures , and civil protection structures and finally the establishment of rules enabling French nuclear dissuasion to be used for the joint benefit of the European alliance .
We regret that these considerations were not mentioned in the report .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Tindemans on his report .
Mr Tindemans is just explaining a few things to Mr Bonde who cannot , I believe , have read the report .
If he had done , he would not have been able to talk as if things were being imposed on individual countries .
But if Mr Tindemans is indeed explaining things to him , then he need not listen any further because he will know exactly what I know myself .
European security policy rests on three pillars .
The first pillar is the preventive security policy - the avoidance and prevention of crises .
The second pillar is a common foreign and security policy which , in my view , and here I agree wholeheartedly with Mr Tindemans , must be supported by a common defence policy .
As I see it , the third pillar is disarmament .
The existence of fewer weapons in Europe would make an important contribution to security .
All three pillars are underdeveloped and there is perhaps a difference between Mr Tindemans and myself in that I believe that he places too little emphasis on pillars A and C - that is prevention and disarmament .
But that is not to say that the second pillar is not important .
We must develop this common security policy within the EU , but also with the United States , with Russia and the Ukraine , and with the countries of the Mediterranean .
Why is this sort of foreign and security policy , supported by a common defence policy , so important ?

First the question of credibility : If we have to deal with individuals like Mr Milosevic - and yes , Mrs Schroedter , we do indeed have to deal with such individuals - words and a show of goodwill are not sufficient . He will not show goodwill unless he is sure that our words are backed by arms , and not just as a last resort .
Secondly , we need a more unified voice .
We have too many organizations working in an uncoordinated manner .
The EU , the WEU , in the case of Kosovo and Yugoslavia alone , and the contact group , NATO and various other institutions ...
Too may institutions , with too many different memberships , making it impossible at the moment for them all to speak with one voice .
Thirdly , I believe that Europeanisation is very important .
A Europeanisation which does not stand in conflict with the USA , but which gives the countries of Europe greater weight within this alliance , and here I mean any European countries who wish to become involved .
But it is up to us to take this Europeanisation in hand , particularly in the field of the so-called lowthreshold defence policy - which makes Mr Tindemans proposals on the police , and the compromise , very important .
We cannot rely on others .
Another important point is greater democracy .
Cooperation between and , one day , the integration of the EU and the WEU would mean greater democracy if this House won more rights and greater influence as a result .
Lastly , Mr Titley said quite correctly that we have to learn to walk before we can run .
I agree with him absolutely .
But , there are so many crises where we have to learn to run quickly if we are going to be of any help .
So let us learn . But let us learn quickly .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Tindemans for this excellent report .
The report is the result of some delicate balancing , and shapes a logical future for talks on a common security policy .
The European Union has a clear angle on security , regardless of whether there are elements of military security in future Union operations .
The notions of security and defence partly overlap .
It is obvious that the creation of interdependence in itself will increase security and stability in our continent .
We should remember that European integration is , by its nature , its aims and its fundamental structure , one vast security project , with defence as one of the principles of the Maastricht Treaty .
Specifying the role of the Western European Union as part of a single defence policy is linked to some extent with the simultaneous enlargement process in respect of NATO and the EU .
With NATO about to receive members from central and eastern Europe its membership will become more heterogeneous , but at the same time the organization 's so-called European pillar will be strengthened .
Although it might be claimed that the interests of the eastern European countries in NATO membership are ultimately focused on military security , it must also be said that when the countries of central and eastern Europe join , the organization 's role as one of regional , collective security will grow .
It is essential that the Union also considers its own role in this manner .
To clarify the future status of the WEU and make its work effective , it will be necessary to reassess the status of its associate and supervisory members .
If it is the specific task of the WEU to implement military operations in the future , the role of the supervisory members in active participation will be hopelessly vague .
I see that in the near future all those concerned , including my country , Finland , must be part of the WEU operation , as a result of equal and fully-fledged membership .
And the same obviously goes for the future members of the Union .
The Petersberg tasks , which were written into the Amsterdam Treaty on the initiative of Finland and Sweden , and which allow all Union Member States to participate in regional peacekeeping operations , will create a supporting structure for a single defence policy .
The development of a viable peacekeeping capability is a precondition of the growth of a single defence policy , although peacekeeping is not always directly linked to defence .
It will also be seen as a step on the way to a more united identity for European security policy .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Tindemans , and I too consider that he did an extraordinary job , especially given the great resistance that he encountered along the way .
I too believe that he would have liked , would have tried to do much more than he succeeded in doing in the end , and that it was therefore extremely difficult for him to arrive at this point with results that are , honestly speaking , modest from the point of view of whoever considers this issue - common defence policy - an essential point , if Europe is not just thought of as the Europe of the single currency .
The WEU must be integrated into the European Union : this is the first step , and it seems to me that Mr Tindemans was extremely clear on this .
We have before us the shame of what occurred in Bosnia , where American intervention was necessary .
Let us never forget this !
Anyone who says that the Americans are the world 's policemen because the Europeans engage in diplomacy is a hypocrite .
This is only the sign of Europe 's weakness and the hypocrisy of the European countries which continue to be political dwarfs , continue to only think of themselves internally .
Furthermore , anyone who has said that the Tindemans report should focus more on prevention and less on the matter of interventions has assumed a hypocritical approach because , while it is true that prevention is the top priority - this is clear - it is also true that Europe is forced to just chatter away , to utter useless waffle , because in reality it is not possible to intervene in cases of regional conflicts , like in Bosnia or Albania a few months ago .
At this point the road to common destiny opens for Europe : the European countries can no longer afford not to understand this .
Whoever thinks that the British Empire or the French and German powers can still exist is living under a vain illusion .
We can and we must contribute to Europe 's future in peace and stability .
Mr President , a reliable visionary must be a realist , and that is why Mr Tindemans was the excellent rapporteur of a report which was , naturally , excellent .
In principle the Union must be able to take military action on its own .
This does not , for instance , mean replacing NATO , but being an addition to it .
An adult European Union must be able to enforce its foreign policy by military means , including during the times the United States do not support this .
The rapporteur has clearly stated in his report that a common defence policy is pointless without a common foreign policy .
Many Member States are still putting up barriers against effective realization of the CFSP . Realism is therefore called for when we are talking about defence .
As many Member States as possible should make use of NATO joint task forces if desired .
By the way , the Union should do its best to avoid constructing a parallel military structure .
The people of Europe can do without higher defence budgets .
Concrete steps are rightly argued for here . The Ministers of Defence should also be able to meet in Union context .
Commission services involved in security and defence must also be strengthened . The European Parliament must have more regular consultations with the Secretary General , the President and the assembly of the WEU than it has at present .
In conclusion , Mr President , as chairman of the relevant subcommittee I support the proposal in the report to change the name of the subcommittee , presently security and disarmament , to Subcommittee on Security and Defence Policy .
Disarmament does of course in principle form part of this .
Mr President , I think that the rapporteur , Mr Tindemans , has produced an important piece of work , despite the fact that the nature of the subject is such that it is as if we were charting unknown waters .
Where the political options of governments and the Council stop , there is room for many scenarios and many ideas .
Perhaps this is the role of Parliament , perhaps this is what we did with Political , Economic and Monetary Union in other eras .
It is my opinion however that we must try and take care to consolidate and integrate what we have achieved thus far , before we open up other roads , such as defence , which are paved with many difficulties .
In my opinion , the problems which are arising in the former Yugoslavia are connected not with the European Union 's lack of a defence policy but with the inability to make specific choices or the making of wrong choices such as in the case of Bosnia .
Within this meaning of placing special importance on and consolidating what exists today , I would like to put a question to Commissioner Van den Broek , who has been patiently following this entire debate .
Both at Amsterdam and in the Treaty there is the notion of external borders , the notion of the integrity of the European Union and there is the notion of mutual political solidarity .
I wanted to ask Mr Van den Broek : are there borders between the European Union and the East ?
Or just the North , South and West ?
Is there European Union integrity ? If all this exists , why this apathy ?
Perhaps it is more a matter for the Council , but I would like his opinion .
Why this apathy of the main organs of the European Union towards a number of disputes currently taking place on the part of Turkey concerning islands which , as everybody knows , belong to a Member State and to the whole of the European Union ?
I would like an answer from Mr Van den Broek .
Mr President , firstly , I find it quite incredible that Mr Tindemans is being hailed here as a visionary .
I do not know how someone living in the Dark Ages , who believes in military blocs , global militarization and imperialism can be considered a visionary .
It is a ludicrous thought .
On the issue of imperialism , it is quite clear in paragraph 4 of this document that ' the purpose of a common defence policy is to protect the Union 's interest in all areas , including security of supply ' .
That is disgraceful .
You are saying that you want a defence policy and defence system , not to protect yourself against potential aggressors , but to protect your fundamental selfish interests .
That such a thing should be true in this Parliament is an absolute disgrace .
Ireland is holding a referendum on the Amsterdam Treaty .
Our government and the main political parties are telling us that the Amsterdam Treaty has nothing to do with defence .
Yet , as Mr Tindemans says , the Amsterdam Treaty makes a common defence policy a more credible prospect given that it strengthens the organic bond between the European Union and the Western European Union , created by Maastricht .
The Western European Union is a military alliance committed to the nuclear deterrent .
Furthermore , Article J ( 7 ) of the Amsterdam Treaty , a protocol attached to the Treaty , was an Irish addition and intended to prevent the Irish people from knowing the real implications of the Amsterdam Treaty .
It says that the European Union , together with the Western European Union will jointly consider future requirements in strengthening mutual cooperation within one year following the entry into force of that Treaty , in order to give the WEU , ' as an integral part of the development of the Union ' , an organizational framework .
It is quite clear that what you are doing here is militarizing the EU , turning it into a military alliance , the main purpose of which is to protect its selfish interests and get easy access to global resources .
( Applause from the Green Group )
Mr President , before starting any discussion on European defence , an essential remark must be made : the collective defence of Member States of the European Union does not depend on the European Union , but on the Member States and on the alliances to which some Member States belong .
That is why I regret the use that is made , in the Tindemans report , of some inadequate and ambiguous concepts , the concept of the legitimate defence of the European Union , for example .
Having said that , thinking about European defence today means asking a series of questions .
Whether the European Union is really the most relevant framework within which to approach the current defence problems of our continent , in terms of the new threats that have replaced the Soviet threat .
Whether the aim of a European defence policy should be to put everyone into a straight jacket or whether it should be organized on the basis of a variable geometric concept , taking into consideration the Member States ' very different wishes with regard to defence .
What should be the relationship between the European Union and the WEU ?
The Amsterdam Treaty does not propose to integrate the latter into the former and overall , it keeps the existing relationships as they are .
It only contains two innovations : the incorporation into the CFSP of cooperation in the field of armaments , and the Petersberg missions .
It obviously goes without saying that arms policy is an intergovernmental matter .
Because of its specific nature , it is important in the defence sector to ensure that sovereignty prevails over market forces .
The objective of the European Armaments Agency must be to maintain the capability for independent research and production at the highest technological level in Europe , in view of particularly aggressive American competition .
The Tindemans report also mentions strategic air transport , space intelligence and satellite communications .
In such areas , the establishment of European poles of competence by Member States who wish to do so will make it possible to gain control , particularly of information , and to put an end to our dependence on the United States .
These are areas in which the scale of the costs involved in the projects justifies the adoption , by virtue of the principle of subsidiarity , of joint programmes , whose funding will have to be provided over a period of time by Member States , which freely decide to take part .
Member States with a tradition of neutrality , which make up one-third of the Fifteen , have accepted the integration into the Treaty of all the Petersberg tasks , but have however clearly refused the collective defence guarantee instituted by the Brussels Treaty among members of the WEU .
Article 17 of the Treaty of Amsterdam also reflects the deep divisions between Member States with regard to defence policy .
Even leaving aside the question of Member States with a tradition of neutrality , it states that common defence must be brought about through the integration of the WEU into the European Union and , at the same time , that this has already been achieved within the framework of NATO .
These legitimate differences form the very fabric of Europe and it is essential that the will of the people and of Member States be respected , particularly in an area as sensitive as defence .
The Tindemans report rightly underlines the fact that any common defence policy is dependent upon the clear identification of common interests and proposes that a Council White Paper should try to outline them .
It also underlines the need to give form to the European security and defence identity which the Berlin Summit ....
( The President asked the speaker to conclude ) These areas seem important to us and have obtained our approval .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mr Tindemans for the work he has done and for the direction given to the report whose contents we fully endorse .
Of course more could have been done , such as asking for the process of common defence to be speeded up more , but the rapporteur wanted to have as much unity and consensus as possible .
Perhaps , with his experience as a man of government , he was not wrong .
The common defence policy cannot advance by relying heavily on majorities that he could nevertheless have sought and obtained .
It is nonetheless extremely significant that this debate is taking place precisely today , the same day our Parliament has expressed its favourable opinion for the names proposed by the Council for the members of the Board of the European Central Bank .
It is perhaps the best way for our Parliament to respond to the rightful criticism of those afraid that the European Union is only an agglomeration of financial and monetary interests .
We must reaffirm here once again that monetary union without political union is ridiculous , a useless effort for the European people .
An essential accompaniment to political union is undoubtedly a common foreign and security policy combined with a common military and arms strategy .
Today , Europe is witnessing an important moment , a happy moment .
The single currency must soon be followed by a common defence policy so that Europe can guarantee peace , including beyond its own borders .
The effort of Mr Tindemans reminds me of the overwhelming commitment in this Parliament of the late Member , Mr Spinelli , who from these same benches from which arise today obstacles on which there is not always agreement , argued and fought for Europe to become a political subject and therefore to have a common , military and foreign policy .
The delegation of the National Alliance , the democratic and moderate Italian party , will vote in favour of the report to reaffirm its own choice for European Unity and in so doing to confirm the need to make those essential choices and give political and international dignity to our Europe .
Mr President , this report once again gives us an opportunity to voice our great appreciation of Mr Tindemans ' expertise and commitment .
The distinction between security policy and defence policy has become less obvious in so far as the risk of an armed attack on EU members has , in the phase in which we now find ourselves , diminished . This has been accompanied by an increase in the risk of crises in our immediate neighbourhood .
Crises can , however , escalate into full-scale hostilities .
We must not close our eyes to the fact that developments in Russia , for example , can quickly give rise to a more serious situation with regard to defence policy .
Europe needs both a deterrent protection of its borders and the capacity to intervene forcefully in order to resolve crises .
NATO forms the basis for European cooperation in the field of defence .
A more active defence cooperation within the EU should be developed not as a replacement , but as a complement , for NATO .
Such a complement is needed .
Nevertheless , European defence cooperation within the WEU has lacked strength .
The problem lies not so much in the fact that new countries outside military alliances have applied the brakes , as in the lack of a strong political will at the heart of the EU .
There has been no force akin to the one that has driven EMU forward .
A functional defence policy must also be based on a common foreign policy , but the EU has not yet reached this point .
The Tindemans report gives us an opportunity to reflect on this point .
The question is whether Europe can entirely rely on NATO , and thus on the USA 's commitment .
It is realistic to envisage crises and threats of this kind arising in situations where the USA might well be in agreement with the EU , but lacks the motivation to intervene in the way that we in Europe would wish .
Major enlargement of the EU would in all probability reduce the degree of unity between the EU and NATO , thereby reinforcing the need for defence cooperation within the EU .
The European Union aims to promote peace in Europe .
In this respect the EU has been a total success .
The peace initiative is being further advanced through eastward enlargement .
This burgeoning cooperation has already produced significant results .
In order to gain membership of the European Union , the applicant states are striving to promote human rights , settle internal disputes and conflicts between themselves and also with other countries .
This is important .
It is not only in the Balkans that a diverse ethnic mix has the potential to result in serious complications .
Here is a modern , present-day version of the EU 's peace mission .
For example in my own country , there is every reason to point to the major role that the EU continues to play in developing peace in Europe .
The tragedies in the Balkans , that is , outside the EU and outside the circle of applicant states , shows how badly things can otherwise turn out .
Dear Mr Tindemans , I have read your report and listened to what you have said and I want to give you my warmest congratulations .
There is no doubt that your report will be voted for by the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , however , for you who have worked so hard , unfortunately for the European Parliament and unfortunately for the people of Europe , the gentlemen of the Council will throw it in the bin .
The gentlemen of the Council did not manage to agree on the President of the Central Bank , making a mockery of the euro before it even gets off the ground .
In truth , do you believe that they will agree on this extremely important issue ?
They are not interested in a common foreign policy and in the defence of Europe .
They are not interested in the interests of Europe nor in the people of Europe .
The only thing that matters to them are the interests of banks and bankers .
Look at what happened at Dayton .
The Americans made a decision and Mr Van den Broek , despite his effort , simply pays from the Commission Fund .
In Cyprus , in the Middle East , in Kosovo and in the Aegean , Mr Holbrooke and Mr Miller discuss and decide and Europe simply carries out their decisions .
I do not want to disappoint you . I wish your report good luck but I am afraid it will not have good luck .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Tindemans on the skill and especially the tenacity and patience that he demonstrated in writing this excellent report : a controversial report , not because of its contents but because this Europe of ours is still faced with the growing difficulty of dealing serenely and seriously with an issue like that of its own security and defence , even though it knows that the success of its own political process certainly depends in large part on finding a solution to this .
Its discomfort can also be seen in the proliferation of institutions to which it delegates this issue that it does not know how to handle .
As has already been recalled by other Members , we have at least four institutions : the European Union , the WEU , the OSCE and NATO which , although in theory should collaborate between themselves , in reality are at odds and interfere with one another .
As if that were not enough , the WEU - which is to become the military arm - is waiting to be integrated in the European Union at that noble moment when , if and when , the governments decide that this operation can be carried out .
I would not like it to be like in Manzoni 's Promessi Sposi , that is to say that , in the view of someone or indeed of many , ' this marriage must not take place ' .
Furthermore , six years ago , almost to the point of convincing the public that it was possible to do better , the Pietersberg agreement was invented to conduct peace missions : not one has ever been carried out , and I wonder when one will be .
I conclude by saying that the Tindemans report is a courageous stone cast in the pond of political indolence .
I hope that it will finally succeed in promoting that debate that until now has been lacking .
Mr President , following the example of the other Members I too will congratulate Mr Tindemans since , with the very fine and elaborate phrases which his long political experience allows him , he manages to reveal what he wishes , that is the redevelopment of the European Union into a military-political , police-controlled terrorist organization .
He is driven not by personal criteria but by criteria of class . This is what he expresses .
The financial money markets , the huge monopolies and the multinational companies must be able to digest - without inconvenience - what they gain with monetary union and all the other attendant factors which currently govern the European Union .
The NATO - WEU - OSCE trinity aims to create special intervention forces , armament programmes , a military arms industry and aerial information centres etc . , all paid for by the European taxpayer .
Naturally this poses a question : will this European Union not have a defence policy ?
He does not clearly specify , however , who the enemy will be and against whom .
There is not even the slogan " Soviet Union , Warsaw Pact ' and he implies that the enemy is the people and their revolt under this oppressive policy .
You wish to keep this in check and on this basis you want the freedom to intervene wherever , within and outside the perimeter of the EU , the interests of the European Union , that is of multinational corporations , are - he says - affected .
And one last point , since a lot has been said about Mr Milosevic ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , during the debate last year on Mr Tindemans ' first report on a common security policy for Europe , I expressed the wish that the enlargement of the European Union to include central and eastern European countries would not go hand in hand with an identical enlargement of NATO . European and American interests are more and more often divergent and it is high time the people of Europe took charge of their own destiny .
My wish has been fulfilled , and I thank the rapporteur , who argues in favour of the integration of the WEU into the European Union and the accession to the WEU of future Member States of the Union . This must take place with the close cooperation of the CIS .
Even if , and particularly if , it displeases the Green Group . They are bribed to increase European nations ' subjection to the Americans : at the economic level - illustrated as clearly as possible by their attitude , which by the way , was grotesque , to the vote on the patenting of biotechnological inventions ; at the military level , as the amendments they tabled on this excellent report by a great statesman , Mr Tindemans , have shown .
Europe will soon have a single currency .
It will also need an army .
That is the price of our independence .
Mr President , I am afraid that after Mr Kaklamanis ' Marxist analysis of the European banks and Mr Ephremedis ' class-conscious considerations , I shall look a little bland as I just want to make a few comments on the Tindemans report .
I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Tindemans for taking on this very difficult task .
The task was indeed a difficult one , as I know from our work together on the committee .
It was to formulate a common defence policy for fifteen independent , sovereign states and for 75 to 80 parties - I am not sure exactly how many parties are represented in this House , but I know that they represent very different opinions .
These opinions stem from different traditions in defence policy and it is my view that we shall only be able to achieve a successful defence policy if we are prepared to accept and respect these different traditions in its formulation .
I would like to mention three principles which are important as I see it , which go beyond what you have written and which will form the subject of various amendments .
Firstly , we should endeavour to define a new defence policy which is embedded in a new security policy and which is based more on collective security models such as the OSCE than on models from the Cold War like NATO and the WEU .
Secondly , under certain circumstances today preventive conflict solving and the triggering of a new disarmament spiral - a disarmament rather than an armament spiral - can be a more effective instrument of defence than any multipurpose weapons which may be in the pipeline .
Thirdly , if we develop our own defence policy we should do it not to relieve the American budget , but in order to reflect our own identity .
Mr President , I just have a comment on the Rules of Procedure relating to speaking time .
I should be grateful if you would be much more generous in allocating time to Mr Ephremedis in the future , for when otherwise do we have the pleasure of listening to old Stalinist speeches .
I do not think those remarks were quite proper , but , since we are also sometimes lacking in humour , you are forgiven .
Mr President , do I owe Mr Brok anything ?
Let me settle with him .
If I owe him anything , I will settle it with a cheque .
In euros , when it comes into circulation ...
I was going to say that I could invite you to speak , to make a personal statement , at the end of the debate .
But as you have already taken the floor , you no longer need to speak at the end of the debate .
Mr President , during those days when 56 Foreign Ministers and Ministers of National Defence - 56 ! - from 28 European Countries , 10 of which are Members of our Union , took part in the celebratory sitting of the Western European Union under Greek presidency in the beautiful town of Rhodes , two American envoys , Mr Holbrooke and Mr Gelbard , went back and forth between Belgrade and Pristina in a desperate attempt to find , between Serbia and Albania , some treatment for the bleeding wound of Kosovo .

In the multi-paged text of conclusions which was given out yesterday the many ministers of the WEU expressed , among many other ambiguities , their own concern and their readiness to promote a realistic and clear approach to tackling the problem .
However , the difference between the two simultaneous demonstrations of international diplomacy is telling : in the first , in Rhodes , there is comfort , luxury and the slow pace of ceremony .
There is no sense of time and , above all , no binding nature of specific solutions .
It is quite the opposite with the on-the-spot visits-cum-forays of the American envoys .
Often , because of the study of and demand for practical solutions , they do not avoid dangerous complications and injustices .
Thanks are owed to Mr Tindemans who , with missionary zeal , insists on mobilizing Europe into shaping a common foreign policy .
Since 1975 he has been striving in this direction , proclaiming ever since that only in this way can Europe protect its values and acquire its political substance .
At exactly the time when we are welcoming the inception of EMU and the establishment of the euro , the long and faltering march towards the OSCE , the vagueness concerning the incorporation of the WEU as an arm of defence , despite the wishes of Maastricht and the minced words of Amsterdam , are restrictive burdens which inhibit the integration of Europe .
In a world of rapid developments , such as today 's , delays are alarmingly dangerous .
And we have already had bitter experience .
Personally , I can only express a single disagreement with the Tindemans report : the shaping of a common foreign policy must not go forward gradually , as the text says . It is an immediate priority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report prepared by Mr Tindemans sends out a very positive signal because it is , at long last , a document which clearly highlights the European Union 's responsibility for its own security .
Because what is the question here ?
In theory , our entire foreign and security policy has been established since Maastricht .
In practice , however , it is a fiasco , as we all know .
So what does it mean ?
What is the objective ?
Not just to condemn , but also to invalidate the misuse of force in politics !
That we shall be able to achieve when the European Union is finally able to distance itself from individual national security policies and instead combine the political , the economic and , at the end of the day , the military potential of the Union in the interests of crisis management and peace-keeping .
They both amount to the same thing .
The second issue which I would like to highlight is the following : Since Maastricht , we have been working towards the objective of a common foreign and security policy and we have been saying that we want to make the Western European Union an instrument of the European Union .
Perhaps we should stop talking about it and actually get on and do it !
Lastly , many people would prefer to leave the security of the European Union in the hands of Washington .
In my view that would be a pity !
For , quite legitimately , American security policy is concerned with safeguarding its own interests .
Secondly , American security policy very , very often depends on the prevailing domestic political situation .
Under certain circumstances , that could actually represent a security risk for Europe .
We must therefore continue to pursue the goal of a common foreign and security policy , merge the EU and the Western European Union in the interests of crisis management and peace-keeping , not only in Europe , but at world level .
Mr President , Mr Tindemans ' s report is a declaration of war by militarists in this Parliament against European peace policy .
It was written by an agent from the weapons ' industry , whose home country has never been in the frontline of military threat .
Mr Tindemans and Mr Titley wish to manufacture weapons a long way from the front for those who will have to fight there whenever , according to the report , the basic principles of the EU are made a laughing stock of .
Such full employment is not one of the EU 's basic principles .
My country has never been occupied .
How many of you can say the same , you who are now planning a common arms industry , a common arms capacity and a common military doctrine ?
If it comes to the crunch , will you homefront arms manufacturers be offering to help out those who are joined with you in a union , but against their own wishes , get involved in armed conflict ?
To all war-mongers now suffering from trauma as a result of occupation or the Falklands conflict I say : do not try to force us defenceless countries into a military alliance via a single EU defence policy .
You are too poor a bunch of soldiers to give others guidance on security .
As chairman of a labour organization I would like to say to Mr Brok that he , in the service of the firm of Bertelsman 's , as he is , has no right to advise free European representatives on what they should say .
Madam President , the report is entitled ' establishment of a common defence policy for the European Union ' , but the content exudes thinking and rhetoric from the Cold War .
The report is based on the idea that conflicts and problems are resolved by military means .
Foreign and security policy are based on different components : foreign policy , aid , trade , peace and conflict resolution , disarmament policy , refugee policy and military defence .
A security policy is therefore not the same as a military defence .
It appears to me to be out of touch with reality to write a report with the tenor of the study that Mr Tindemans has produced .
According to many commentators , including the WEU 's political assembly , the realization of a common defence policy has been removed from the agenda for a long time to come as a result of the Amsterdam Treaty .
It seems to me most remarkable that Parliament , which has no power to decide on a common defence policy , is once again tabling a motion on this matter , quite contrary to the will of the Council of Ministers .
The idea of a common defence policy seems to be a mantra : if it is repeated often enough it will perhaps become reality .
From a modern security perspective , the security of the people is the central consideration .
The threat to the people may be anything from environmental disasters to social exclusion .
At present , conflicts between states are becoming increasingly unusual .
Instead , intra-state conflicts are growing ever more common .
Most of these conflicts have their origins in social antagonisms of an ethnic and / or religious nature .
Such conflicts cannot be resolved by military methods or with bullets and bombs .
Amidst the federalistic euphoria it should not be forgotten that the UK , Denmark , Ireland , Austria and Sweden do not accept a common defence policy as proposed by Mr Tindemans .
In Sweden , 70 per cent of the population are still opposed to a common defence policy .
Madam President , the European Union will only carry any weight if it succeeds in growing beyond its achievements to date .
Here for the first time we have an opportunity to develop the Union on three institutions - the traditional European Community , the Economic and Monetary Union and the political union - freely , that is without extreme pressure from outside as was the case during the Cold War with its threat of nuclear strikes .
This requires a will - as outlined in the Maastricht Treaty - to create a common foreign and security policy and , step by step , a common defence policy .
This is enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty which the Austrian Presidency , aware of its responsibility in its forthcoming presidency of the Council , will soon ratify .
To date , both the common foreign and security policy and the foreign defence policy are rudimentary and vague , not to say non-existent .
This is highly unsatisfactory in view of the regional conflicts currently going on in Europe .
May I point out to the previous speaker that unfortunately security problems in Europe are not restricted to natural disasters .
Our dependence upon the will of the USA to intervene in crisis regions in Europe as a policing force within the framework of NATO not only illustrates the weaknesses of the current European position , it has also become an almost unbearable burden for the USA .
The current trend is for the US to withdraw from European trouble spots , leaving the EU with a still greater responsibility .
The Tindemans report therefore points the way to European independence in the narrower sense of defence policy .
It is therefore logical for Austria to support the complete integration of the Western European Union into the EU and to take part in the creation of a common European defence policy .
However , this cannot and should not take place in opposition to NATO .
Eleven out of fourteen of our EU partners wish to create a European security and defence identity within NATO .
The WEU depends on NATO capacities and NATO logistics in many respects .
The remit of the WEU and the NATO Partnership for Peace are largely similar .
Any unnecessary duplication of existing mechanisms should therefore be avoided .
What we need is solidarity and cooperation in building a common security and defence policy .
The enlargement processes both in the EU and in NATO should be seen in this light .
The Tindemans report forms a good basis from which the Council and the Commission can formulate policy in this area .
Madam President , there are three reasons why I cannot agree with the basic tenets of Mr Tindemans ' s report .
Firstly , its view on security is , to my mind , outdated and based on the supposition that there may be a conflict between states , resolved by the use of force .
Of the twenty-seven wars or conflicts that went on in 1996 , only one , the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir , was between different countries .
Conflicts , particularly those in Europe , require improved methods of stabilizing crises and improved peacekeeping operations .
In this respect , I believe the initiative on behalf of the foreign ministers of Finland and Sweden is the right one .
Secondly , the report does not sufficiently get to grips with general European security , and especially the development of security between the EU countries and Russia .
This sort of cooperation is required , for example , in the development of the Baltic region and in the Nordic sea regions .
Thirdly , the notion of developing the European Union as a defence organization does little to aid EU enlargement .
An emphasis on EU military endeavour will , I believe , affect the issue of enlargement for the countries bordering on Russia as well as for Cyprus .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , do you remember one of the replies from President Chirac of France to the protests to nuclear testing ?
It is also for you , he said , your security and your defence !
It is too bad that the other heads of government did not take the President of the French Republic literally , at the time , and did not insist on arriving in Amsterdam at a truly new result for the common defence policy .
It did not happen that way and we had a disappointing result .
Basically , the real significance of the Tindemans resolution is , in my opinion , this : the European Parliament says to the European Council , to the Council of Ministers ' the time has come to include this difficult topic on the agenda ' .
Do not turn away , do not try to escape , let us not give the awful performance that we gave with the Bosnia tragedy .
We are about to increase from fifteen to twenty six , we cannot do it without reaching a new parameter , that of the international identity of the European Union , of a common defence policy .
It will be difficult , certainly , it will be very difficult , but there are no alternatives . Of this at least I am convinced .
The Member , Mr Tindemans , has been defined a visionary ; in my opinion he is a realist .
People who are visionaries and also dangerous are those who , looking to the past , are only able to propose again a situation that we have already experienced .
So , from the past let us keep the different languages , cultures , the enormous wealth of our European Union , but let us leave in peace the worst results from the dictatorships , the wars , the racist ideologies and cases of nationalism .
Let us look forward with a little courage .
A short while ago at the funeral of an official of the Western European Union , who passed away too soon , a wreath of flowers was brought by colleagues of the deceased . Next to an affectionate message to the loved one was a curious signature in French : ' Friends of the Accidental European Union .
There 's a small mistake : Accidental European Union . However , we need a genuine union of the people and the States , not an accident of history !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the WEU is developing its operational capacities on the basis of internal optimization .
This means that , in accordance with the widening of its remit in 1992 , it is on the way to becoming an instrument of efficient crisis management in Europe .
For this reason it is important that we continue to follow this process in this House , as we are doing today .
In my view , the WEU has two main tasks . Firstly , to oversee the integration of new partners from Eastern Europe and , secondly , to strengthen the European pillar of the Euro-Atlantic alliance .
In this context , it is extremely important that relations between the WEU and both the EU and NATO are shaped with the necessary sensitivity .
This sensitivity is necessary firstly with a view to relations between Europe and America , but also in relation to various EU Member States , such as the United Kingdom , Denmark , Ireland , Austria and Sweden where , for a variety of reasons , the idea of the development of a military arm of the European Union is received with a certain amount of caution at the very least .
But , to address Mr Bonde from Denmark , we have absolutely no intention of influencing the Danish referendum on 28 May with our debate today .
Like every other country , since the Treaty of Amsterdam Denmark is entitled to opt out of any matters relating to military initiatives .
However , I do believe that we would be ill-advised not to take seriously the concerns of the citizens of the neutral countries .
I also have great sympathy for the position taken by the United States which - most recently on Corfu - advocated continued adherence to the NATO agreement to make independent collective resources available to the WEU only where this is required for urgent CFSP operations within the context of a specific crisis .
I am also resolutely against granting the WEU basic and permanent autonomous planning and intervention capacities within NATO , but - and here I direct my comments to the Europe of the Nations group - there can be no question of the WEU organizing European worldwide recognition à la Paris alongside NATO and without transatlantic agreement .
Its future role will be limited to dealing with crises like the current situation in the Balkans with a CFSP restricted to the performance of joint operational , humanitarian and peace-keeping WEU initiatives .
Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs McKenna , Mrs Theorin and Mrs Ojala for their contributions , which I regard as small shafts of light in an otherwise rather dark and gloomy debate .
I find this just as depressing as the other day when I actually read the Tindemans report .
Nor - I regret to say - did the amendments to the report make me any happier .
This is , after all , an own-initiative report from the European Parliament .
I therefore feel that it would be profoundly regrettable if this were to be the signal that this elected Chamber sends out to its voters .
For example , no consideration whatsoever is given to any new aspects , not even to the policy pursued by the four neutral states , which are , after all , members .
I sincerely hope that we shall reject this report .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on producing his timely report .
Mr Tindemans is right to point out that not all EU Member States are ready to work towards a common defence policy , despite the fact that at Amsterdam the WEU was regarded as an integral part of the development of the EU .
The Amsterdam Treaty , in developing a more effective common foreign and security policy , stressed the importance of closer institutional and organizational links between the EU and the WEU , including the evolution of the Petersberg humanitarian and peacekeeping tasks .
I welcome the references in the report to the role of Combined Joint Task Forces , the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council , the Partnership for Peace programme and the importance of establishing a European armaments agency .
The report also points out the importance of the objective of global disarmament , the Pact for Stability and welcomes the draft EU code of conduct on the arms trade .
However , there are areas of the report that I would disagree with .
The integration of the WEU into the EU is not a realistic proposition in the near future .
I do not accept that the purpose of a common defence policy is to protect the Union 's interests in all areas , including security of supply .
Furthermore , I do not agree that security and defence issues should come under the authority of a Commissioner or that a White Paper on defence should be drawn up by the Policy Planning and Early Warning Unit for approval by the European Council .
Nor should the EU be in the business of signing military cooperation agreements with Russia and the CIS countries .
Amending the Treaty on European Union to include Article 5 of the WEU Treaty is also not a feasible option .
For these reasons , as the report currently stands - I stress as it currently stands - I regret I will not be able to support it .
Mr President , I do not belong to the group of colleagues here who are congratulating Mr Tindemans .
The report as it stands today seems to forget that there are four militarily non-aligned members of the Union and that their consent is necessary to fulfil the dreams of Mr Tindemans and others to integrate the WEU into the Union .
On the other hand , as has been mentioned , one improvement to the Amsterdam Treaty was realized on the initiative of Sweden and Finland , namely the inclusion of the Petersberg tasks .
This implies that the non-aligned countries are as interested as all others in developing a common defence policy .
Common defence and common action will ultimately depend on geopolitics and national interest .
That applies to big Member States as well as small ones , as was shown in the mishandling of the Yugoslav crisis .
I for one would welcome sending troops into Kosovo if other solutions fail .
Finland at present being the only Union member having a common border with Russia sees the development of mutuallybeneficial and peaceful relationships with that country as all-important , in marked contrast to NATO strategy .
Portugal might view this differently .
Decisions on European defence policy should not be made in Washington , as has happened in the past .
The weakness of the present wording of the report is that it combines false dreams with nice words .
If the Socialist proposals for amendments fall , many of us will have to vote against the entire report .
Madam President , I believe I am the last speaker on behalf of this House in this fascinating debate . It is not the first debate on this subject , nor will it be the last .
It is fascinating thanks to the forward thinking reports by Mr Tindemans , who has occupied himself with this subject for decades .
I was and remain sceptical about the opportunities to develop a genuine defence policy within the Union context .
I am not opposed to it on principle , but consider it sensible to leave NATO on this point for what it is .
What 's more , it does not seem sensible to me to put the cart before the proverbial horse .
The discussion on the defence of own territory has been pushed into the background somewhat over the past few years by a much more important discussion on the role of NATO , the European Union and the WEU in crisis management .
I am therefore much more interested in the question of whether the Union will be capable of carrying out the so-called Petersberg tasks should the situation arise .
Then we will be dealing with crisis management elsewhere .
This is therefore the crux , I believe , of a military debate at national level .
The realization of this option , for which the foundations were also laid in Amsterdam , and preparing ourselves for the possibility should be given priority over the coming years .
It also concerns the practical interpretation of the relationship between the European Union and the Western European Union in this sphere .
What the Union needs above all , and I have often said so , is positive practical experience .
With such an experience in the sphere of possible crisis management , common defence might also come into view .
So I would like to turn it all around .
The Union must learn to trust itself regarding security issues .
The introduction of the euro will also without question lead to the necessary dynamism in this area .
Economic union leads to political union ; this has been said often enough .
As far as that is concerned I believe that the security experts in this Parliament can expect a sunny future .
The last thing I would like to say has been said frequently before .
The best contribution the European Union can make to security in Europe is its enlargement .
This does not involve any military instrument .
The proof that the scope of the security instruments of the European Union is extensive must , I think , remain the starting point in the debate in this Parliament on the security role of the Union .
Madam President , I would also like to express my great appreciation for Mr Tindemans ' report on the common defence policy of the European Union .
I am not surprised at the quality of the report , nor at its inclination towards compromise , when I think of Mr Tindemans ' wisdom , which he acquired during a long period of governmental responsibility and of ministerial office in Foreign Affairs .
I also remember very well the reports made by Mr Tindemans in which he repeatedly argued in favour of activating a clear common defence and security policy as the ultimate objective of a strong European Union .
And certainly after the step which was recently taken towards a common monetary union , the CFSP , to my mind , deserves extra and renewed attention . We should capitalize on the cohesive impulse which will also emanate from monetary union to arrive at a closer common defence and security policy .
The topical value of this Tindemans report could not have been greater .
I have already mentioned a few reasons for this .
But added to these is the fact that , in the past , during such a discussion on a European defence policy we were able to refer to the tragic developments in former Yugoslavia and were able to point to the lessons which should be drawn from this .
But today it is no longer possible to speak in an abstract way about this topic , because Europe is yet again faced with a situation which , if precautions are not taken in time , might show a repetition of the horrors of an ethnic conflict .
I will deal with the situation in Kosovo separately in a moment .
But it seems to me that it should also be discussed in the context of this debate , as there are so many points of reference with the remarks put forward by Mr Tindemans in his report .
The political , economic and also the humanitarian consequences of an escalation , an overspill of the conflict in Kosovo into other regions , will directly affect the interests of the Member States and those of the applicant countries of the European Union .
And I am thinking not least of the possibility that once again huge numbers of refugees will get on the march .
Absorbing such a situation has also so often been the subject of debates in this House .
Yesterday I spoke with Mrs Ogata , the High Commissioner for Refugees of the United Nations , who told me that inside and outside Bosnia Herzegovina there are still approximately 1.8 million displaced people and refugees for whom a solution is not yet in sight .
But in other areas too we will be busy for a considerable time to come consolidating the situation in Bosnia Herzegovina , which is only improving slowly .
That is why there is every reason for us to reach a state of affairs in which all the resources the Union has , or is able to have , at its disposal are dedicated fully to preventing the situation in Kosovo and the surrounding region from worsening .
And I am most definitely referring to a possible contribution by the Western European Union to initiatives intended to limit as much as possible the risk of the conflict spilling over .
Here I am thinking , of course , about the measures for the benefit of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and of Albania in particular .
As indicated by Mr Tindemans , the European Union last year failed to play a conflict management role in Albania via the Western European Union .
All credit to Italy , by the way , which , only three months after the European debate and with the support of a number of other countries , managed to be present in the country with a stabilizing unit and , indeed , managed help to stabilize the situation .
But it would most certainly have been the European Union and the Western European Union 's responsibility , mindful also of what has been laid down in the Amsterdam Treaty with regard to the so-called Petersberg tasks , to take a leading position in resolving the crisis which erupted in Albania at the time as a result of the pyramid investment scandals .
However , a comparable situation is currently arising , but it is by no means certain whether there is enough political will at the moment to implement actively the security aspect of the common defence and security policy .
This afternoon someone , I believe it was Mr Lambrias , already pointed to the WEU meeting on Rhodes which took place yesterday and the day before yesterday .
But the results of this meeting do not indicate that spectacular initiatives have been agreed .
The question then arises as to whether it would not have made sense if the European Western Union had at least been asked to conduct an analysis of the security situation in situ , coupled with a number of recommendations about the way the Western European Union might possibly help to achieve security in the region .
It is right and it makes sense that this issue is also being looked at from within the NATO context .
But why should a specific input from the European Union , from the Western European Union , not be one of the possibilities ?
The absence of concrete and specific activities is making a debate on the place of the Western European Union in the security architecture really rather theoretical .
The Tindemans report mentions the European security and defence identity ; all of this seen against the background of the Western European Union 's place in the Atlantic Alliance .
The question is , and I am in fact concurring with the comments made by Mr Wiersma just now , whether it is really all that advisable to start a broad discussion with each other on a common defence policy when we have not been able to make any progress on common foreign policy , and most definitely not on common security policy .
Would it not be preferable if the Union was to start by focussing on implementing what was understood by the so-called Petersberg tasks , also in the Treaty of Amsterdam ? Peace-promoting tasks , including peacemaking , humanitarian actions , etcetera .
Should this not already be a possibility , or lead to concrete actions , then you may wonder whether we should have any big illusions within the European Union about the defence identity .
When we are talking about defence identity and link this to the protection of independence and the territorial integrity of a territory , I do not believe anyone in this House will dispute that the prime responsibility for this lies with the Atlantic Alliance , NATO , in the foreseeable future as well .
But what we are talking about here , and where Amsterdam has in fact made some progress , is taking action ourselves , with military resources as well , in the field of regional crisis management for instance .
And I repeat my question : having not taken the opportunity a year ago in Albania , should we have been surprised by events yet again this year when there is the threat of a crisis in Kosovo ?
And will we later be asking ourselves why no timely precautions were taken ?
Like Mr Tindemans , the Commission , in its recommendations which preceded the Intergovernmental Conference at the time , argued that the Western European Union should ultimately be integrated into the European Union .
This could lead to matters being better attuned , including the diplomatic , economic and military resources available to the Union .
Should the Union not succeed in formulating and implementing a more decisive foreign and security policy , which is supported by military resources with the aim of crisis prevention , then the credibility of the entire common defence and security policy will in our view be seriously affected . This foreign and security policy was based on what was agreed by treaty , both in Maastricht and in Amsterdam , and which was endorsed by all Member States without exception , with regard to the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Now of all times , when the Union has set the enlargement process in motion , this credibility must not be put on the line .
An enlarged European Union will also and particularly have to adopt a political position which corresponds to its economic size and interests . It will also have to be able to look after these interests with all the resources at its service .
Many thanks , Commissioner Van den Broek !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Nuclear tests in India
The next item on the agenda is a statement by the Council on the nuclear tests in India .
Madam President , on 11 May the Government of India announced that it had conducted three underground nuclear tests .
The presidency subsequently issued the following statement : ' The presidency expresses its dismay at the news of the Indian nuclear test which was carried out earlier today .
The European Union is fully committed to the implementation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty , which seeks to discourage the proliferation of nuclear weapons .
The European Union has a strong interest in the peace and stability of South Asia and is concerned about the risk of nuclear and missile proliferation .
The presidency is ensuring that the implications of this test are discussed by Member States at the Political Committee on 12 May ' , which in due course took place .
The Government of India has today announced that it has carried out two further tests , which it says complete the planned series .
These tests have been carried out in flagrant disregard of international opinion .
This is a deeply unwelcome step which can only serve to destabilize security in the region .
The tests are contrary to the disarmament process to which the overwhelming majority of the international community are committed .
The Political Committee agreed that the European Union should make démarches to the Governments of India and Pakistan .
These are being carried out today .
The watchword in South-East Asia is that there must be restraint .
The European Union will continue to urge Pakistan and India to resolve their differences through bilateral dialogue .
This offers the only realistic hope for a solution to the issues that still divide them .
There will be a discussion on the implications for European Union-India relations at the 25 May General Affairs Council .
At that Council the European Union will decide on its response .
But it must be measured and proportionate .
Madam President , Minister , I only have two minutes and in two minutes one can only be brief .
The five nuclear tests India has just carried out - we have just learnt , in fact , that there were two more this morning after the three the day before yesterday - are exceptionally serious .
India is , in fact , in a situation of unresolved territorial conflict with two of its neighbours : one is China , a recognized nuclear power and the other is Pakistan , a potential and perhaps even clandestine nuclear power .
But China and Pakistan both signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty , the CTBT , in September 1996 in New York , although as far as I know they have not yet ratified it , and until now they have respected it .
This is therefore an act of defiance and a step towards escalation into nonpacific handling of the conflict .
It is extremely dangerous .
Unlike many commentators on this subject , Minister , I personally am not surprised .
India 's explanatory speech when it refused to sign the CTBT was significant and premonitory .
India now has a vehemently nationalist government , whose establishment almost everyone here regrets , but the fact that it has been possible to carry out these five tests less than two months after that government came to power shows that everything was obviously ready and that the whole nation was committed .
India is a great country with a very ancient and remarkable culture .
One cannot visit India , as I have done , without learning to love it . Perhaps India is expressing the feeling that it has been forgotten or is despised by the international community , and its lack of confidence in the ability of the international community to conduct peaceful conflict-solving processes .
Many nations have reacted angrily , but also seriously and deliberately . However , the Russian Republic has been heard more or less to say , although I exaggerate , ' that sanctions should not be envisaged against India because it is a good customer ' !
American strategic leadership of the world is in crisis .
It is being made to look ridiculous by India , by Pakistan , which recently tested a missile , and by Mr Netanyahu .
Europe 's responsibility , Minister , is therefore becoming overwhelming .
Are we capable of together imposing the required diplomatic and economic sanctions ?
Are we capable of forcing France and the United Kingdom to launch the complete nuclear disarmament plan suggested by the Canberra Commission ? That is the only thing capable of calming regional tensions in the Indian subcontinent , provided that major powers start it .
International events will not await our procedural hesitations .
Minister , the European Union 's first great initiative in terms of foreign and security policy must be nuclear .
This is an emergency .
Madam President , the agenda says that we will have a statement by the Council on nuclear tests in India followed by questions .
I , in my innocence , assumed from reading this that we were allowed to put questions to the Council .
I merely wanted to ask the Council to refresh my memory : did it voice the same dismay when France carried out the nuclear tests ?
Did it condemn France for doing that ?
Mr Smith , I assume that we both have the same agenda for today , and my agenda says the following : Statement by the Council on the nuclear tests in India , followed by questions , statement by the Council and the Commission on Kosovo , followed by a debate .
I have been informed that the groups have agreed to organize a debate instead of the questions and have therefore registered speakers .
I believe the matter has been discussed jointly in the groups .
I really am very sorry that I cannot now give you the floor to ask a question , but this is what has been arranged .
Madam President , my group would wish to condemn these tests but we would recognise in so doing that this was a political explosion in response to a party political programme : and to that extent I agree with Mr Smith that it is actually very similar to the last French tests .
It seems to me therefore that it requires a political response .
It really should not be necessary to go around exploding bombs in the world in order to attract the attention of the international community , and I fear that for too long the European Union has shown a blindness towards South Asia .
It is not wise in my group 's view to try to ignore a quarter of the world whether on nuclear issues or on climate change issues where India and China also play a key role .
I want to address two questions , if I may , to the presidency : would it consider convening a regional summit on security in South Asia ?
This seems to me a more useful response than the American sanctions proposals , although I suppose the two might be conducted in parallel .
Secondly , will the President-in-Office come to the Foreign Affairs Committee at the end of this month , the day after the Council meeting to which he referred , since we will be discussing the André-Léonard report on the new European Union-Indian partnership agreement and our views on that might obviously be affected by what happens in the next few weeks ?
I believe the British presidency has a key role to play in defusing what is an unfortunate incident before it becomes a regional disaster .
Madam President , the five nuclear tests are not making the situation any more comfortable in the meantime , and are undermining the momentum for nuclear disarmament which has been in existence since the end of the Cold War , the signing of the CTBT and the extension of the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
I dare say India is a threshold country , but it is also on the threshold of a dangerous instability in the region .
Mr Spencer is quite right when he says that it is not solely a military issue , but principally a political issue .
India should be reprimanded , agreed , but this reprimand must also act as a warning to other countries .
In recent agreements the countries in possession of nuclear weapons have committed themselves to nuclear disarmament .
We are not seeing much evidence of this , Madam President .
Instead , the United States is conducting subcritical tests and the START-II Treaty is not being ratified by the Russian Duma .
It is of the greatest importance that all nations concerned take part in the disarmament which is now finally able to take place .
Unilateral condemnation of India is not right , of course , but other countries concerned must indeed be warned by this incident .
Only through a joint approach will we be able to reach our goal .
Madam President , the seriousness and irresponsibility of the new Indian Prime Minister 's decision cannot be sufficiently emphasized .
It is likely to start a process with unpredictable consequences in a region where over a third of humanity lives , which has been the scene of several wars over the last few decades .
It is a challenge to the international community unworthy of the prestige that great country has earned in the past .
I believe the time has come to resume the debate on nuclear weapons and their permanent destruction in every country , without exception . By signing the Non-Proliferation Treaty , declared nuclear powers have signed a solemn commitment , Article 6 of the Treaty , to work towards the achievement of that aim .
It is the prerequisite of radical , universal and controlled non-proliferation .
But , we are far from achieving it .
I should also like to take advantage of this House to appeal to all pacifist movements and personalities that share my conviction that the campaign for disarmament is still , or is now becoming , very urgent indeed .
Let us hold meetings .
Let us consider together what initiatives to take to express a strong protest against these tests and more generally to stimulate public opinion on the issue of peace .
Madam President , I believe that the nuclear tests carried out by India , now five in total , are indeed a big step in the wrong direction .
The whole region is in turmoil .
Look at the reactions from Pakistan .
China , too , has given a heavy response .
In addition , we are seeing that this decision is provoking many reactions throughout the world , and rightly so .
In that respect I am not entirely reassured by the words of the President-in-Office when he says that we should respond , but moderately .
I would like to say : let us respond clearly and through diplomatic means , and with specific economic measures .
In that context I think we should indeed take a thorough look at the cooperation agreement between the European Union and India , particularly as far as the transfer of sensitive technology is concerned .
I really believe we should look at how we deal with this , not least in the context of the report by Mrs André-Leonard .
Naturally , on the other hand , not enough emphasis can be placed on the hypocrisy of the five nuclear powers who have done nothing about nuclear disarmament , even though this was also provided for in the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
To point a finger at others who promote proliferation , something I naturally find extremely negative , without taking any responsibility oneself for disarmament , is , I regret , something that will no longer convince the world .
We will not become credible as a European Union , and this applies to both the United Kingdom and France , unless they take initiatives in this matter .
I have not seen anything of this kind so far .
Madam President , the five underground nuclear tests which India has carried out obviously caused a shock wave throughout the world .
The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty is not applicable to India as it has not ratified the Treaty .
We should be honest , India feels threatened by Pakistan , by China , and is often right to feel this way .
The question is not only whether the fifteen countries of the Union will speak with one voice internationally , but also what we will be doing as from next week , when a vote is held in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy on the signing of the cooperation agreement .
The question then will be : what is our position ?
In other words , will we decide not to sign as long as India has not signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty ?
At the same time this will also mean that we must pursue a much more active policy so that , as Magda Aelvoet has said , there will finally be an end to the hypocrisy of the nuclear countries .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the dissemination of nuclear weapons may cause one to feel anxiety , which is understandable , but it is no excuse for hypocrisy .
The President-in-Office , a British minister , is part of a government which has nuclear weapons , which is obviously quite agreeable when you do not want other people to have them .
We hear that sanctions are going to be taken against India by the United States of America , in the name of morality , of course as always , although the United States is the only country to have used a nuclear weapon against civilian populations , in Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
Can you explain to me , Mr President-in-Office , why it is right , fair and decent in that area for China to have an unacceptable nuclear weapon , yet immoral and scandalous for India to have one ?
Did the Communist Party , to which Mr Wurtz belongs , not welcome Stalin 's acquisition of the atomic bomb , at the time ?
Mr President-in-Office , do you not think that the solution to the problem of nuclear proliferation should be political ?
We have to use the good relationships we have with all the parties involved to try , by mediation , to decrease the tension in the area .
Superpowers must not try to evade the rules of conduct they wish to impose on others .
The rest of the world will look upon anything else as an intolerable and hypocritical diktat .
Madam President , it is a very serious matter that India has conducted these tests since this could lead to a new global nuclear arms race .
This situation clearly requires both political and public responses .
The EU must respond , not simply verbally but also in the form of action .
The citizens of the EU should do exactly what they did during the French nuclear tests , that is , to react with the instruments at their disposal .
The Swedish government has today , with immediate effect , halted a cooperation agreement with India amounting to SEK 900 million .
It is also important , however , to bear in mind that India 's argument for not signing the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was that it did not contain a paragraph on total nuclear disarmament .
This argument must today be directed back at India and utilized , if it really was seriously intended .
However , it is also important to remember that every nuclear power should be treated equally .
They are , in fact , currently contravening their undertakings to reduce their nuclear weapons under Article 6 of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons .
This is something we should also bear in mind when taking action against India 's nuclear weapons tests .
Madam President , since nuclear testing was resumed on Mururoa under the aegis of the French President Mr Chirac , it was of course to be expected that such conduct would be copied by countries in Asia and elsewhere .
We accepted the existence of nuclear weapons with a bad conscience at the time , Madam President , because of their deterrent effect .
That national pride should be attached to the possession of such a weapon is obviously completely mad .
It seems that nationalist politicians have been calming their consciences for a long time with the idea that national interest and national honour will justify everything .
Against this kind of politics our political ancestors at the time invented European integration against nationalism , because nationalism in fact means war .
These are things which have been said here before by people such as Helmut Kohl and Mr Mitterand .
That is why the European Union must be the first to condemn the dangerously macho behaviour of India .
It would be of great significance if the people of India were also to discover that their government has committed a blunder , and that it has not gained anything .
Because of financio-economic measures we must cooperate with countries which are capable of exerting financio-economic pressure , such as America and Japan , to see what our role should be in guaranteeing peace in this region .
I extend my good wishes to the Council , that it may be able to proceed with the speed and effectiveness hoped for in the Tindemans report , to respond well to these matters , and thus to play an acceptable and respected role on the world stage .
Madam President , as rapporteur on the strengthened European Union-India partnership , I am particularly shocked by India 's dangerous and incomprehensible attitude .
The five nuclear tests have changed the European Parliament 's whole perspective on the strengthened partnership .
Our report aimed to be comprehensive and gave the necessary political support to the declared determination of both parties to make their cooperation more efficient .
India has just seriously breached the mutual confidence which had been built up over a number of years .
I will therefore encourage the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy to consider that current circumstances are no longer conducive to strengthening the partnership ; on the contrary , they must lead to a temporary halt in the process until India has permanently stopped carrying out nuclear tests , has signed and ratified the Non-Proliferation and Comprehensive Test Ban Treaties and has begun to contribute actively towards improving relations between states in the region , more specifically with Pakistan .
On 25 May , the Committee on Foreign Affairs will have an opportunity to discuss this , within the framework of my report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , like the previous speaker I find it extremely worrying that India has carried out these tests and that no criticism is coming from inside the country itself .
Given this fact , the sanctions which have been announced are more likely to result in an act of defiance than any sort of understanding that as a large , democratic country in the region India also has a duty to set an example to its neighbours .
A show of strength may achieve the desired domestic effect for the moment , but this will be far outweighed by the damage it will cause at international level .
A State which cannot solve the problem of poverty in its own country should not be seeking to enhance its domestic reputation through demonstrations of this kind .
The last thing we need in a developing country is an arms race .
Already , India spends 12.5 % and Pakistan 27 % of its budget on military expenditure .
In view of the arms race in the region , however , calling for India alone to put an end to testing would now seem to offer little chance of success .
The European Union must also ask itself whether , after the French tests in the Pacific , it did not sit back a little in relief rather than making energetic calls for more countries to join up to the existing Treaty .
Madam President , thank you for the chance to make a short response to the points which have been raised in this short but important debate .
I would like to say to those who raised questions that the points which have been highlighted will be considered as part of the agenda on 25 May by the General Affairs Council when it considers the Union 's response .
There are two inaccuracies I wish to correct .
One is that there was a sense of neglect in India - I cannot accept that there has been any neglect by the Union .
Indeed , the presidency has had a political dialogue with India within the last month and a wide range of issues have been considered .
But even if there is a perception of neglect , I do not believe that this in any way justifies the act which the Indian Government has taken in carrying out those nuclear tests .
The second inaccuracy was a point raised by Madam Aelvoet who said that I had said that there would be a moderate response from the Council . Well , I did not say that there would be a moderate response .
What I actually said was that there should be a measured and proportionate response and that is quite a different thing .
The important point of the debate is that it has been an opportunity for us all to focus on this subject , to think of the way in which the Union should respond and to suggest options so that on 25 May the Council can consider what action should be taken .
But above all we must make sure that we give proper regard to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and that these form the background to our discussion on 25 May .
Our main purpose should be to devise an appropriate response so as to have the maximum impact on the Indian Government and also to do our utmost to secure regional stability and restraint in South-East Asia .
The debate is closed .
Agenda
Ladies and gentlemen , the debates held this morning and during the course of this afternoon have drawn out somewhat , as you can see both from the agenda and the time .
This means that we now have to adjust the agenda for this evening .
I would suggest the following order of business for this evening 's session .
According to the agenda there is Question Time from 5.30 p.m. to 7.00 p.m.
I suggest that we continue the debate on EuroMediterranean co-operation , which we left unfinished this morning , after the evening recess at 9.00 p.m.
That would then be followed by the debate on Kosovo , the report by Mr Caudron on the competitiveness of European industry , the report by Mrs Mann on a European initiative in electronic commerce , then the recommendations for the second reading of the report by Mr Hendrick on a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations , the recommendation for the second reading of the van Velzen report on operator number portability and carrier pre-selection and , finally , the report by Mr K. Collins on the labelling of certain foodstuffs produced from genetically modified organisms .
Does anyone have any objections ?
Madam President , on a point of order .
I recognize the tremendous difficulties we have got ourselves into with the agenda .
Clearly , there is no point in having a statement on Kosovo and a debate several hours later when the Council , I understand , will not be here .
I should like to suggest that we have the statement on Kosovo from the Council and the Commission , we take one speaker from each group , as foreseen , and finish the debate there .
Those of us who are further down the list are prepared to sacrifice our position , provided we can get one statement from each group , so we can have a debate on Kosovo , finish it there , and then take Question Time .
I have just quickly added up how much time that would take .
I shall therefore propose a compromise to your proposal .
We shall ask the Council Presidency and the Commission to introduce the subject of Kosovo , and the debate will then take place later as I have suggested .
Madam President , Kosovo is currently one of the major political problems and major trouble spots in Europe .
We wanted to find another time to discuss the matter .
But we were told that it would be better to do it today since a Council statement was scheduled and the debate had therefore been arranged for today when we set the agenda on Monday .
Then yesterday at 5.00 p.m. , when almost no one was in the Chamber , it was suddenly announced that today 's agenda had been changed and now we find ourselves in a situation where the debate on Kosovo is due to take place after the debate on the nuclear tests in India has been squeezed in .
A statement from the Council which is not followed by a debate is nothing more than a Council press conference !
Why do we need a European Parliament if contributions to the debate are banished to the night .
Mr Titley 's proposal really is the most acceptable compromise .
We are already very loathe to accept it , but what you have suggested is no compromise , it is simply the original proposal .
Mr Posselt , that would mean that Question Time would be cut short .
Madam President , I have only one thing to say .
Question Time has so often been shifted in the past because certain parties did not like the questions , that I would suggest the discussion on Kosovo should take place now .
That is simply the most logical solution .
It is a burning issue for us . And it is nonsensical that we should be dealing with a non-European matter instead of such a vitally important issue as the Kosovo question .
I would therefore strongly urge you to consider this solution .
Madam President , on a point of order .
Today the Presidents of the Federal Republic and Kosovo have agreed to meet in Belgrade .
That , of course , has caused quite a new situation .
It would be ridiculous to discuss that situation without the presence of the Council .
I follow Mr Titley 's suggestion that we postpone all of it , because there is no point in discussing this without the presence of the Council .
Many thanks !
If I have understood what you just said correctly , we can proceed as follows : We will introduce the debate on Kosovo and the speakers from the various groups will be allowed their previously allocated times .
I would , however , ask you to stick to these times .
We will have the first round and the rest of the debate will have to take place this evening .
Question Time will , however , be cut by the amount of time - some 15-20 minutes - which we require to do this .
On the agenda , Question Time starts at 5.30 p.m.
It will , however , be cut short and at 9.00 p.m. we will return to the order of business as scheduled on the agenda .
If you are in agreement I will take that as being decided .
Kosovo
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Kosovo .
Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to take part in this debate on Kosovo .
I got into some difficulty with your colleague on questions before when there was an attempt to rearrange the agenda .
I hope he will understand that part of this understanding is that the length of Question Time will be reduced because of the debate on Kosovo .
There is an increasing spiral of violence in Kosovo which is deeply worrying .
Hardly a day goes by without reports of new confrontations .
The Serb security forces are undoubtedly entrenched .
Involvement of the Yugoslav army , until recently keeping its distance , is a further worrying development .
The deteriorating security situation further underlines the urgent need for a political process involving full and unconditional dialogue .
It is a sad fact that increasing violence makes the goal of unconditional dialogue that much more elusive .
However , as many will recognize , there can be no other way to resolve the crisis satisfactorily .
The Balkans , as we all know , has already seen far too much bloodshed .
The international community 's rapid and firm response has sent a resolute signal that we are not prepared to see a return to the appalling acts which we witnessed in the Balkans at the beginning of this decade .
We have recognized that we were too slow to act in the past and we are determined not to make the same mistakes again .
The European Union has fully endorsed the measures taken by the contact group of countries which sent a tangible message to President Milosevic in Belgrade that the international community will not tolerate the brutal acts of repression and violence committed by his police and security forces in the province as at the end of February .
It is simply not credible for the Belgrade Government to justify such actions as legitimate counter-terrorist measures when so many women and children are victims .
At the same time , the European Union has made clear its firm opposition to the use of terrorism to achieve political goals .
It is now the case that the level of distrust between the two sides is such that for any process of dialogue to stand a realistic chance of succeeding , some form of international facilitation is clearly essential .
The European Union has therefore appointed Felipe González as its representative to the FRY to work in tandem with his mandate from the chairman-in-office of the OSCE as his personal representative .
Belgrade 's response so far to Mr González ' mission has been disappointing .
It continues to claim that Kosovo is an internal affair .
But we reject such claims .
There are serious human rights concerns and these have no boundaries .
The situation in Kosovo also poses serious risks to the security of neighbouring states and to the stability of the region as a whole .
The governments of those states which stand to be affected most , namely Albania and Macedonia , have taken a constructive approach to Kosovo which we very much welcome .
We recognize their concerns and will continue to work with them in exploring ways of preventing the situation in Kosovo from affecting their own security .
We have already increased the number of European Community mission monitors on the Albanian border with Kosovo and have also placed monitors in Macedonia .
It is our firm desire to see that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia takes its rightful place in the European family of nations and plays a full part in the international community .
President Milosevic has a clear choice .
Choose the path of peace and reconciliation through dialogue or continue down the path of ever-increasing violence and confrontation and face continuing and deepening international isolation .
Madam President , I gladly concur with the Presidency 's plea .
I would like to add that the Commission is also strongly convinced that solely a dialogue and negotiations , with the involvement of international observers or those who can facilitate the process , will offer the chance of a solution . It is therefore unacceptable that President Milosovic continues to take the position that this is an internal affair , and that all interference from outside can be rejected .
But at the same time it also means there is a risk that the conflict will escalate further , particularly after President Milosovic organized a referendum with a predictable outcome in which the population also turned against international interference , to call it that .
Then the international community will be left with two choices .
The first is to step up the pressure .
The Commission is in the process of implementing the decisions made within the Contact Group with regards to blocking the foreign assets of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , whilst at same time also stopping investment aid .
A proposal of this kind will soon reach the Council .
Secondly , the Commission has also set out which positive measures President Milosovic could obtain in the event of his being actively prepared to cooperate .
I am thinking of the support we would like to give to the implementation of the education agreement which has been drawn up .
I am thinking of the humanitarian aid which is still being given despite Milosovic 's political resistance .
But I am also thinking of the trade preferences which might be promised to Milosovic if he cooperates .
I am thinking of the technical assistance as part of the PHARE Programme which Serbia is not able to claim in the present circumstances .
I am also thinking of the trade and cooperation agreement which was offered to Serbia at the time , if they were to keep to the recommendations in the Gonzales report .
In other words , those who might feel that President Milosovic is not given any encouragement whatsoever to cooperate in a peaceful settlement of this conflict , should realize that there are plenty of offers on that point .
For that matter , I am also thinking of the American sanctions which could then be lifted .
And I am thinking of Serbia being readmitted to the OSCE and the United Nations .
In other words , a whole series of positive measures that could return Serbia to the framework of the international community , yet Milosovic 's interest in Kosovo still seems to have the upper hand .
Mr President , I conclude by observing once more that the European Union , too , should accept its responsibility in taking precautions where the protection of the borders of Albania and the former Republic of Macedonia are concerned . This is in fact the second precautionary measure the international community should take in this situation while there is the risk the situation might escalate further .
NATO is looking into the situation .
We know this .
We also think that the Western European Union should conduct an investigation and should come up with possible recommendations , so that we will not end up once again in a situation where we might have cross-border conflicts leading to great streams of refugees . The European Union might blame itself for not having prepared itself in time , let alone for not having taken measures against it .
Madam President , thank you for accepting the compromise proposal put forward by Mr Titley against his own best interests .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Commissioner , in principle I can endorse today 's two reports .
I would like , in particular , to underline the Commissioner 's words on the subject of the plan , what I as a parliamentarian would call a " carrot and stick ' approach , a plan which in all likelihood promises a positive outcome .
Not because we have any sympathy or support for Mr Milosevic , but because we must endeavour to do everything in our power to save the situation before the crisis escalates .
This is neither the time nor the place to go into the missed opportunities of the past .
On the other hand , however , it only makes sense if Mr Milosevic realizes what will happen if he follows a certain course of action .
And , Mr Commissioner , I would also like to lend my full support to your comments on the investment ban .
I believe it is true that the sanctions , which are hurting , have made time a more critical issue for Yugoslavia .
But sanctions only hurt if they are truly universal and are observed by everyone . Here the contacts with Russia are particularly necessary .
I would also like to endorse this plan on behalf of my group .
Sanctions must hurt , but on the other hand there must also be a pay-off , in the truest sense of the word , if Milosevic is prepared to operate a reasonable policy .
So our absolute support goes to Albania and FYROM .
I am delighted that the WEU has decided to become involved .
This is linked to the report which we have already debated at some length .
We must use all the measures available to us .
I also believe that the joint deployment of police forces would be very significant since the Serbian police do not enjoy a sufficient level of confidence and trust amongst the Kosovo Albanians .
Finally , I also believe that it is very important that we talk to the forces in Bosnia . As far as they are concerned , nonintervention in Albania , in Kosovo and in FYROM is tantamount to an invitation to stir up the conflict again .
For this reason I would like to give my support to the reports and above all to the package of measures which the Commissioner has outlined .
Madam President , for some time now Mr Uschkin Hoti , a Kosovo Albanian professor and a great European , has been languishing in a Serbian jail because years ago he dared to suggest a European negotiated solution for Kosovo .
In our resolution we call for his immediate release and we should take what he says as a warning .
This is not the sudden escalation of a conflict . Kosovo has been the scene of systematic discrimination , torture , expulsion and even genocide for years .
1989 started with a quasi-coup by Milosevic abolishing the autonomy of Kosovo in breach of the then Yugoslavian Constitution .
Today we can be in no doubt that it is Mr Milosevic who must bear the principal responsibility for what is happening , which is not individual cases of infringements of human rights , but crimes against humanity .
For this reason I am very grateful to Mr Swoboda for Amendment No 3 in which he gives voice to this fact .
Crimes against humanity can never be a domestic matter , even less so than infringements of human rights .
In my view , the rightful place for Mr Milosevic and his thugs is before the tribunal in The Hague , not in the negotiating room .
There can be no doubt that we must strive for a negotiated solution .
So the policy of the carrot and the stick is undoubtedly the right one .
Sometimes , however , I have to say that I would like to see a little more of the stick .
First and foremost , we must be clear that it will be difficult to get the better of Serbia with sanctions - as Mr van den Broek said very clearly earlier . What we must do is leave Serbia in no doubt that , if this genocide continues , it will end up alienating itself from the international community , with all the resulting consequences .
We need not only international observers , we also need international peace-keeping troops to monitor the return to autonomy in Kosovo , leaving the Kosovo Albanians free to come to an independently negotiated solution with Belgrade .
In truth , I do not believe that the current murders will stop until we decide to impose our presence in Kosovo through observers , through the long-planned EU office and , if possible , through peace-keeping troops .
As the European Union we should not shy away from taking independent initiatives .
Of course we need the contact group , but we should not allow ourselves to become hostage to it .
Anyone who followed the meeting of the G8 Foreign and Finance Ministers in London saw how the G8 collapsed because Russia was completely unprepared to back the measures . In other words , Moscow is choosing to turn a blind eye to the genocide .
We must be clear that this is quite clearly affecting the work of the contact group .
Which is why , in addition to the contact group , we also need to project a clear and unambiguous voice from the European Union .
Madam President , according to information I have received from Belgrade , an agreement was reached last night , with US mediation , between Presidents Milosevic and Rugova . Under this agreement , they are to meet in Belgrade and there , in private and without a prearranged agenda , they will discuss the framework for continuing intensive negotiations at lower levels .
I am surprised that Mr Henderson neither made any mention of this nor even appeared to be informed of it : in any event , he made no comment about it .
I believe that a very significant step has been taken here .
Milosevic has thus accepted that the Kosovo question is a federal issue and not merely a problem within the Serbian province .
Rugova , for his part , has renounced the demand for international participation in the negotiations - at least as far as the meeting in Belgrade is concerned .
I feel that Mr Holbrooke can be congratulated on his achievements .
The Council of the European Union and Mr Henderson will presumably be informed in due course of any concessions he may have had to make in order to bring about this agreement - in the form of reduced sanctions , for example .
The armed conflict in Kosovo that was mentioned by Mr Henderson has escalated .
For example , two police patrols were recently attacked , one of them in Pristina itself .
The road between Pristina and Pec has been blocked off , there are reports of artillery shelling of Kosovan villages , and new victims are being claimed every day .
Under these circumstances , the events there must be regarded as a low-level war , which poses a threat to peace and security throughout the region .
Clearly we hope that the negotiations between Milosevic and Rugova on freedom and autonomy for the Kosovo Albanians will result in a reduction , or better still a cessation , of hostilities .
We cannot be sure of this , however .
There is a risk that one or other of the parties in the conflict ( or both of them ) may want to exploit the negotiation situation or demonstrate against it by escalating the violence .
I know that I can rely on support from Parliament in urging the parties to refrain now from violence and in demonstrating through our actions that we wish to give both the negotiations and the peace a chance .
Madam President , I think the people of Kosovo are as worthy as the people of Montenegro . They should therefore be given a charter which matches this , but obviously within the confines of the new Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
I fear that without a formula of this kind no definite peaceful settlement will be possible . It is true , the acute problem is getting people around the table and getting them to accept that international mediation is appropriate .
In that respect , both parties have allowed opportunities to pass .
I fully support the comment that human rights and the rights of minorities can never be reduced to an internal affair . For that matter , the entire situation over there proves that there are immediate consequences for neighbouring countries ; think of Macedonia , Albania , and how they respond to it .
Secondly , I believe that , if we are talking about both encouragement and sanctions , we will have to be careful as far as sanctions are concerned . They must hit Serbia and not Montenegro as well .
It is difficult to carry out some economic sanctions towards a federation without all the parts of that federation bearing the consequences . This while Montenegro has a far more open attitude ; and I believe firmly that Montenegro 's offer should be incorporated in such a way that a solution is sought within the federation , and that everything is not made dependent on Serbia alone .
There is one specific point I would like to draw attention to . This is the problem of the presence of Albanian migrants and Albanian refugees in the Member States .
We all know that quite a few of these people are involved in buying and supplying arms which end up in Kosovo .
On that front many Member States are failing to seize a great many opportunities to gain contact with these Albanians , to organize meetings with them , and to show other perspectives and make these possible .
This is not an idealized picture ; a meeting like this took place in Germany with great success .
I think it would be very useful if , on this point , we were to try , as part of common policy , to give some proper direction to the difficult but real potential of the Albanians from Kosovo who are with us .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I have a number of questions .
There are a number of strange factors which make it seem possible that the UCK 's activities are in fact a giant stratagem , manipulated , organized and orchestrated by Belgrade .
Do the Council and the Commission have any information on the subject ?
Do they intend to carry out an enquiry into this question ?
Mr President-in-Office , you say that the Belgrade government is no longer credible .
Could it ever have been credible with Mr Seselj amongst its members ?
Question three .
As Mr Posselt said , the Kosovan leadership has sometimes shown certain weaknesses .
A number of its members , who are in prison , are nevertheless very important , intelligent people , whom we have been able to meet , to discuss things with .
They have been tried and sentenced under conditions one can only imagine .
In particular , Mr Hoti has shown that he has quite clear ideas about the future of Kosovo and the future of relationships between Kosovo and Serbia .
Have the Commission and the Council taken any steps to secure the liberation of Mr Hoti and other political prisoners in Kosovo ?
Question four . The European Union has a habit of intervening when a crisis has already broken out .
Is it not time to take measures before a crisis , to work to establish the logistics of a peacekeeping and a peacemaking force , to send observers directly to the borders between Albania and Kosovo and between Macedonia and Kosovo , and in any event , to prevent the Belgrade government from continuing to manipulate the situation ?
Madam President , fellow Members , the crisis in Kosovo - a consequence of the fibrillation to which the former Yugoslav world is still prey - risks , as in the case of Bosnia , turning into a tragedy , with its resulting ethnic cleansing and counter-cleansing .
The National Alliance delegation considers the real popular revolts which occurred in this region to be more the consequence of the illiberal and despotic regime in power in Serbia than a real desire to reunite with Albania on the part of the population of Kosovo which is of Albanian origin and culture .
However , the real supporters of European Union are overcome with a sense of helplessness when they consider that once again - faced with the prospect of an ethnic , and not only ethnic , war that could erupt in a region very close to us - Europe is finding it hard to be a valid interlocutor between the parties .
In fact an interlocutor , to be credible , also has to throw its political weight on the negotiating table and the possible consequences of the failed agreement between the parties .
And here we come to the crux of the problem with regard to the European Union , which , until it has a common foreign policy , no one , or almost no one , will have any weight to settle the conflicts , including those closest to its borders .
And thus we read about the attempts of the American mediator , Mr Holbrooke , who is meeting with the Serbian President Milosevic and the Albanian President while Europe is still discussing whether the crisis in Kosovo is an internal crisis of the Serbian Federation or can become a battle between States .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the National Alliance delegation considers that the institutional reform relating to the voting mechanism in the Council can no longer be put off , and therefore that unanimity must be abolished for foreign policy decisions .
The debate is adjourned .
It will continue this evening .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0464 / 98 ) .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are starting this Question Time 30 minutes later than stated in the agenda we all approved .
Now , just as we are about to start , and bearing in mind that we cannot extend this debate beyond 7.10 p.m. , I am being asked to allow two points of order .
I will permit them , because the Rules of Procedure say that I should do so .
However , I would ask you all to remember that the time used up on points of order detracts from the time available to people who have questions to ask .
Mr Sarlis , you have the floor on a point of order for one minute at the most .
Mr President , I am a registered speaker on Kosovo so please tell me when the debate will continue .
I understand and respect the fact that questions must take place , but you must tell us when we will talk about Kosovo since it is not possible - and I have been in the European Parliament for 9 years - to strike off speakers who have been announced and who have been approved by the party .
Please tell us the time during which the debate on Kosovo will continue and I hope that the President-in-Office of the Council will be able to organize his trips and his return accordingly so as to be present during the debate . But if he is not present we must still carry on with the debate .
Mr Sarlis , please listen to me .
You were here when we approved the agenda .
It is not the Presidency 's fault that we are behind schedule .
The debates will be resumed this evening at 9 p.m.
At the moment , Mr Sarlis , all I can offer you is the chance to start Question Time , two minutes later now than it already was .
So , Mr Sarlis , the debate will continue from 9 p.m. this evening .
Mr Dupuis has the floor on a point of order .
You have one minute .
Just a few words , Mr President .
In fact , I think there is some mistake , because we agreed that there would be a mini-debate with representatives of the groups and therefore an introduction by the Commission and the Council , a statement of the views of the various groups , and a reply by the Council and the Commission .
Otherwise , it would not make sense .
Yes , Mr Dupuis .
But you should raise this question with your group chairman , because it was not the Presidency which organized this debate but the chairmen of the various groups .
At the moment , all I can do is manage the time allocated to me .
And we are already behind schedule .
I can assure the honourable Member that I have spent the last 30 minutes waiting to begin Question Time .
I would ask you to raise your disagreements about the organization of our work with your group chairmen , because they are the ones who set the agenda .
The Presidents of the sittings only try to implement what they have been allocated . And sometimes , like now , we have the problem that you are not happy because you have been unable to contribute , and the Presidency is unhappy because of having been unable to start at the proper time .
Ladies and gentlemen , I now consider the matter closed and we shall begin questions to the Council , as I said , 33 minutes late .
We shall be unable to recover all the time we have lost , because Mr Henderson has to leave , and we Members of this House have other commitments .
Question No 1 by Mrs Ulla Sandbæk was to have been taken over by Mr Bonde , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
However , since he is not here , the question lapses .
Question No 2 by Lyndon Harrison ( H-0388 / 98 )
Subject : SMEs ' participation in the Single Act
Does the Council believe that the long-awaited Late Payment on Commercial Debt Directive and the recently published Venture-Capital Programme for SMEs will encourage these vital , job-generating agents to participate more decisively in the Single Market ?
Late payment inhibits the competitiveness of small and medium enterprises and acts as a barrier to small businesses participating fully in the single market .
The Commission transmitted a proposal for a Council directive to combat late payment in commercial transactions and presented its proposals at the Industry Council on 7 May .
The Council looks forward to discussion of the directive at a working group meeting before the end of the United Kingdom presidency .
The Luxembourg job summit of 20-21 November welcomed the initiative of the European Parliament on the strengthening of budgetary resources earmarked for employment and invited the Commission to make formal proposals , for speedy adoption by the Council .
On 21 April the Council gave its political backing to a package of up to ECU 420 million over three years for three strands of measures , including a venture capital facility run by the EIF to be targeted at an early start-up stage at SMEs with high growth potential .
The Commission has produced a draft paper on risk capital and job creation in the European Union , analysing the venture capital market across the European Union in comparison with the United States and concluding with an action plan outlining further work required at both Member State and European level .
The Council hopes that these measures will boost in particular the small and innovative firms which are so vital to growth and employment across the European Union .
I am very grateful to the President-in-Office for that very positive reply because I know that the British Government has made this a priority for its six months .
It may not be achieved now but I hope that it will be carried over to the Austrian presidency and brought to fruition , because this question of late pay really is the scourge of small businesses throughout the European Union .
Only recently , indeed this week , we have had the latest Grant Thornton report which demonstrates the enormous payment periods which still afflict small businesses in the southern states of the European Union .
But even in the United Kingdom half of invoices are still paid late .
50 % are deliberate and SMEs wait 50 % longer than big businesses to receive their pay .
If we can unlock this problem for small businesses in the European Union , the dividends in terms of jobs and getting our people back to work will be absolutely enormous .
I would like to thank my honourable friend for his supplementary .
It is a very important issue .
There are many small companies throughout the European Union who have believed that there are contracts that they could well take on but are often deterred from doing so because they feel that they will not be paid in a reasonable time period ; therefore they would end up with very difficult cash flow problems which could in some extreme examples put their businesses into bankruptcy .
If one wants to improve competitiveness generally within the European Union , which I would hope we all would want , this is an important area which we should tackle .
I hope that the draft directive will go a long way to improving the climate in which these small businesses operate and lay down clear guidelines to the larger sectors of the market that when they take on contracts with small businesses they should make the payments with in a reasonable period .
If they do , and if this directive helps them to do that , that will go a long way to improving competitiveness by boosting the small company sector .
I would like to welcome the President-in-Office 's response to my colleague 's question but pick up the part about venture capital .
This is a huge problem for small businesses .
The European Union says a great deal about its support for small and medium-sized enterprises , but it is exactly such a company in my constituency that has been having great difficulty in accessing money from the European Investment Bank precisely to expand and provide additional jobs in an Objective 5b area .
I would ask the President-in-Office if he could give me some assurance that it will be made easier for such companies to access such funding .
Thank you very much , Mrs Hardstaff .
Mr Henderson , as you can see , this Question Time is getting off to a good start because everybody is congratulating each other .
Let us hope you continue to receive just as many congratulations throughout the hour and ten minutes we have available .
Would you like to reply to Mrs Hardstaff 's question ?
I thank my other honourable friend for her further supplementary - which I think covers another aspect of this .
It does raise the important point that , given the initial difficulties that small and medium-sized companies have , which were highlighted by Mr Harrison , they have to have an assurance or a belief that they will be paid on time .
If they cannot raise the capital to finance a particular project which might involve additional investment then , even if they thought that the contract would be deliverable , and even if they thought that they would get paid , they might not be able to put enough cash up front to be able to make perhaps a minor modification to their equipment , or whatever , in order to be able to fulfil the contract .
Therefore any measure which helps a small company to be able to tap into venture capital is a very desirable measure , and I hope that we will be able to push this as far as we can , making the necessary progress to be able to give that additional support to the small company sector throughout the Union .
Question No 3 by James Nicholson ( H-0390 / 98 )
Subject : Disparity between the pound sterling and the Republic of Ireland punt
Does the Council recognize the disadvantageous trading position being faced by Northern Ireland traders at present as a result of the serious disparity between the pound sterling and the Republic of Ireland punt and will the Council give a view on when the present position can be alleviated and whether it will act to ensure equal and fair trading between both jurisdictions ?
The Council recognizes the importance of exchange rate stability for the effective functioning of the Single Market .
As recognized by the 1997 broad economic guidelines , sound macro-economic policy management creates the conditions for stable exchange rates within the Community .
Member States reaffirmed their commitment to pursue stability-oriented economic policies at the Ecofin meeting on 1 May .
Mr President , I would also like to welcome the President-in-Office here today and thank him for his answer - brief though it was .
The reality of course is that the difference between the pound and the punt has been as great as 22 % .
As Northern Ireland is the one part of the United Kingdom that has a land frontier with another European Union country , that difference is immense .
It is affecting retailers and petrol stations and is putting people out of jobs in the border areas between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland and is causing very serious damage to traders in that particular area .
I particularly wonder if the President-in-Office or his government or , indeed , the Council , would consider commissioning a study into the effects of this .
We are now approaching the time when the single currency will be introduced in the other Member States .
Taking into account the fact that the United Kingdom is not going to be part of that single currency and the Republic of Ireland will be , will he undertake to have a look at the damaging effects this will have on retailers and all the businesses in Northern Ireland , even though it is a crystal ball gazing exercise at this stage ?
The honourable Member raises an important point which clearly is felt by his constituents .
The exchange rate differences between the punt and the pound will have always had an effect on the border area between the Republic and Northern Ireland .
I can remember not so long ago when the relationship was quite the reverse .
I can reassure him that Ecofin is committed to monitoring the way in which exchange rate movements take place as we move into an era of the single currency and its relationship to the other currencies it affects .
I can also say - and this is not a matter for the Council - that the British Government itself will be monitoring the way in which there are movements in the economic situation between single currency countries and the United Kingdom .
That would obviously include the Republic of Ireland and the Northern Ireland part of the United Kingdom .
That is part of the process of monitoring the degree to which any convergence takes place .
The honourable Member will know that it is the stated aim of the United Kingdom Government that there should be a period during which convergence could take place between the economy that is determined by the pound currency and the economy which is determined by the single currency .
So there will be a monitoring by Ecofin .
But additionally , the United Kingdom Government will be conducting their own analysis .
That analysis they will , I am confident , raise in Ecofin , which will help to build part of a pattern for the Council to monitor .
Question No 4 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0393 / 98 )
Subject : Creation of a European agency for safety in civil aviation
What information can the Council provide on the possible creation of a European agency responsible for safety in civil aviation ?
In December 1996 the European Commission made a recommendation for a Council decision authorizing the Commission to start negotiations on establishing a European Aviation Safety Authority .
Since then the Council has been actively considering the issue .
The Council recognizes the need to achieve a high uniform level of aviation safety in Europe and therefore supports EASA 's establishment .
Council bodies are carrying work forward on the assumption that the Safety Agency will take the form of an international organization based largely on the joint aviation authority system .
Interested parties recognized at European level have been consulted and support the quick establishment of such a safety agency .
The Transport Council is expected to consider a decision on a negotiating mandate at its June session .
I thank the honourable Member for his supplementary .
It is a very obvious point .
It is a matter that has to be subject to the consideration of the Council .
There is a view that it needs to be as wide as possible so that the highest safety standards can be monitored , scrutinized and agreed over that wide area .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office whether at the conference , which as he said , is going to create such an agency , consideration will also be given to safety inside the aircraft .
For many years now there has been a decision that you could only take one piece of hand luggage into the aircraft .
I fly a lot and have noticed that this is not respected by most airlines .
It is one of the main factors of aircraft insecurity in the event of accidents or difficulties .
Does he intend to take steps to ensure that this particular problem is included in the negotiations and in the preparations for the agency ?
It really is a matter which should be for the airlines .
I know that I have been a sinner in that regard on a number of occasions : I have tried to take too many bags on and sometimes I have been told by the airline to leave the bag at the steps and it gets put in the hold .
This is one of the issues which could be covered by the Safety Agency .
The intention is that it would be responsible for all areas of aviation safety - specifically aerodromes and air traffic control - but it would certainly also cover the area suggested .
Mr President , as a pilot I myself am often in the air and it occurs to me that , contrary to what we may imagine , with Eurocontrol in particular , interfaces often do not meet safety standards .
I believe we need new standards legislation in this area to form the basis for a single European agreement based on the same software and hardware platforms .
Secondly , GPS has brought us new opportunities in navigation .
Not too long ago I was in Moscow where we will be getting another system in the form of GLONASS .
This heralds the start of a new era in navigation .
To what extent will this new agency 's remit include setting safety standards for future projects ?
The honourable Member has raised a very relevant point .
I would certainly hope that the remit of the Safety Agency would cover responsibility for looking at the impact of new technology in many areas of aviation safety , and a capacity to make recommendations on the testing of new technology and on requiring higher safety standards to be met .
Question No 5 by Alan Gillis ( H-0395 / 98 )
Subject : Money laundering
Given the illegal activities of non-resident registered companies in Ireland what action does the Council intend to take within the context of European anti-drug policies to persuade the Irish Government to close these companies which the government has admitted are involved in money laundering activities ?
A Council directive on prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering has been place since 1991 .
The Commission draws up reports on the implementation of this directive at regular intervals and submits them to the European Parliament and the Council .
The Commission has not so far submitted any proposal to change legislation on money laundering .
As for the specific question put by the honourable Member , the problem to which it refers has not been discussed within the Council 's bodies .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office .
I am very disappointed that this very important issue is not further up the agenda .
One could almost call it an outrage , in fact , given the hundreds of thousands of EU citizens - most of them very young people - whose lives are being completely destroyed by the drug barons who make themselves vast fortunes , assisted very often by inadequate company legislation .
Most of these young people go to a very early grave .
We in Parliament have made the whole drugs issue a top priority .
In view of this , I should like to ask the President-in-Office : does he not think that he should also make money laundering and the fight to combat drugs and drug trafficking a top priority , bearing in mind that the European Union has almost no borders now and there is free movement for these traffickers ?
I agree very strongly with the point the honourable Member raises .
Undoubtedly there is a link between the provision of drugs for drug abuse and money laundering from the profits of drugs and , indeed , sometimes securing the finances to purchase them in the first place .
I would say to him that if he believes that there is some way that current regulations are not being applied , he should draw this to the attention of the authorities .
The presidency has made the whole question of combating this trade in drugs and allied activities like money laundering a top priority .
The European Conference set up an experts ' group to look at how drugs could be combated across a wider area than just the European Union but also covering the countries which wish to accede to the European Union , some of which are often involved as transit countries from the source of drugs and are therefore linked in with the provision of the financial resources to purchase them or get profits out of them .
It is a top priority and I am sure that the Cardiff Summit will want to address this issue .
It has been a high-profile issue .
It is very much a people 's issue - parents and others throughout the whole European Union are terrified that their children might come into contact with drugs and end up as drug abusers .
I have no doubt that they will give full support to action the European Union - or any of the nation states within the European Union - can take to combat this evil trade .
I was the rapporteur on enlargement in Eastern Europe and internal security .
What we are currently seeing is that , due to the large privatization programme , coupled with uncertainties in terms of law and order , large scale money laundering is going on in countries wishing to accede to the Union , in some cases the laundering of money which comes from the European Union and is then transferred back to it .
Does the question of money laundering have a role to play in the structured dialogue with the countries of central and eastern Europe and in the preparations for accession ?
This issue was introduced into my report by Mr Schmid of the Social Democrats .
Countries wishing to accede to the Union must take energetic measures to counter money laundering prior to accession .
The honourable gentlemen is absolutely right that there is and should continue to be a dialogue between the Union and the countries that wish to accede to the Union on the whole question of combating this trade in drugs and the allied problem of money laundering .
I hope I can also reassure the honourable Member by highlighting the fact that as part of the screening process , there is a need for those countries which wish to accede to the Union to meet the Union 's acquis .
That covers the banking system ; and one of the elements of the banking system which is important in this is to follow banking regulations which , in very simple terms , require people to identify the source of large sums of money which they are depositing in the banking system .
I do not know whether that applies already in some of the countries which wish to accede to the Union .
It may in some areas , it may in some banks .
But , as a banking unit , that will form part of the screening in the banking area and can be an important protection .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the European legislation on money laundering to which you referred earlier does not apply in Gibraltar , does not apply in Jersey , does not apply in Guernsey , does not apply on the Isle of Man - though all of these are British sovereign territories - and does not apply in small countries such as Andorra , Monaco and the Vatican State .
Has the Council discussed how these loopholes , which are very important in practical terms as they represent the central concentrations of money laundering in Europe , can be closed ?
I do not wish to respond about the specific territories that were referred to by the honourable Member .
Without prior notice and a detailed analysis of the situation in each area , that would be wrong .
However , in general terms , I can say that it is very much in the interests of those offshore banking sectors that they meet the normal regulations that apply internationally .
If they are found not to be meeting those standards , there will be a loss of confidence in their ability to fit into the rest of the world banking system .
That would deprive them of a lot of deposits they would find attractive .
For instance , I know that on the Isle of Man strong efforts have been made to make absolutely clear that the level of regulation required there is the same as would be required in the City of London .
You can argue about the adequacy of the City of London 's regulation ; but the Isle of Man authorities , as one example , are very keen to ensure that is the case .
In Gibraltar too measures have been taken by the government to make sure they were able to reassure any potential investor that the same kind of international standards in banking applied there as applied elsewhere .
So there is an awareness by those authorities , for their own commercial interests , that they meet international standards .
That should be a reassurance for investors and should also be a deterrent for any potential money launderer who thinks he can have an easier ride there than in one of the banking systems within the main part of the European Union .
Question No 6 by David Bowe ( H-0400 / 98 )
Subject : Environment Council of 23 March 1998
Is the Council happy with the outcome of the Environment Council of 23 March 1998 ?
If not , why not ?
I am happy to report a very satisfactory outcome from the Environment Council of 23 March .
The Council reached four common positions , agreed four sets of conclusions and made good progress in a number of key areas such as climate change and air quality .
This work should make a valuable contribution to improving the quality of life for people in Europe .
A good part of this success was due to the availability in good time of Parliament 's opinions , thanks to the work of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection of which I know the honourable gentleman is a member .
I thank the President-in-Office for his compliments about the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I will relay them to my colleagues .
I would agree with the Council 's analysis of the first meeting of the Environment Council during this presidency .
It is an excellent step forward in shaking off the last vestiges of the image of the UK in particular as the ' dirty man of Europe ' .
However , I would like to ask what else - this is only the first step - will the presidency be doing or does it think it has already done during this presidency to achieve more in the field of the environment and completely sweep away this image of the UK as being ' the dirty man of Europe ' ?
I thank the honourable Member for his question .
The presidency and the Council at this time have taken the whole question of environmental improvement as a top priority .
In addition to the points to which I have already referred in my initial answer , I am also pleased that common positions on three directives on landfill , emissions from light vans and emissions of volatile organic components from certain industrial processes have been agreed .
There is now , I understand , an opinion from Parliament on those matters .
The Council also agreed conclusions on climate change which assess the outcome of the Kyoto Conference last December and set out the main priorities for work to be done on emissions trading and other matters before the next conference of the parties in Buenos Aires in November .
These are all important pieces of work which have been done to improve our environment throughout Europe , and I hope they will give a bit of momentum to the whole question so that the work can be carried on by the honourable Member 's committee and , indeed , by future presidencies of the Council .
I should like to welcome the President-in-Office to this other place and ask him if he shares my concern that the informal Council of Environment and Transport Ministers have indicated their desire to introduce a kerosene tax which would have dramatic effects on air travel ?
Would the minister not accept that , in fact , air transport is probably one of the cleanest , most environmentally friendly ways of transporting people and goods across Europe and that it would be wrong to target air transport in this way ?
Would he not also agree that imposing a kerosene tax , which I understand is the desire certainly of the Environment Department in the United Kingdom and others across Europe , would have a very detrimental impact on what is an environmentally friendly form of travel and on the local economies and those employed at airports and by airlines ?
It is always a great pleasure to receive a question from the honourable Member , whether it is in this Chamber or in another place .
I know she takes a keen interest in the matters we are discussing .
There is no question of the Union targeting a particular sector of economic activity and requiring that sector to make a larger contribution than other sectors to environmental matters .
The important principle is that all sectors of economic activity should , on all occasions , carefully monitor and scrutinize the environmental impact of anything they do .
Indeed , the Treaty of Amsterdam requires the Union to take cognizance of that in any of its measures .
I hope I can reassure the honourable Member that , at the moment , the matter to which she refers is a proposal .
All the various agencies which will be examining this proposal will be looking at what the effects are to see if the desired result would be likely to accrue .
When we have further analysis and further consultation , then I will be in a better position to be more definitive .
I am sure that the honourable Member will come back again , if not in this place then in another place , with a similar interrogation .
I know Miss McIntosh has to divide her time between two parliaments these days but I wonder whether she is aware that at lunchtime today this Parliament voted against the concept of a kerosene tax and the Labour Members of this Parliament supported that position on the advice of Her Majesty 's Government .
I wonder whether the minister would welcome that decision ?
Mr Henderson , you have the floor if you would like to reply to that question .
You have the right to reply or not to reply .
I invite you to take the floor , but this question goes beyond the precise scope of the original question . So it is up to you to decide whether or not to reply to Mr David Martin 's comment-cum-question .
Mr President , I cannot resist one of your invitations .
I say to the honourable Member that I was not aware of that decision , but it is something that will be taken into account by the Council in its deliberations .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 7 by Pedro Marset Campos ( H-0405 / 98 )
Subject : Situation in Palestine
In view of the unacceptable behaviour by the Israeli Prime Minister , Mr Netanyahu , during the recent visit by the EU Minister-in-Office , Mr Cook , does the Council not think that the European Union should adopt a firmer attitude , irrespective of the consequences , and demonstrate clear support for the Oslo peace agreements and the UN resolutions by urging Israel to comply with all UN and UN Security Council resolutions ?
What action is the Council planning to take in order to ensure that the Israeli Government adopts and complies with the UN resolutions ?
Question No 8 by Sören Wibe ( H-0414 / 98 )
Subject : Economic sanctions against Israel
The conduct of the UK Foreign Secretary , Mr Cook , on his recent visit to Israel / Palestine was extremely courageous .
The Israeli Prime Minister , however , showed no will to negotiate and acted very arrogantly .
Does the Council not consider that more practical action must be taken against Israel , possibly in the form of economic sanctions , to persuade them to respect the peace agreement ?
The Council 's approach to the Middle East peace process is firmly based on international legality , including United Nations Resolutions 242 , 338 and 425 .
The Council has , over the years , constantly been urging Israel to comply with these resolutions .
The Council believes firmly that the Oslo process and the principle of land for peace represent the best prospect for a solution offering justice for the Palestinians and security for the Israelis .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your answer , but I think it is inadequate , for the following reason . The State of Israel was created 50 years ago , and it is also 50 years since the UN committed itself to the Constitution of the State of Palestine .
Israel has a great ally - the United States , with its lobby - whereas Palestine should get special help from us , both for the sake of peace in the Middle East and for the sake of the future of the Mediterranean .
Does the Council not think the European Union should make more of a contribution , in order to have - as has always been the case - a vision of solidarity and scrupulous compliance with international legislation , in the face of Prime Minister Netanyahu 's actions , which place constant obstacles in the way of this peace process ?
I very much agree with the point raised by the honourable Member that there is a need and it is proper that the European Union should be involved .
Indeed , it has a responsibility to try to do what it can to resolve the various differences in the Middle East .
I cannot recall being at any Council meeting over the last year when there has not been a discussion of activities which could be undertaken on behalf of the Union to try to make a contribution to the peace process .
During the presidency there have been two visits to the Middle East , the second by Prime Minister Blair , resulting in a conference in London at which there was an attempt to take the peace process further .
The conference in London was important because it re-established the dialogue .
There is now an opportunity for a further dialogue to take place at the invitation of the American Government .
As I understand it , the remit which has been issued by the American Government is broadly acceptable to President Arafat .
At the moment steps are being taken by both the American Government , with the support of the European Union , to try to persuade Mr Netanyahu to also take part in those talks .
We have been aided by our special representative who has undertaken a lot of hard work on behalf of the Union in the Middle East in the recent past .
It is crucially important , given that we are the largest donors of aid to the area , that we also exercise our political obligation to try to help the peace process and continue to put the maximum pressure on the parties involved to try to broker a settlement .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office both for his reply and , above all , for the British Presidency 's efforts in this area , which I truly appreciate .
However , I still wonder - like Mr Marset Campos - whether rather more concrete measures are perhaps needed , in the form of political or economic pressures on Israel , in order to persuade it to take part in the peace process .
I would like to ask a concrete question : Has the Council during its presidency , for example , requested or demanded of Israel that it should permit the millions of Palestinian refugees who for generations have lived in refugee camps outside Israel to return to their former homeland ?
Has it , for example , also required of Israel that it should return the Palestinian properties that were stolen from the Palestinian people in connection with the 1948 war ?
I believe it is this type of concrete requirement that needs to be made in order to persuade Israel to modify its current dangerous behaviour .
I thank the honourable Member for his question .
On many occasions during this presidency the Council has tried to put pressure on the parties in the Middle East , including Prime Minister Netanyahu to try to persuade them to take action on the issue to which the honourable Member refers and indeed many other issues .
It is important to make progress little by little , if that is the only way that progress can be made .
Many who are involved or who have a knowledge of the circumstances recognize that there really has to be the kind of dialogue that tackles simultaneously the various political and economic questions so that there are steps forward as part of a package to which all the parties are committed .
The problem of trying to put emphasis on one part is that progress on a piecemeal basis is not always permanent and often leads to a situation in the near future where there is a regression from any advances that have been made .
That is why there is a need for a wider dialogue involving the political and economic issues .
We have been urging the Israeli Government to take part in this latest American initiative .
At least the dialogue is back - to some extent - on track after the London talks .
Question No 9 by Anna Karamanou ( H-0411 / 98 )
Subject : War scenarios in children 's electronic games
According to a recent investigation by the Greek newspaper , the war industries have found suitable territory for expanding their business enterprises in the games market with the aid of simulation technology .
Using war scenarios and simulated battlefields , children are trained in the techniques of war , the use of violence , in cunning and guile in order to become the ' super-warriors ' of tomorrow .
The deserts of Iraq and Kuwait are the settings for games such as Desert Tank , Super Battletank , M1 Abrahams and Desert Strike in which the players are called on to drive tanks and pilot helicopter gunships and destroy the hideouts of the ' non-Christian terrorists ' .
What measures will the Council take to protect the minds of children from all such profiteers and warmongers and how will it intervene to pass on to the new generation European peaceful values and a rejection of war and violence as a means of resolving differences ?
The Council has been examining two proposals on related subjects .
First a draft decision for a multi-annual Community action plan on promoting safe use of the Internet .
The action plan would promote several measures against violence and illegal material on the Internet including , firstly , systems for labelling or rating material according to its level of violence , for example .
Parents would be able to use the so-called filtering programmes which can block access to material which has been labelled as violent .
Secondly , hotlines for Internet users to report illegal material and enable law enforcement authorities to prosecute its originators .
Thirdly , other awareness-raising measures so that parents know what tools are available for protecting their children .
The Council is also examining a proposal for a recommendation on the protection of minors and human dignity in audio visual and information services .
The proposal recommends that Member States voluntarily establish national frameworks for the protection of minors in the fields of broadcasting and on-line services , in particular by encouraging the parties concerned - users , consumers , businesses and public authorities - to take part in developing and implementing measures for that purpose .
It also recommends the establishment of self-regulatory frameworks and codes of conduct at national level for on-line services .
I hope that the Council and the Parliament can continue to work closely together on both measures to make sure that they are adopted as soon as possible .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , from your answer I gained the impression that the issue is not being faced with the attention its seriousness demands .
It is not possible to treat as insignificant the fact that the education of the younger generation of European citizens has literally slipped out of the grasp of institutional bodies and is now in the hands of profiteers , especially those who benefit from the cultivation of violent behaviour among the young , and those who through video games and CD-ROMs - and I am not simply referring to the Internet - essentially involve our children in war scenarios and literally teach them war techniques , I would say , à la Ancient Sparta .
Every day we are witnesses to the increase in the violent behaviour of children and in criminality and I think that the Council must come up with more serious measures than just advice .
I thing that the existing legal system at the level of the European Union does not cover the issue , which I regard to be of vital importance . I also think that few markets are as dangerous as those of video games .
There is a relevant article in the January 1998 Economist which , Mr President-in-Office , I would recommend that you study .
I thank the Honourable Lady for her supplementary question .
I think she gives further emphasis to the need to take action .
I cannot really add to what I have already said on the action .
It is practical , but I know that there are many millions of people throughout the European Union who feel very strongly about this .
That is why it is important that we come forward with proposals to do what we can in a practical sense to try to create a better environment for technologies such as the Internet .
The honourable Gentleman raises two important points .
There is a very real point about parents being able to take action on the Internet to block material which they do not want their children to see .
I find it difficult to operate a video properly , and I usually have to get my son to show me how to work it , but that is very simple technology compared to the Internet .
It is a very real point , and maybe local public authorities could be offering parents advice on how they might come to grips with the technology .
On the question of what should happen to those who are the perpetrators of material which is in contravention of the law : if it is in contravention of the existing law , then it should be reported to the authorities , and it would be up prosecuting authorities throughout the Union to decide whether or not there was a case which they could take to court .
As to whether or not the situation changes after the Amsterdam Treaty , there is a further onus on the Community to make sure that any action it takes is non-discriminatory , and that is something which will be borne in mind in any activity that we take as a Union to try to counter the effects of some of those damaging products which are on the Internet .
Question No 10 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0416 / 98 )
Subject : Harmonized EU eco-labelling
Sweden is well endowed with reliable eco-labelling systems , having three of them , namely Bra Miljöval , Svanen and KRAV .
Eco-labelling has achieved a success in Sweden that is unparalleled in other EU Member States .
This is the result of conscious efforts by the environmental movement to stimulate demand for eco-labelled products and of the great interest shown by increasing numbers of consumers who are committed to protecting the environment .
The EU is preparing to prohibit Swedish eco-labelling schemes .
There is a new proposal for a directive , pursuant to which only the EU 's own eco-label , the flower , will be permitted .
Independent eco-labelling schemes , such as the Swedish Nature Conservation Society 's Bra Miljöval , are to be banned .
Despite the substantial efforts made since 1992 , the EU scheme still has no more than a handful of licensees .
Its drawbacks are so great that it has not been attractive to licensees or consumers .
Environmental organizations will reportedly no longer be guaranteed places in the Commission 's consultative forum .
In view of this , what will the Council do to stop the Commission changing things for the worse in relation to the environment ?
One aim of the Commission 's proposal for the division of Regulation 880 / 92 , which established a Community eco-label award scheme , is to ensure greater consistency and complementarity between that scheme and other schemes operating within the Community .
The proposal does not seek to prohibit other schemes operating at a national or regional level .
Rather , the effect of Article 11 of the proposed new regulation would be that within five years national schemes should be limited to those product groups for which there were no criteria established under the Community scheme .
The working group of the Council has held an initial discussion of the proposal , attended by representatives of the Commission , and this was one of the issues on which a number of Member States expressed concern .
There are no plans at present for further discussion of the proposal .
We have , of course , only today discussed a report on this question in Parliament .
During that discussion , Parliament backed demands that no deterioration should be permitted in the national regulations as a result of the introduction of EU regulations that are to apply throughout the territory of the EU .
It was stated very clearly that it must be possible after a period of five years to guarantee that the Community 's eco labels are at least as rigorous as the labels used in the best of the national eco-labelling programmes .
My supplementary question is : Does the Council support this decision of Parliament , and what other conclusions does the Council draw from the extremely positive debate that has taken place in Parliament today ?
As the honourable Member will know , and I thank him for his question , there has not been the necessary support in the Council for a similar proposal .
Whether or not the Council would accept modifications which are suggested by the honourable Member 's committee is something that I cannot comment on at this time - it was only adopted today .
But it is something which is before the Council and it will be for the Council and the Member States to make an assessment of the impact of the proposals on the general scheme of things and to see whether or not their original reservations have been met .
Question No 11 by Maj Theorin ( H-0417 / 98 )
Subject : Common military defence
The issue of common military defence and immediate integration of the WEU into the EU has been removed from the Treaty of Amsterdam , whereas humanitarian , peacekeeping , early warning and conflict-solving tasks have been considered to be important matters of common interest .
In spite of this , proposals concerning common military defence are constantly referred to Parliament .
Does the Council consider that common military defence will become a reality in the near future ?
After ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , the new Article 17 of the TEU will stipulate that ' the common foreign and security policy shall include all questions relating to the security of the Union , including the progressive framing of a common defence policy , in accordance with the second subparagraph , which might lead to a common defence , should the European Council so decide ' .
Subject to the adoption of such a decision by the Member States ' in accordance with the respective constitutional requirements ' , the new Treaty therefore describes common defence as a possibility left open for the future under the conditions set out in the article .
Upon entry into force of the Treaty this text will define the parameters of the Union 's handling of the question of common defence .
Thank you for answering my question .
The Council 's representative is absolutely right in stating that this is what the Treaty says , and it also says if the Council so decides .
That these words have been introduced since the Maastricht Treaty is , of course , also due to the fact that there are a series of countries in the EU that do not currently back a common defence policy .
And many have also made it clear that the Treaty of Amsterdam as it stands means that the question of a common defence has now been put aside for some time to come .
This applies to the UK , Denmark , Sweden , Ireland , Austria and Finland , all of whom say that they are not prepared to enter into a common defence policy in its present form .
As I interpret the situation , the Council 's reply to my question is therefore that a common defence policy is not on the agenda for the near future .
I would like to thank the honourable Member for her question .
I hope I can reassure her that the Council has currently a capacity to debate foreign and defence policy and , indeed , does so on many occasions .
But the articles to which the original question referred was a matter of common defence .
The position which was adopted in Amsterdam is a position which is acceptable to all the countries within the Union .
It is one which allows a debate , it is one which allows as much common action as is practical under the Petersberg tasks , where there is a need for activity to relieve a crisis or whatever .
The question of military defence is something which has to be determined in another forum .
There are different views on that matter .
There are different associations within the European Union on defence matters and I foresee in the near future no change in that regard .

Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
We have exactly 5 minutes left until the deadline we agreed on .
I propose a joint reply to Questions Nos 12 and 13 .
I am sure that with your customary conciseness and the discipline of Mr Newens and Mr Gahrton , we will be able to finish at 7.10 p.m. as agreed .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 12 by Arthur Newens ( H-0419 / 98 )
Subject : Iraq - UN Agreement
Would the President-in-Office make a statement on the way in which the recent agreement between the United Nations and Iraq on site inspections for weapons of mass destruction and for increases in the supply of food , medical and humanitarian aid is working out in practice ?
Question No 13 by Per Gahrton ( H-0455 / 98 )
Subject : The Iraq embargo
At an EU conference on humanitarian aid to Iraq held in early April , a member of the Commission , Mrs Bonino , directly attacked the Iraq embargo on the grounds of its anti-humanitarian impact .
Does the Council share Mrs Bonino 's view that the embargo is doing more harm to the innocent than to the Saddam régime ?
Is it prepared to initiate action to alleviate or lift the embargo ?
UNSCOM 's inspections of sensitive sites began again on 6 March .
All went ahead with full Iraqi cooperation , albeit with some bureaucratic delays .
Inspections of presidential sites followed shortly afterwards on 26 March and 4 April , proceeding without any major difficulties .
The United Nations humanitarian aid programme under Security Council Resolution 1153 will not come into force until the government of Iraq has submitted a distribution plan to the UN and that plan has been agreed by both sides .
Food and medicines have never been subject to sanctions .
Under the UN humanitarian oil-for-food programme , the Iraqi government is able to export large amounts of oil to fund the purchase of humanitarian goods .
Following the UN SecretaryGeneral 's recent recommendations for improving the oil-for-food scheme , Iraq will be able under the next phase of the programme to more than double the volume of its oil exports to USD 5.3bn over a six-month period .
The recent European Union meeting , which discussed the humanitarian situation in Iraq , demonstrated the continued commitment of the European Union and the international community to do all it can to help the Iraqi people .
Regrettably , this commitment is not shared by the Iraqi regime .
The regime has ample resources available to it under the UN humanitarian programme but chooses not to use them to help ordinary Iraqis .
The EU will continue to support the efforts of the UN to persuade the government of Iraq to deploy the resources available to it to best meet the needs of the Iraqi people .
The conditions for lifting the UN sanctions regime against Iraq are clear : when Iraq complies with all the relevant UN resolutions , sanctions can be lifted .
Does the President-in-Office accept , nonetheless , that the agreement made with Iraq by the United Nations Secretary-General has not led to any real increase in the level of imports of food and medical supplies , which are only at about a level of a third of the volume imported prior to sanctions , occasioning great hardship and many deaths which , of course , are partly the fault of the Iraqi dictator ?
Will he take up through the appropriate channels the serious bureaucratic delays occasioned by the United Nations Sanctions Committee and also the exclusion of a large number of items , including things like microscopes , eye glasses , spatulas , thermometers and vaseline , which cannot be considered as military supplies and are hitting the most vulnerable sections of the population , not Saddam Hussein and his particular clientele ?
I thank the honourable gentleman for his question but I have to say to him that it is Saddam who is using children to play politics .
The capacity has always been there for the Iraqi Government to have food and supplies for oil .
That was reinforced in the agreement brokered by the Secretary-General of the UN .
The opportunity is still available if Iraq meets the very reasonable terms which have been laid down .
The Council 's representative says that it is Saddam who is using children to " play politics ' .
All of us here are , I am sure , convinced that Saddam 's regime is a repugnant dictatorship , but surely it is rather too easy to blame everything on this regime .
There are , as we all know , reports from numerous humanitarian organizations , which in no way support the Saddam regime , about the dreadful consequences that have ensued as a result of the boycott .
My question was prompted by the fact that Commissioner Bonino has also realized that the effects are dreadful .
Nevertheless , is it not the case that the Council must take into account the real effects of the boycott and not simply blame Saddam ?
I would therefore like to pose the following question : Precisely what conditions need to be fulfilled ?
How are we to know that Iraq has fulfilled all of the UN 's conditions ?
How will we ever be able to prove that there is not a single illegal weapon in Iraq ?
While thanking the honourable Member for his question , may I say to him that the food and medical supplies for oil are available because the Council and our international allies in the United Nations are aware of the potential impact on a society of not having access to those important commodities .
That is why every effort has been made to enable Iraq to purchase the necessary equipment and supplies .
It is Iraq that has chosen not to meet the very reasonable conditions which have been laid down and reiterated by the UN Secretary-General in his recent proposal with the Iraqi Government .
The facility has always been available .
It is still available and it is up to Iraq to respond to a very reasonable position on behalf of their people who are desperately in need of those supplies .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
Ladies and gentlemen , since the time allocated to questions to the Council has now expired , Questions Nos 14 to 38 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
I would like to thank Mr Henderson .
Mr Papakyriazis has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , the point of order I want to raise is obvious . I wish to express my concern and make a protest , since we did not have the time to examine more questions .
I naturally understand your position and fully respect it , but this is the reality . I also take into consideration the fact that a debate such as the one on Kosovo is a very serious reason for this delay .
However there is a point at issue , and I hope that you realize this . I would like to ask a question which is not simply rhetorical but fundamental : if I consider that my question is timely and serious and , given that its debate has been adjourned for this specific reason , can I bring it up again at the next sitting ?
Mr Papakyriazis , I have two things to say .
Firstly , the agenda is set at the meeting of group chairmen .
So I would be grateful if you would address your complaints about the agenda to your representative at those meetings .
This Presidency had to wait half an hour today before being able to start Question Time .
So I would be extremely grateful if you would address any comment you might have on the matter to your group chairman , since I am only responsible for the implementation .
The second point is that if you withdraw your question you can reformulate it .
But if you do not withdraw it , it will be answered in writing , as I said earlier , within the next 48 hours .
So , Mr Papakyriazis , you have the choice of receiving a written reply within that period , or of withdrawing your question . In the latter case , it would be entered for Question Time again , but I can give you no guarantee that it would be dealt with here in this Chamber .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Euro-Mediterranean cooperation ( continuation )
The next item on the agenda is the continuation of the joint debate on oral questions to the Council and the Commission on Euro-Mediterranean agreements .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , this morning 's news headlines ran as follows : " Palestinian in Jerusalem stabbed by Jewish extremists and bombing of southern Lebanon by Israeli air force with four civilians dead ' .
Such is Mr Netanyahu 's style of peace process .
Let us not deceive ourselves : the peace process between Israel and Palestine has reached a deadlock , if indeed it exists at all any more .
The Oslo Agreement , the foundation of this peace process , is no longer being respected by the Israeli government .
We must take note of this fact as it has a drastic effect on the whole EuroMediterranean Partnership .
At the beginning of the Partnership we tried to separate the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership from the peace process .
I hope that it is now clear to everyone that this is not possible .
If we want to make progress in the EuroMediterranean Partnership we must get involved in the so-called peace process .
Then , when Israel and Palestine are negotiating , we must have a say .
A second point which has concerned us recently , and which is also closely linked to the Barcelona process , is Algeria .
The European Parliament delegation has , as I see it , opened a door of dialogue with Algeria .
This Parliament now also sees many things in a new light , particularly as our colleagues who were there and who have presented us with a detailed report have now been able to correct a considerable degree of false information .
We must proceed resolutely down this path .
We must seek cooperation with our colleagues in the Algerian National Assembly and assist them in continuing the process of democratization in Algeria , which was begun successfully by means of the elections .
We cannot do much but we should be prepared to do what we actually can do , which is to help Algeria by taking on its concerns , by being prepared to work together with the Algerians , for example by fighting terrorism , not in Algeria but in our own States , in Europe .
So far we have been very negligent in this area and we have allowed terrorism to flourish here .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , this is indeed an important sitting of the European Parliament , insofar as it is concerned with the future and the significance of the MEDA programme and its relevant aspects .
There is no doubt that both this programme in its entirety and the relevant MED programmes are an important - perhaps the most important - tool for the success of Mediterranean policy . This is a policy - and you , Mr VicePresident of the Commission , have said it yourself on many occasions this morning , and I agree with you - which faces problems , mainly due to the fact that there are flashpoints in the important area of the Mediterranean .
There is no dissent , on the contrary I think that there is agreement in this Chamber , that the MEDA programme must not only move forward but must also cover the largest possible spectrum with regard to the Mediterranean .
Nor is there any doubt that the contribution of the MEDA programme to finding political solutions , together with what can be achieved through the MEDA programme , may be significant .
However these flashpoints , in Turkey , in Cyprus , in the Middle East and in Algeria , which typify the Mediterranean at this moment , cannot be tackled simply using financial means ; political solutions and political proposals are necessary .
I direct this remark to the Council .
It is not enough to complain about the fact that problems exist .
It is not enough to realize that we are often not present .
We must go one step further .
We must put forward proposals and these proposals can be put forward .
We often speak about the Middle East question and we will speak about it on many more occasions .
It is an important issue .
However it is not enough just to ascertain that there is an issue , we must put forward concrete proposals to cover not only the bilateral relations between Israel and Palestine , but the remaining countries in the region such as Syria , the Lebanon and Jordan .
These are countries which are important factors in peace and stability in the Middle East .
We speak about Algeria and we will speak about it on many more occasions , and I agree with Mr Sakellariou that the European Parliament has opened a large door . It is now in the hands of the Council and the Commission alike - and , Mr Commissioner , I welcome the fact that you have sent a group to Algeria - to turn this opening to practical advantage .
It is not enough to say that Islamic fundamentalism is an anathema .
We must find the right way to combat it .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , today , as in 1972 , we are proposing general cooperation or financial aid for the Mediterranean , this time of course at somewhat higher levels .
Now , as then , however , in the wider Mediterranean region , political issues and claims are emerging in the face of which the European Union continues to be helpless or inconsistent , cowardly or absent , even though now of course it is proposing some vague dialogue .
Nevertheless , in Algeria it is being sought , in the Western Sahara it is absent , in the Middle East it is essentially a spectator , and in Cyprus it is politically downgrading its original constructive involvement . Towards Turkey at times it takes " a tough stance ' without any obvious effect , and at other times it tolerates the unacceptable interference of this country in the internal issues of the European Union , such as with the recent singular veto which Turkey imposed on Community programmes on islands inhabited by Greeks .
I do not need to go on . I think that as long as there is no real common foreign policy to guarantee security , integrity , peace , freedom and co-development , today 's attempt will run the risk of failing in the same way as the attempt in 1972 , which we called " Overall Mediterranean Policy ' , somewhat ironically perhaps .
I would inform you that I have received seven motions for resolutions , submitted pursuant to Article 40 of the Rules .
Mr President , I just want to reply briefly to what was said this morning .
Do not lose sight of the fact that , when all is said and done , the Euro-Mediterranean programme of the Barcelona Conference is barely two years old . Such a long-term programme as the creation of a free trade area is going to take much longer than that , and these two years have been the initial phase , with a lot of teething problems .
As I said before , do not forget what the situation was like before , and where we are now .
In the first year of the MEDA programme 's implementation , the European Parliament decided to establish a negative reserve of 20 % .
Last year it was 10 % .
This year there is no negative reserve .
Also , the decentralized cooperation programmes for the Mediterranean , which had caused problems , have been relaunched .
In other words , we now have the MEDA programme completely operational for the first time .
A lot of things are still not working properly , of course , but the important thing to know is that the programme has now reached cruising speed .
Furthermore , we cannot overlook an obvious aspect , which Mr Sakellariou and the rest of the speakers have mentioned .
While the lack of peace in the Middle East continues to contaminate the Barcelona process , we can work properly on the second pillar , that is , the association agreements .
However , we cannot work properly on the first pillar - security , peace and stability , confidence measures and the Mediterranean Charter - for obvious reasons .
As for the third pillar - sectorial conferences and civil society - our work is very difficult . As you know , last year we had to cancel at least three sectorial conferences because some people came but not others , and some people would not come if certain other people did .
So this is a very serious matter .
I hope that between us , on 6 June at Palermo , we will be able to resolve this situation .
What the European Commission is trying to do is precisely to separate the Barcelona Conference from the ups and downs of the peace process , because all the while people are reproaching each other , it is very difficult to get on with the day-to-day work .
Thank you , Commissioner Marín .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at 12.00 noon tomorrow .
Kosovo ( continuation )
The next item on the agenda is the continuation of the debate on the statements by the Council and the Commission on Kosovo .
Mr President , I rise , not in the normal way to contribute to the debate , but because earlier this afternoon the debate on Kosovo was curtailed and there was a certain degree of chaos because we were trying to get the statements from the President-in-Office of the Council and from the Commission , and contributions from Members of the political groups .

During that melee Mr Cars asked a question of Mr Henderson , the President-in-Office , about a meeting he had heard about between Mr Milosovic and Mr Rugova to try and resolve some of the problems in Kosovo .

Mr Henderson was not able to respond to that point by Mr Cars .
He has asked me to confirm that such a meeting will be taking place and that the presidency has , late this afternoon , issued the following statement :
' It is good news that Milosovic and Rugova will meet face to face on Friday .
This meeting has been made possible by the sustained pressure from the EU , the contact group and others in the international community on both sides over the last two months for a meaningful dialogue to begin .
We have all called for President Milosovic to line up clearly behind the necessary political process .
We now look to both sides to make full use of this opportunity for constructive political dialogue , particularly to the authorities in Belgrade , given their primary responsibility as a government to seek a negotiated solution . '
I am sure this Parliament will respond enthusiastically to this news as it is exactly what we were pressing for .
Mr Henderson has asked me to indicate that he apologises for not replying directly to Mr Cars , but this was a consequence of the circumstances .
But I understand that this single meeting in Belgrade will be followed by negotiations in Pristina within one week and that there will be weekly meetings thereafter .
Therefore this is a major breakthrough in the dispute .
It is exactly what Members of the European Parliament were demanding .
I would inform you that I have received seven draft resolutions , submitted pursuant to Article 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Competitiveness of European industry
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A4-0138 / 98 ) by Mr Caudron , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the competitiveness of European industry ( SEC ( 96 ) 2121 - C4-0025 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is often thought fashionable to bemoan the supposedly poor performances of European industry .
Having reached the end of my report , which I began a few months ago , I can and will say that this is not fair and , indeed , it is in many ways very unfair .
Of course , this evening , at the end of all this work , there is no question of my not being aware of or not mentioning our weaknesses .
I will mention five of them in particular .
The first is the inadequacy of our investment , both public and private , in recent years , which has undoubtedly curbed both innovation and gains in productivity in our industry .
Our second weakness is our serious shortcomings in the area of information technology and in the production of computer goods as well as in biotechnology .
Our third weakness is a tax system which is cumbersome , often unfair and which often curbs competitiveness in our industry .
The fourth is European industry 's poor visibility regarding its competitors , be they American or Japanese .
The fifth is for example the great difficulty which all of our societies have in adapting to all technological change , and this applies to all sectors and all people .
These problems are important and require , both on the part of the European Union and on the part of the Member States , the adoption of clear , readable and simple measures which are timed appropriately .
In my report I propose some of these , basing them on two main areas .
The first of these areas involves the changes necessary in the environment of European industry , for which I have seven proposals .
First , the implementation of a global economic policy for the European Union , coordinating the economic policies of the Member States .
Of course this is already underway but we can do a great deal more in this area .
Second , the coordination of fiscal policies , particularly in order to fight against all forms of fiscal dumping and all other forms of deregulation .
Third , the modernization of our Member States ' public administrations in an effort to achieve administrative efficiency , which is undoubtedly one of the key factors in improving the business environment , and to return to a genuine notion of public service .
Fourth , the strengthening and improvement of the Internal Market in line with the advent of the euro which , as we all know , will play a very important role and will at the same time be an excellent lever of European citizenship .
Fifth , the European society statute , which must at last be removed from the midst of the decision-making network in order to further the constitution of large European groups , large industrial groups .
Sixth , a commercial policy for the Union which would no longer be embryonic and which would , in particular , allow our competitors in the rest of the world to respect the rules of international competition .
Seventh , finally , and without putting in doubt our drive in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises , we should not forget that , like small and medium-sized enterprises , large companies have an important role to play in the development of the world economy , nor should we forget that research and technological development depend to a high degree on large companies who alone have the means to place themselves at the forefront of the research / development process .
The second area involves proposals which affect the internal adaptability of the company .
First , the introduction of information technology on a massive scale .
The computer must become a universal tool in relations within a company , between companies and between business and the public .
Second , the issue of training . Greater consideration must be given to this , particularly by company managers ; furthermore , it would be possible to integrate this training into the procedures currently under discussion with regard to reducing working hours .
As for these arrangements for reducing working hours , we are aware of the debate which divides us to a certain extent and I , personally , would like to say that if , in my capacity as rapporteur , I cannot support the GUE 's amendment on this issue , then as a French socialist I support Amendment No 4 of the Confederal Group of the European United Left .
Third , businesses must be capable of adapting to the market fluctuations to which they are subjected .
Incidentally , the solution , which involves quite simply eliminating regulations in order to make the labour market adaptable , this solution or these proposals are neither realistic nor socially acceptable and I believe that we can only give businesses the chance to adapt if and when salaried employees are guaranteed a solid base of social entitlements and assurances regarding the sharing of the benefits of growth and progress .
Finally , as a fourth and last point , as product life cycles are becoming increasingly short , protection by means of patents in Europe must incorporate new data .
A rapid reform is required here .
These , ladies and gentlemen , are the results of my own reflections and of our joint efforts , both in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and via the Internet , which helped me a great deal in drafting this report .
I do not claim to have done a revolutionary piece of work ; I hope simply to have brought the debate forward and to have widened it , to have removed it from the traditional confinement of 2 or 3 points which are ideologically difficult or too difficult .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Caudron for his excellent proposals .
European industry still represents production processes , professional skill and experience at the highest level .
Scientific and technical know-how are also top-notch , but we lag behind in information technology , and especially in the area of applications and content .
So training , brainpower and diversity will also be essential elements in economic competitiveness .
For this reason , we must pay special attention to the development of training schemes , support for teachers and creating an innovative environment .
High level research in Europe also needs to be improved in terms of effectiveness , so that we do not lose our researchers , for example , to the hard cash research institutes and universities of the USA .
Increased competitiveness in industry and improved productivity cannot really happen at the expense of cutbacks and flexibility in the labour markets .
Europe will not be competitive as long as it is struggling with the problem of unemployment , which is a waste of human resources .
Europe 's strength lies in the diversity of its peoples and cultures .
We have better education systems , equality and social security .
These are the basis of a sustainable information society .
The production of content in the information society is the area of business that is developing fastest .
Europe should set up multiform and flexible networking bases , where content industries could be developed through invention , innovation and research .
They should be simultaneously both local and global .
Productivity in the European economy seems to hinge very much on the investment stage .
Public sector investment has , in particular , been at a staggeringly low level .
The Commission should put forward a proposal to create a framework for a new European industrial policy .
I expect guidelines based on measures to promote public and private investment .
We must also be able to target action and risk financing at those innovative sectors of industry that are creating jobs .
Similarly , the burden of taxation has to shift from the shoulders of the workforce to such areas as , for example , speculative currency dealing .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Caudron on the open-hearted manner in which he has accepted points of view and incorporated them into his report , which we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy have considered at length and with great care .
I would also like to express my appreciation of the efficiency and prudence he has shown in seeking the views of industry and also being influenced by these views .
I would also like to congratulate the Commission on the sound and straightforward account that we now have of the situation we find ourselves in .
Competitiveness needs to be analysed at global level , precisely as the Commission has done .
It is also important to discuss the competitiveness of European industry because it provides the basis on which we build a large part of our prosperity .
The greater part of the EU 's exports are industrial goods .
Industry has a decisive role to play for large sections of the knowledge-intensive service sector .
We in the PPE group are satisfied that there is agreement on the analysis of the importance of a good operating environment and incentives .
At a time when changes are occurring at an ever increasing pace , a long-term , predictable and sustainable regulatory framework is an essential prerequisite for an improved commercial and industrial climate .
In our view , additional investments , special rules for certain sectors and a selective economic policy are ineffective and costly and will , in the long term , destroy entrepreneurial activity .
The structure of tax systems , employment legislation and infrastructure in the broadest sense are crucial for growth , employment and competitiveness .
At the very least , this means that the present barriers to growth in small companies must be removed .
Structural reforms are required .
Globalization of the economy increases the need for reforms .
As previously mentioned , most of the amendments tabled by our party grouping were adopted . However , we would like to have seen greater emphasis placed on the importance of better functioning markets , in which measures against the distorting impact of state aid and monopolies must be intensified .
Exposure to competition must increase with improved observance of public tendering and privatization , along with continued liberalization and deregulation of markets .
I am saying this because it is important for the business sector as a whole , as well as for industry .
The problems are well charted and the Commission 's document , which we welcome , is an important piece of homework , not least for the EU Member States .
But we cannot afford to waste time : this task must be carried out now - especially if we are serious about mastering unemployment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague Mr Caudron 's report reflects the view of the competitiveness which the Commission defends and is trying to impose horizontally .
This kind of competitiveness is based on increasing and apparently limitless adaptability of wages , that is to say employees , in an ever-widening deregulation of the market , and especially of the work-force , and the acceleration , if that were possible , of the privatization process , following the example of the United States with its wage dispersion and lack of social protection , and on doubts about the advantages and costs of reducing working hours .
It is true - and I congratulate Mr Caudron on this - that his report has many positive , that is to say moderating , features : the improvement of professional training , more support for research and innovation , criticism of a strategy based only on labour flexibility , the need for and the importance of public investment , and the preservation of publicly-owned and public service companies .
We should very much like the framework to be less submissive and the strategic moderations and corrections to be more forthright .
It is in that frame of mind that we have submitted some amendments which we hope the rapporteur will accept , although we have already had some replies , not all of which were positive , but , in any event , I think those that have been accepted can improve this report even further .
My compliments to the rapporteur .
Mr President , I believe that to say that the report is very cautious and unsystematic is to do Mr Caudron an injustice .
Nevertheless , we should remember that this problem was discussed in all its detail and all its contradictions in the Delors Report of 1993 , and we should also remember the tenth chapter where a strategic conclusion - that of the need for a new development model - was at least hinted at .
In my opinion , before beginning the debate we have to redefine at least two things , and despite his many sensible ideas Mr Caudron was not able to remedy this .
The first is the term " industry ' , which can be defined in many ways , perhaps as the demarcation of industry and the craft trade in terms of repairs , or perhaps as the development of new branches of the industry which no longer resemble the old ones , such as in terms of contents production , the information society or the transport / telecommunications sector which give the term " industrial structure ' , which Mr Caudron rightly uses , a whole new meaning .
Secondly , we must consider more carefully the importance and meaning of the term " competitiveness ' .
It is not simply a question of costs ; it is also a question of quality and particularly of benefits for others ; it is not so much a question of export surpluses , in any case not in a large European Economic Area whose export quota is under 10 % .
Mr Caudron addressed real problems : for example , the lack of investment .
But I believe that we should not conceal the fact that it is linked to a situation in which for the last 15 years cost cutters have had control of both the private and public spheres and this has had devastating results .
It should also be noted that , as far as the technologies of the future are concerned , Europe is currently giving away the lead it had , and to a certain extent still has , in environmental technologies .
Because of this I , as a member of a small parliamentary group , wish simply to quote the great axis analysis strategy which could alternatively be applied and which in some ways agrees with what Mr Caudron proposed but is further-reaching .
First of all , at a European level , we urgently require something like a gouvernement économique which then also takes control of the various dimensions of dumping - fiscal , social , ecological - and , by means of a new policy relating to market economics , sets new conditions of development .
We then need a renewal of the European model of society and consensus , which itself is a condition for innovation and also a factor of productivity .
If complaints are being made about a lack of innovation we should not forget who caused it .
I think it was neoliberal deregulation policy which caused it ; this frightens everyone and prevents innovation .
The third requirement would be a necessary axis of social and ecological reconstruction as a systematic exploitation of technologies , procedures and resources appropriate for the future , moving towards a revolution in efficiency and sufficiency and a refocusing of the economy on local and regional requirements .
This would finally be a practical discussion , unlike the quite old debate on the question of whether we should have an industrial policy or the debate brought up again by Mrs Carlsson about the purpose of deregulation , as those are the wrong debates .
Mr President , two minutes is a very short time to discuss a subject of this importance but I thank Mr Caudron for his excellent report which places Community industrial policy among the principal areas of European construction .
Mr Caudron 's report opens several areas for consideration .
I will mention only two or three of them .
First is the importance which we must attach to the way in which SMEs and large industrial groups are complementing each other increasingly .
We all know that SMEs in Europe , of which there are approximately sixteen million , are the main vehicles of job creation today and that for the most part they depend on or cooperate with the large companies .
In my opinion we must therefore encourage synergy and - why not ? - work towards creating a statute for European society which would make it more efficient in terms of international competition .
With regard to the second area of consideration , I believe that this development must be accompanied by an obligation on the part of the Union to promote research , innovation and training , which are prerequisites in the fight against unemployment and in social advancement , assisted also by technological progress .
This brings us to the question of the financing which would be required to achieve these goals , from both public and private capital .
I think that venture capital offers concrete ways in which we can contribute to the development of the companies which are in the process of innovating .
Perhaps today we should have an impartial approach to the issue of pension funds and their contribution to economic development and employment .
Of course this would require a strict professional code of ethics as these funds are also supposed to go towards the payment of pensions .
I would have liked to discuss working hours and the reduction of these hours but I do not have enough time .
I believe , however , that it is a major problem because , quite simply , it concerns employment .
We must above all avoid being strict to the point of reaching deadlock .
Everything in life is in constant motion and the organization of work today , in particular in terms of the number of working hours , needs and will need to be adaptable and flexible , even up to a period of one year .
I would have liked to discuss the harmonization of tax systems and many other areas which agree with Mr Caudron 's analysis , which my group will of course support .
Mr President , the discovery that , given the same level of growth , the United States creates more jobs than Europe , either with a higher or a lower net product , is fundamental .
With unemployment of 18 million a direct relationship must be established between competitiveness and job creation .
A competitive industry simply creates more jobs .
The field in which Europe , both at Community and national level , has a genuine need to catch up , is industrial research .
Our efforts must be concentrated much more on commercial realizability .
Due to flaws in the coordination of research policies in the Member States , some of the most valuable synergy effects are lost .
Particularly in the area of information technology , a research and development policy with excellent coordination and funding could make a significant contribution towards improving the competitiveness of European industry .
Mr President , Mr Caudron addressed seven points from his report .
I shall address three matters that are not included , but should have been .
The first concerns the reason why during the past five years the USA has enjoyed higher growth than Europe .
I am rather surprised that no one has mentioned the obvious fact that the USA has not had a convergence programme .
The USA has not had the same strict monetary policy as Europe .
Nor has the USA been so intent on combating inflation .
My second point concerns taxes .
In the report taxes are mentioned only as something which hampers growth and productivity .
The only theory to support this approach is the one stating that taxes reduce people 's desire to work .
But surely this theory can scarcely apply to the present situation in Europe .
Whatever it is that the 20 million unemployed have , it is surely not a lack of desire to work !
I believe it should have been added here that taxes are returned to the citizens , either in the form of benefits or in the form of aid to the public sector , and that taxes therefore help to increase demand , which is , after all , the major motivating force behind innovation .
Furthermore , I feel that reference should have been made to the significance of the increasingly uneven distribution of income .
A rich man has a marginal propensity to consume of almost zero , while the propensity to consume of a poor man is almost one .
When the distribution of incomes becomes increasingly uneven - which is unfortunately what is happening in Europe today - what we get is an automatic reduction in demand .
This in turn reduces production and growth , and therefore also innovation .
I would like to have seen these three points included in both the rapporteur 's report and the Commission 's original statement .
Mr President , first I wanted to congratulate Mr Caudron on his interesting report , which is a valuable contribution to our reflections on the competitiveness of European industry .
Because our society 's first priority is employment , and let us not forget that within our society , industry is the basis for growth , wellbeing and the creation of employment around us .
So the competitiveness of European industry is a basic necessity for our socio-economic model itself and for the very wellbeing of European society .
The single currency is going to favour this competitiveness because , on the one hand , it creates stability for investment , consolidates the internal market and decreases exchange costs for businesses and , on the other hand , it brings low interest rates too , which also help to improve the funding and competitiveness of European business .
All of that is necessary but insufficient because we are also in a climate of globalization , which has to be seen as an opportunity but which requires European industry to be competitive and to adapt more quickly .
And the truth is , we cannot compete on the basis of a flexible labour market and an overall reduction in the total wages bill as the basic premises of this competitiveness .
We have to look for other sorts of measures to ensure that European industry can take advantage of the opportunity provided by this globalization . To do so , we need measures such as , for example , strong support for innovation .
In Europe at the moment , we are very advanced in terms of basic research , but it requires an effort to translate that into industrial innovation , the product and the production process . We have to take steps to build that bridge , to allow competitiveness to improve .
We have to support the coordination of economic policies - including fiscal policies - to create a climate that will favour investment and competitiveness in European industry .
We also have to support a framework of European industrial policy which can , for example , contribute aspects such as those mentioned by Mr Sainjon , to create synergies - incentives to create synergies between European small and medium-sized enterprises - innovative financial instruments for the fundamental promotion of risk capital development , so that innovation can progress .
I also think that a competition policy like the one being implemented is a positive measure .
I will end by saying that , basically , we need training for our human resources .
At the moment , energy can be bought , technology can be bought and moved around , raw materials can be bought and moved around , but our competitiveness and our future fundamentally depend on our people .
So : training , training and training should be our objective for the sake of competitiveness .
Mr President , the Commission 's initiative and Mr Caudron 's report are both of the most immediate relevance to the competitiveness of European industry , and I therefore commend it .
This is the only way of promoting competitiveness in a world where frontiers are being progressively opened up , to everyone 's advantage .
It was important in the first place to put the problem into perspective . The rapporteur is right to underline in his explanation of his thinking that the recent predominance of the market should not lead us to abandon ' public action at regional , national or European level ' .
Furthermore , it was precisely in this decade that the Maastricht Treaty had a chapter on industry inserted in it , not prohibiting public involvement in production ( with a few rare exceptions ) , but making it clear that public involvement is essential to the removal of imperfections and the creation of external economies . This is the only way we can hope to exploit to the full the possibilities the market offers .
The reference to nations at regional and European level should , however , have been reflected in the recitals and paragraphs of the resolution , defending structural policies which , by promoting less favoured areas , help to promote aspects of competitiveness which have hitherto been less developed ( since the only justification for regional policy was then social and political ) .

Without in any way denying the importance of the major groups and alliances , such as referred to in nº 22 , for example , and as mentioned by Mrs Carlsson and Mr Sainjon , we also consider that emphasis should have been placed here - or in another paragraph - on the role of small and medium-sized businesses ( only mentioned in one recital , Recital D ) , which in many cases are highly competitive ( even the most competitive ) both in the European market and in other more developed markets , such as the United States and Japan .
As is rightly stated in the Recitals , furthermore , they complement the big companies , and the support programmes mentioned in the report and the resolution are more appropriate to them , since the big companies do not need these measures to the same extent .
Finally , the problem of making the labour market more flexible should have been examined in greater depth ( the way it is dealt with in Recital H seems to me to understate it ) .
Obviously this does not cast any doubts on the need for social support , and it is an essential factor in the creation of new opportunities . Members of the European Parliament , as representatives of all European citizens , should therefore be concerned not only with people in work but also with those who are unemployed , young people in search of their first jobs in many cases .
None of these will be impressed by a rigid and unrealistic European ' social model ' , which may be based on the best wording ( idealistically speaking ) of the Treaty and other texts , but which does not put into practice the entrepreneurial dynamism that is essential to creating jobs . Otherwise , there will be a negative general reaction to something it is important to safeguard , namely the correct European social model .
Mr President , the debate has shown that progress has been made in the discussions which we have had in recent years about terms such as competitiveness , productivity , deregulation , flexibility , etc .
For this reason I would like to congratulate Mr Caudron on his report as , even if not all points made in it reflect his own personal views , it clearly reflects the fact that we have developed certain areas of common ideas and reflection .
This in itself is very positive .
Of course there will always be dissident opinions but these opinions are increasingly becoming those of the minority .
Mr Wibe , who has unfortunately gone now , gave us an almost admirable description of classic socialist theory which , I believe , is not shared by Mr Wolf , and this is quite significant .
This means that there are always ideas which originate in the past and are defended vigorously but which do not bring us forward because they are not capable of gaining majority acceptance and above all because they cannot be implemented .
In the last week we have held the debate with the Council of Ministers for Industry about competitiveness in the light of our report , which is also the subject of Mr Caudron 's report , and we were , on the whole , in agreement on this .
We have now done sufficient analysis and drawn up sufficient plans .
It is now a question of beginning at a specific point in order to draw up a common European policy which will then have certain outcomes , the positive or negative aspects of which we will discover in due course .
In my opinion theoretical arguments about , for example , whether deregulation creates jobs or destroys jobs , are , in view of our experience in telecommunications , for example , quite futile .
As can be seen from the statistics , today there are essentially two areas in which new jobs are created in Europe : the information society in the broad sense of the term , and biotechnology , i.e. two modern fields of technology which , thankfully , are ours once again , after we had lost some time in these areas .
I will not blame anyone for this as a debate of this kind must go on for some time so that people can get used to it , but now we have caught up again .
There is another possibility which we introduced in the debate and which Mr Caudron also mentioned : benchmarking .
Without much difficulty we were offered two examples : New Zealand and Ireland .
Firstly , these are small countries which did not start out with a high level of industry but were peripheral nations with a mainly agrarian structure .
New Zealand , we could say , is on the periphery of the world and Ireland is on the periphery of Europe .
Both countries have come through this change with great success .
They have created more jobs , particularly better paid jobs and not just jobs which combat poverty but jobs which bring with them good prospects for survival .
These examples will not be able to be applied fully to other countries but it is clear what the broad outlines of such a project would involve .
Then there is the question of research and development , innovation , the role of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We now have enough projects in this area .
We should continue them .
The debates on the fifth Framework Programme on Research and Development have not yet come to an end .
The man who said that has also gone .
The problem is always that those who require explanations go while those who do not require any stay .
For example , for a long time now we have been applying our research to processes and products close to the market , to things which have direct impact .
Years ago we came away from the idea that research is a noble affair which has to be conducted far away from the market .
In small and medium-sized enterprises we now have the first visible progress , which my colleague Christos Papoutsis is pursuing resolutely .
Flexibility of the labour market is of course quite a critical problem because everyone here thinks it is possible to advance by dismantling social rights , although that in turn reduces the quality of life .
If we examine this closely - and I believe there can be no general assertions which are correct - we can see some positive aspects .
In our White Paper we began to look more closely and to ask about the current situation regarding jobs which do not require any specific qualification .
By this I mean jobs which - even if we place considerable emphasis on qualifications , which in our opinion is important and right - must still be available as there will be a large number of people who do not possess the relevant qualification , because they are unable or do not wish to do so , and this is always a possibility .
A society which can only offer jobs for a particular level of qualification is also not ideal .
Incidentally , we have lost a lot more of these jobs than the USA has .
The interesting thing is that our labour productivity is higher than in the USA because we have lost these jobs for the lesser qualified .
However , if we retain these or perhaps wish to create more of them , we must reduce the tax burden there .
This is quite a simple , normal possibility .
Unfortunately none of the Member States has done this to date so we must consider how we can encourage the Member States to put this part of the tax reform into practice .
With regard to the other option - whether or not to reduce wages - it has always been my opinion that it is dangerous to pursue a simple policy of reducing costs , reducing wages or cutting jobs to the point where the very existence of a company is at risk , as in this way it loses the potential that it will need when it recovers , and we see now in European industry that new jobs will be created because competitiveness has increased and better production is now possible .
Thus , only cutting costs , only saving , is certainly wrong , but reducing unnecessary costs , for example in general input , energy , telecommunications , is the correct policy .
As a result of the monopoly in the Union 's energy market our energy costs are still higher than in the USA .
In energy-intensive industry this of course represents a disadvantage for competitiveness .
At this point I would like to say to Mr Wolf - without wanting to touch on a sore point , as I am much too liberal and humane for that - that to increase the price of petrol in Germany by DM 5 will of course result in a loss of jobs .
This has nothing to do with environmental technology .
Of course we can introduce changes to our environmental technology but if we drive our energy costs up as high as this , which in environmental terms would be justifiable , we must accept the negative consequences which this has on jobs .
This means that , as always in life , we must compromise and we must also sometimes set priorities .
I have now come to believe that if there is to be any point to such a debate on competitiveness and jobs we must have the courage to set this priority .
There is no point in saying that we will now make environmental policy with great aplomb if we continually claim that unemployment is our number one problem and our social systems are no longer capable of eliminating unemployment .
Mr Caudron 's remark that he personally would like to support this reduction of working hours tempts me to comment on this too .
We can reduce working hours if we introduce greater flexibility in the Working Time Statute and are prepared to do this .
We can even do it to increase productivity .
However , it is very obvious that a general reduction of working hours without making the working time statutes more flexible leads to even higher labour costs and as a result jobs are lost .
With some people you could be forgiven for thinking you were having a debate with deaf-mutes because sometimes certain basic facts are simply not accepted .
Thankfully we have now gone past that stage .
I am thankful that the report which the Commission presented , and which we will in future present annually , has met with such a good response . I hope that the result of this debate and of further debates will be what we have already established in the Council of Ministers .
We must now take action .
We have really talked long enough now .
Even if we do something wrong it is still better than doing nothing at all .
So let us begin , even if it goes against all Mr Wolf 's theories , as I believe that in the end the most decisive factor in politics is the outcome , not whether or not someone was proven or will prove right in theory .
We can always try that , and there are of course wonderful battles , but these battles do not help the unemployed .
For this reason I think that we should now begin to do something which has in the meantime proven to be very successful and when we see how it turns out we can progress from there .
We must not pursue a policy which makes the same mistakes for ten years ; however , we can now begin to learn from our experiences , to take action and then after two or three years to see what comes of it .
Then we will see that we are not in such a bad position .
We have in the meantime improved considerably in terms of competitiveness and in some aspects we surpass both the USA and Japan .
The euro will also make a considerable contribution to the competitiveness of European industry .
So there is no need for pessimism but every need for action .
If that is the outcome of this debate then we have helped many people .
Thank you , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at 12.00 noon tomorrow .
Electronic commerce
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A4-0173 / 98 ) by Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication by the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee on the Regions on a European initiative for electronic commerce ( COM ( 97 ) 0157 - C4-0297 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank my colleagues for their very intensive cooperation and willingness to compromise , which resulted in a report which can hopefully consolidate a little the European Union 's policy in the area of electronic commerce and business transactions .
I would also like to thank the committees involved , the Commission , the Council , the companies , trade unions and consumer organizations with whom I communicated continually .
In particular I thank the Secretariat of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , which worked around the clock and participated in the drafting of this report .
Electronic commerce and business transactions are becoming increasingly important for companies and citizens of the European Union .
Without having to make a huge investment , firms now have a global market place .
In theory the SMEs can profit most from this .
There are , however , still many legal uncertainties and conditions are not ideal for either buyers or sellers .
The aim of the Communication of the Commission is to introduce a series of measures which allow the potential which electronic commerce offers the Internal Market to have full effect .
The Communication of the Commission can be seen as a response to the initiative of the US government , which was presented in person by President Clinton on 1 July 1997 and broadcast live on CNN and C-SPAN .
It drew up an ambitious timetable according to which the sphere of action should be defined by the year 2000 .
The electronic market place is a virtual place where information is exchanged and contracts are entered into , goods are bought and paid for , and there should be binding rules .
It is almost like real life and yet there are some important differences .
The electronic market is part of the Internet .
This cyber reality is a world of its own which is strongly rooted in the real world but with some independent characteristics which must be included in a comprehensive trade policy of the European Union .
We are on the verge of a change in paradigms which will influence existing structures greatly .
The European Union should take its opportunity this time .
Its potential which results from introducing the Internal Market is huge .
My report contains a clear message and my colleagues have supported it : regulate where it is necessary and useful but do not regulate for the sake of regulation .
The legal security which currently exists in the virtual world of the Internet is on extremely fragile and fragmented .
It will be necessary to create greater legal security in the electronic market .
So far , a situation where national , European and international legal systems coexist successfully exists only in its initial stages and in the minds of a few specialists .
International harmonization or recognition of standards in this area will be absolutely essential .
In this context I made a suggestion which asks the Commission to sign an agreement of mutual recognition with the Americans in the area of data protection .
The data protection directive must be incorporated into national law by 1 October .
We are afraid that , once again , this will not be done consistently .
I would like to ask the Commission to propose , as soon as possible , ways in which this can be avoided .
The legal framework should be flexible and adaptable .
Self-regulation can be a convenient way of achieving flexibility in the electronic market place and also to maintain it .
However , it does require the actors involved to take on a considerable degree of responsibility , which must go further than non-binding rules .
The introduction of ethical standards must be embodied in private law , liability law and in particular the law of contract .
The European Union must have an active role in the necessary regulation .
I agreed with my colleagues on many points .
We pressed for this and tried to formulate answers which we hope the Commission and also the Council will draw on .
We need a directive of a horizontal nature .
This directive must be ready in the next two months .
It should encompass in particular the areas of private law , advertising , commercial communications , freelance work and trademarks .
Furthermore , we need international coordination and harmonization in many areas .
We believe that such international coordination should go beyond the proposal made by Mr Bangemann in the context of the international charter .
We support the attempts made by the Commission in the context of the WTO and the domain names , as well as the international charter initiative , although in a more wide-ranging form .
My proposal of a single point of coordination in the Commission in the area of electronic commerce could support this process .
It may be useful to extend it to cover the whole information sector .
We also require tax harmonization .
A Communication of the Commission will be available at the next Ecofin Council .
I suspect that in its current form this initiative will be sufficient to achieve a useful harmonization of taxes ; after initial analysis it gives the impression of being a rush job which will not quite hit the mark .
I look forward to Commissioner Bangemann 's reply .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Mann on her excellent report about this crucial subject .
The development of electronic commerce is dependent on effective and precise legislation , standards , simplicity and certainty according to principles which apply preferably across the whole world , as electronic commerce will be primarily international commerce .
In addition , a global legal framework for electronic commerce must be clear , transparent , simple , technologically neutral and should stimulate competition . It must offer both the consumer and producer adequate protection .
The market , however , needs to stimulate the growth of electronic commerce , and too much regulation or the wrong kind of regulation might nip the potential of electronic commerce in the bud .
Electronic commerce must not be regulated to death .
It slows down the resolution of a number of important and sensitive international issues , such as , firstly ; what should be done about taxation ?
Mrs Mann has already mentioned this a short while ago .
The idea of tax neutrality of electronic trade is widely supported within Europe and the United States , and no discrimination should be allowed to take place between traditional and electronic delivery of services .
Unequal treatment leads to trade distortion and thus to unfair competition .
My second point is privacy .
The consumer must be certain that the electronic environment is safe .
Buying products electronically without the payer 's personal details being fully recorded should be a matter of course .
Small payments are normally made in cash without divulging personal details .
The transaction is anonymous , and it should be thus on line .
This leads me to my last point .
What is the Commission 's position on VAT levies on the Internet ?
I ask you this question , Commissioner Bangemann , as I understand that the Commission is proposing a control system for electronic invoicing of VAT .
This strikes me as extremely controversial in view of the protection of data and privacy , and the wish of many people not to have VAT on the Internet .
So I look forward with interest to the Commissioner 's response .
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not think it necessary to reiterate the growing importance of electronic commerce and its promise : the Member , Mrs Mann , did this very well , and her report deserves full congratulations .
As rapporteur of the Committee on Research , it is my duty to underline a few important points concerning the guidelines of support for research and development to facilitate the growth of electronic commerce .
I think that it was certainly a positive move to liberalise the telecommunications market to facilitate the lowering of prices through competition .
This is not enough , however : it is necessary to broaden , on the one hand , the base of users , to help those who invest in the development of applications and software , to help small and medium-sized enterprises that want to launch out into the international dimension with telematics , to encourage the administrations to become computer literate , also offering in this way with the new technologies better services for the citizen , to develop the culture of interaction with computers not only through school and the workplace but also through new types of training and involvement for all ages .
In addition to encouraging the market 's expansion , Europe 's telecommunications equipment industry must be kept competitive and innovative .
While it is true that in the computer industry we have lost the race with the United States , as regards the telecommunications industry , it seems to me that competition is still open .
This is competition that counts : the future is being played out more on the interconnection of everything than on computing .
That is why I want to recall only a few of the research themes : switching technology , statistical access technology , data compression technology , long wave broadcasting via cable and satellite , new multimedia terminals and , finally , work on standards to enable Europe 's industry to participate in the definition and assertion of these new standards on the market .
Finally , I would like to recall a point that we discussed at the preliminary stage in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , a point that in my opinion is very relevant for the promotion of electronic commerce at the world level - as the Member , Mrs Mann , has already observed - which is that of international cooperation for the Internet .
It is essential to strengthen the trust of the user and to avoid growing chaos - fraught with controversies and lessons learned out of error or frustration - and , naturally , to ensure as well that Europeans have fair access to the networks , to avoid excessive American control which is basically harmful for everyone .
We have already begun to list the topics ; I am certain that on topics like these , where international cooperation must be strengthened , we will find in Commissioner Bangemann a very dynamic person who wants to find solutions not of the bureaucratic kind but solutions that enable a harmonious development of the market .
Mr President and colleagues , I would , first of all , like to add my congratulations to the rapporteur for a wideranging and comprehensive piece of work .
I think that the broad consultation that she has undertaken with industry , the service sector , consumers and with other interest groups has stood her in good stead and this shows in the report .
I want to add also my congratulations to the Commission , whose proposals are timely , thoughtful and forward-looking .
I want to raise one or two points from Mrs Mann 's report and add some other comments too .
I want to commend her emphasis on the request to the Commission to look at the effect of electronic commerce on jobs .
I know this is already a Commission initiative .
The changes that will inevitably come need to be anticipated and planned for .
Mrs Mann comments quite rightly on the need to improve the skills and awareness of consumers .
This is absolutely essential if electronic commerce is to thrive ; but that is really not so easy , particularly with certain groups of consumers .
Her report goes on to stress the importance of confidence-building in electronic commerce .
Of course , faith in electronic commerce can only be built by safeguarding privacy and safeguarding personal data .
The emphasis on encryption and the proposals on encryption are absolutely sound and well worked out .
It is important because money is a touchy subject , very dear to all our hearts , and certainty is never possible .
There are always some risks in commerce , but at least the method of trading needs to be as foolproof as possible in both the old and the new services .
It is also important in electronic commerce to support the creation and the development of new small enterprises .
Electronic commerce can , and already has , lowered the barriers to entry for many of those thriving and innovative businesses .
At the same time , the rights of consumers need to be maintained .
The method of securing those rights will almost certainly need to be adapted in the new world of electronic commerce .
I want to raise too the whole question of the need for agreement on taxation .
The rapporteur is perfectly right to reject the antiquated and backward-looking suggestion of a bit tax .
I would appreciate the Commissioner 's views on that and also on the question of the need for clarification on whether taxation will be in the country of origin or the destination country - that really does need to be sorted out soon .
To conclude , users of electronic commerce need speedy , reliable , secure , low-cost access to goods and services .
It needs to be speedy because if matters take too long consumers will lose interest .
It needs to be reliable because if consumers cannot buy and trade then they will lose interest ; it will not be delivering what they need .
It needs to be secure , because without that the whole development of electronic commerce will surely crumble .
It needs to be low-cost , because that is the key to the real development of new services in the fields of electronic commerce and many other new technology applications .
This report and the Commission proposal go a substantial way to securing those objectives and I commend them to you .
Mr President , I should also like to start by congratulating Mrs Mann on her excellent report and above all for the excellent cooperation .
Thanks to her method of working we have a very good report with which we , as European Union , are able to fulfil a part of our , as it were , leading role in this field .
Mr President , the Internet is the driving force behind the accelerated rise of electronic commerce .
Large opportunities are awaiting Europe in this field and when we are talking about jobs or employment it is always good to have another look at the figures .
Then we see , for instance , that the software and services sector has an annual growth of about 10 % .
This growth means 50 000 jobs in Europe every year .
So , in other words , it offers a great many opportunities , but we should also set conditions , of course .
We must ensure that education and re-training will take place properly , and that there will be more flexibility .
But we must also remove barriers .
Mr President , I believe that the introduction of the euro will be a powerful shot in the arm for trade within the European Union .
Consumers will be able to compare prices , and conversely , electronic commerce might contribute to the acceptance of the euro , as this form of trade breaks down the barrier to buy abroad .
The European regulations must give the consumer the necessary confidence to make use of electronic commerce and , that way , allow him or her to enjoy the benefits of the internal market more .
Respect for the privacy of the consumer is an essential element in this , and previous speakers have rightly pointed this out .
The supervision of the implementation of the EU directives for data protection which will have to be transformed into national legislation by October this year must therefore be carried out carefully .
The free movement of electronic services within the European Union is an essential prerequisite if the internal market is to function well .
We must avoid variations in national regulations which will result in a fragmented European market . I look upon the Commission 's statement as a very important and appropriate first stab at a European approach which deserves further development .
I would like to spur the Commissioner on to present a proposal for a directive regarding the provision of services in the information society .
Mr President , well-trained computer programmers are much needed .
The European Union will have to pull out all the stops to get rid of this shortage against the background of the millennium issue .
At the same time it will offer many European young people who are about the choose a college or university course a good chance of finding a job .
I therefore wonder whether the European Union and the European Commission might not be able to fulfil some kind of information provider role in this area .
For small and medium-sized enterprises , Mr President , electronic commerce offers big opportunities .
Electronic commerce offers SME 's the opportunity to bring new and remote markets within easy reach , and to find new market segments at low cost .
Nevertheless , companies will have to prepare themselves properly through education and extra training measures .
I believe the fifth framework programme could also play an important part on that point .
But an essential element , Mr President , and this was repeated by previous speakers , is the element of confidence .
Consumer confidence in electronic commerce is vital .
Without this , it will not work .
Other important issues are , for example , what happens to the electronic signature ? How reliable is it ?
What happens to electronic money ? What is the situation regarding liability ?
I also believe the law on agreements , the recognition of contracts , is of vital importance . It is obviously essential that we will finally have certainty concerning the tax issue .
It has already been mentioned .
On that point we will have to reach decisions .
It is quite a policy and quite a legislative agenda we will be facing over the coming period , and it therefore requires international action .
I am anxious to know whether the Commissioner can confirm whether the United States is able to accept the proposed Charter .
The Group of the European People 's Party believes the Charter is a most important proposal and we would like to support it wholeheartedly . But everyone knows that we will not get much further with this Charter if it is not accepted by the United States .
Perhaps you could tell us something about this .
It only remains for me to say , Mr President , that the Group of the European People 's Party would be glad to agree with the resolution and the report by my colleague Erika Mann .
Mr President , at the outset I want to congratulate Mrs Mann on the preparation and presentation of a very fine report .
My group fully endorses the proposal aimed at stimulating the vigorous growth of electronic commerce in the European Union .
The US and Japan already have a head start .
Therefore the EU cannot afford to be left behind .
We need our own road map for the future .
The recent growth of electronic commerce has essentially been driven by the Internet .
It is therefore open to everyone everywhere .
If the US had its way we would already be on the road to a free trade zone on the Internet .
We need to know where the dangers are and clearly identify and make known the benefits .
Two years ago consumer sales over the Internet came to some $ 600m and by the year 2000 they could amount to ECU 200 billion world wide .
There is a clear message .
The sector offers a huge range of opportunities , development potential and jobs .
But , what assurances can the Commission give me today that the full benefits of electronic commerce will come to the west and north-west of my country .
I am calling for positive discrimination in favour of such ultra- peripheral areas and the small and medium-sized companies that are operating there or , indeed , more importantly , have the potential to operate there .
The high cost of telecommunications has acted as a major stumbling block for all electronic commerce in Europe .
I hope that putting in place a package of liberalization measures will result in lower and more flexible prices .
As it crosses frontiers , it is essential that consensus be achieved at world level and the creation of a favourable regulatory framework for electronic commerce .
One of the major hurdles to be overcome is successfully creating confidence for all Internet users in their transactions .
Education and skills are vital .
So too are concerns about cyber-crime , security and data protection .
In conclusion , business on the Internet covers everything from mass market retailing to electronic payments , advertising and business-to-business markets .
The development of an Internet mass market could leapfrog if access can be made cheaper and electronic payments guaranteed .
A Europol cyberpolice could be essential .
Mr President , Commissioner , you must get tired of hearing the same old stories over and over again , but we , the representatives of various groups , would like to have our say .
I am afraid my remarks are similar to what you have already heard .
The Mann report is good , in particular because of its broad approach to the problems .
Electronic commerce has the potential to become the personification of the free movement of goods , as people will be able to shop in any country from behind a computer .
I am having a go at it myself , and I must say that it is rather nice to discover that the territorial aspects of trade can be ignored .
Sometimes it is a bit difficult , at least for semi-literates like me .
But comparing prices is simple , and the advent of the euro will make the process only easier .
In view of the speedy development of the Internet and the cross-border character of electronic commerce , it is of great importance that there should be international cooperation on the creation of a regulatory framework .
But in order for that to be possible , Europe must first of all put its own House in order , and this problem is truly urgent .
I do not believe that putting its own House in order is something the Commission fudges .
On the contrary , I believe the European Commission has made some very good first moves , but that does not mean that the Member States are all in line .
In order to become more competitive , it is crucial that the internal market for electronic commerce functions well .
In other words , the preconditions for this type of trade must be met .
I will repeat them once more .
These preconditions include consumer confidence in the security of the medium , which is extremely important , for example , with regard to money transactions .
Safeguarding confidential information , in other words using robust encryption technology , is another condition .
I believe that we need a code for resolving trade disputes , and in addition we need a few other issues , already excellently described in the Mann report . These include promoting computer literacy amongst all sections of society and promoting access to the Internet , thus preventing unequal use of the Internet amongst the population .
Another point is developing the SME sector and encouraging young talent .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , it is my personal experience in conversations with small firms that venture capital is still a burning issue despite the initiatives we have taken at European level .
Mr President , I must also briefly deal with the problem of tax .
America has proposed a free trade zone on the Internet , and this may be of interest in the short term . If we take measures too quickly now , and if the Member States arrive at fiscal measures independently , we will be going about it the wrong way .
We must start by establishing our own position on the Internet and that is why I think it necessary to dissuade the Member States from taking action which will be damaging to the creation of a uniform European system in the long term .
In this context I would like to support Mrs Plooij 's question regarding VAT .
Mr President , I would like to thank Erika Mann for the work she has put into her report .
The growth of electronic commerce is giving rise to many complex questions .
They concern consumer protection , employment , tax and the fear of being edged out .
Unregulated electronic commerce poses questions of accountability - who is responsible when people have access to instructions on how to make bombs , or if an ordered CD is just blank ?
The Commission should not delay in addressing problems of copyright , trademarks , misleading advertising and safeguarding personal data .
Electronic shopping is going to prove more lucrative in many sectors than traditional shopping .
The effects on unemployment could be considerable .
Things could go the way they have in my country : electronic banking has lost half the jobs in the banking sector .
Investment has been responsible for losing more jobs .
The situation is complex .
When we talk of freedom of choice in commerce , the choice should also take employees into consideration : a choice between work and unemployment .
New jobs are certainly being created , but the old ones are disappearing rapidly .
New services , therefore , have to be found , which create jobs and an added value component , but which do not eat away at other jobs .
Rationalization that gets rid of jobs is easy .
I myself was a company director , and rationalization is one of the easiest things to resort to .
Creating something completely new will be difficult and that is our test in Europe .
We have to create new forms of transaction , because , for example , there does not appear to be any upper limit to spending , as there is , for example , to consuming .
It is true that electronic shopping enables people in peripheral areas to enjoy the facility .
The old and the disabled can order merchandise if their computer is fitted with a modem .
The right equipment and a connection to the Internet should therefore become every citizen 's right .
Only a Europe-wide network will create a real internal market for Europe , and that will provide a yardstick by which to gauge the real level that European society has reached .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is not long - only about 5 or 10 years - since the people of Europe would not have understood the term " Internet ' .
If we look at developments which have taken place since then we see that we are in fact eye witnesses of a revolution in the field of data exchange and are therefore experiencing a revolution of our society and of human coexistence .
However , I would venture to say that we are only at the beginning of a very complex transformation process .
Gradually we notice more and more new fields of application for telecommunications .
I published a book on this subject in the spring of this year and when I read it again today I see that some parts of the book are already out of date .
I believe that we must overcome these ever-recurring obstacles and changes .
For this reason I am grateful for the Communication of the Commission and for the extraordinary commitment of the rapporteur , Erika Mann , and also of Wim van Velzen for a European initiative in electronic business transactions .
The Internet is therefore no longer only suitable for data exchange and transmission of information but also for modern business developments and in fact for conducting business simply , cheaply and quickly .
This means that excellent opportunities in general , as well as possibilities for employment , are opened up to consumers and to many small and medium-sized enterprises .
These new opportunities in turn create completely new service opportunities .
Thus I support the aim of keeping electronic commerce in a European context and preventing the fragmentation of the Internal Market .
We want international agreements and coordination .
I have already thanked Mrs Mann on several occasions for the quality of her reports .
This is another example of the fact that such a discussion with Parliament can also be very informative for us and we gain important new ideas from them .
It is perhaps even more significant that large sections of the report agree with the positions which the Commission has so far put forward , and this is important because in the debate about regulations we must speak with one voice with other trade partners and competitors if we are to succeed .
We are a little proud of the fact that since the beginning of electronic commerce we have been the opinion leaders , to a certain degree , perhaps not in terms of the fact that the subject is already such an important one here - in the USA it is only in its early stages - but more so in view of what it means in terms of development and what we have to do to promote this development .
At the Bonn conference in 1997 we dealt with a number of issues which at that time were very much to the fore , and started on a series of legislative measures which are now available .
I would point out , however , that it is not necessarily only solutions of a legislative nature that are to be considered .
Of course we can use all other possibilities , such as self-commitment of those involved or , something which I proposed myself at an international level , i.e. regulation by political consensus and similar .
This will also help us in our debate with the USA as the USA is not always in favour of a very liberal and far-reaching type of self-commitment ; as is shown by the inscription example it is sometimes considerably tougher and more rigid than we here in the Union are .
However , in any case we can say that if we reach this political consensus and if there is a certain degree of equivalence in terms of content , the way in which it is reached will not be important .
This also applies to data protection , for example .
We have a complete and correct guideline for this , i.e. a legislative measure .
If in the USA more consideration is given to doing this in line with self-commitment , then content is more important .
How it is in the end realized is not decisive .
The charter which we proposed , and of which Mr van Velzen asked the Americans ' opinion , met with broad approval .
We are in the process of preparing it .
In the Council we have a working party .
We invited American and European industry to an initial round table .
Of course we will extend that to include industry from other countries .
We have contacted all international organizations which will be involved in this and we will be in constant contact with the Americans .
At the beginning there were some misunderstandings because the Americans believed that we wanted to create a type of new international authority with strict regularization .
When we clarified this there were no further concerns .
There are certainly still issues which we must discuss but if we want to make overall practical progress we must set the ball rolling because factors which can pose a threat to the Internal Market can of course also pose a threat worldwide .
If it does not succeed in creating a solid foundation for use it could be that these new opportunities will not be used as they could be because people will be concerned if we do not succeed in establishing a reliable basis for use .
We are currently dealing with the issue that Mrs Mann also addressed , i.e. data protection and data security , digital signatures and consumer protection - we have now taken legislative measures regarding both of these - copyright , taxes and customs , which I will deal with in detail later , illegal and harmful content and Internet governance .
These are partly technical but no less important issues involving ways in which one can best use the Internet .
I would be very pleased if it were possible to cooperate with you given the expertise represented here in Parliament .
Allow me to comment on four further points individually as they were also mentioned in the debate .
We can always think about this coordination point .
We have practically done it already .
We have a group in which all Commissioners involved in the information society are represented .
If we wish , we can give it a certain basis of support so that everyone knows whom to consult .
Secondly , the Commission also supports the US proposal of a duty-free zone , as it was called , although this is misleading as in fact it involves customs .
The proposal is only to introduce no new customs duties but to stabilize the situation as it is today .
We have absolutely no problem with that and we will certainly find a solution in the near future .
As far as the question of taxation is concerned there are two positions : on the one hand we say " no discrimination ' , i.e. no additional new taxes - bit taxes or anything else being considered - and on the other hand we say " no privilege ' , i.e. every tax regulation which applies to trade in services or goods on the Internet must be similar in form to those which apply offline .
Let us take a specific example : if we did not have to pay VAT on a book that we bought via the Internet and did have to pay VAT for a book bought in a bookshop , this would be discrimination of normal trade and that cannot work .
The considerations which are obviously behind many of the critical remarks made here do not represent a Commission position ; they are the initial view of a Directorate-General which approached the issue largely from the point of view of its own tax considerations rather than from Internet considerations .
For this reason there is no cause for concern .
We will be able to sort it out .
Of course we also want to prevent the Internal Market from fragmenting ; this is obvious .
We firmly believe that with electronic commerce the Internal Market can gain considerable importance , as well as much more .
What we are talking about is a global network .
As far as jobs are concerned there is an unending list of success stories .
I will quote only one : for example , the company " Alfa Cie .
Metallurgy Company , based in the east of France , specialized in mechanical parts .
This enterprise has expanded from 40 to 400 employees in 3 years , broadened its client base from 1 to 23 countries , reduced time to market for new products from 6 to 1 week , improved reliability , ' etc .
There are also several examples of small and medium-sized enterprises which have met with new opportunities as a result .
I would like to say to my Irish colleagues that Ireland is an example of a country where the use of new opportunities has resulted in a new dynamism in the economy and created jobs .
So if I were Irish I would not be concerned about it having no benefit for Ireland .
It has already done this to a considerable degree .
Of course , as already mentioned here , we must create a series of technical and clear legal regulations .
Data protection is a very important example .
People always think that it is only important for data protection specialists who have strange ideas of one kind or another .
No , it will be a crucial factor in the decision of every consumer regarding whether or not to use electronic commerce .
If it is not guaranteed many people will refrain from using it .
Naturally we must also make certain global regulations in this area , if possible , as data protection which applies only to Europe or only to the USA is worthless if data is used globally .
However , as I said , this is possible because it is not a question of the differences in procedures but of the content .
It is easy to see the creation of new jobs in those areas where figures are already available : in 1996 7.4 million were employed in the IT industry in the USA .
In the year from 1995 to 1996 , 230 000 new jobs were created in the IT industry .
Such figures also exist for parts of Europe .
Even if the results of analyses are only partly available we can still say that on the whole we have an area in which new jobs exist and where old jobs are also secure , as considerable savings and in particular increases in productivity can be achieved by allowing or cushioning a high wage level and improvements in productivity .
For example there is the fact that the competitiveness of the European shipbuilding industry has improved solely due to the introduction of such modern procedures .
If in terms of outsourcing we also interpret this as an information network between the firms producing the systems and the suppliers , then new competitiveness is really being created .
The fact that we are still currently slightly behind the USA is due to a combination of factors ; it is partly due to cost , as already mentioned , but particularly to the greater popularity of the PC .
Incidentally , this will change in future as there will be quite different ways of accessing the Internet , not via PC but , for example , via television sets .
So if access becomes easier and cheaper we will witness a considerably greater driving force being set in motion in Europe than we saw in the USA .
For this reason I would not be concerned about this .
We can catch up if we continue our efforts in the same way .
This is an essential requirement .
But I have no doubt that all the Member States will realize what is important .
The Parliament , as this report shows , quite clearly has the same opinion .
I am quite glad that Mrs Mann has come back as I felt quite alone when she went away .
That shows how much I rely on her cooperation !
Thank you , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at noon tomorrow .
Provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations
The next item on the agenda is the recommendation for a second reading ( A4-0151 / 98 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and the Council amending Directive 83 / 189 / EEC , relating to the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations ( C4-0035 / 98-96 / 0220 ( COD ) ) for the third time ( Rapporteur : Mr Hendrick ) .
Mr President , the rapid pace of expansion of new information services calls for innovative ways of regulating them to the extent that is needed without hindering their development , or of adapting the existing regulations that could prove outdated or counterproductive .
Community legislation may in some cases be necessary but most of the new regulations will stem from the Member States themselves .
As the Commission pointed out in its proposal , there is a risk of Member States issuing contradictory or inconsistent regulations , thus damaging the internal market by restricting the free movement of goods and services .
Hence the need for coordination in this particular field .
The Commission chose to use an existing mechanism directed towards technical standards which has proven to be effective in its own field .
At its first reading Parliament supported this approach .
However , our institution raised several concerns embodied in 17 amendments to the Commission proposal .
These amendments could broadly be grouped in the following categories .
Firstly , the social , societal and cultural aspects to be considered , in particular the need for expert advice in these areas .
Secondly , preservation of sector-specific rules .
Thirdly , freedom of establishment to be ensured .
Fourthly , active cooperation between Member States and with the Commission .
Fifthly , clearer definitions of concepts and their scope , future review and related EU initiatives , legal and formal aspects .
Now , looking at the common position itself , at first view - and despite the relatively broad support by the Commission - I must say it looks disappointing .
Only one amendment , a very minor one , is included unchanged .
However , even if their wording has been substantially altered , most of Parliament 's points have been considered .
The concern of our institution about cultural aspects was shared by the Council who specifically excluded any involvement of the procedure in the area of cultural policy and audiovisual .
Other sector-specific aspects were considered , namely financial services , in a way which shows a convergent analysis of what an efficient regulatory attitude requires .
Most of the issues raised by Parliament relating to formal or legal aspects are taken into account or otherwise resolved .
Not everything is entirely satisfactory , however .
I have tabled five amendments for this second reading , all of which relate to points already raised at the first reading .
Amendment No 1 calls for further Commission action to adapt rules as necessary in response to developments in the sector .
I believe that this is important as the directive should not be regarded as static , but rather as an evolving tool for the regulation of Information Society services .
Amendment No 2 concerns the establishment of an expert consultation group .
Wide consultation , I believe , is vital and expert advice will be ever more important in a field which is becoming technically more complex .
I would like to see a strong commitment to consult of experts from industry and academia , ideally as a group .
Amendment No 3 concerns the freedom of establishment of a service operator .
Failure to allow freedom of establishment poses a major obstacle to the effective operation of the single market .
It means that rules established in one Member State may be used to block organizations from another Member State from setting up in that particular country .
With Amendment No 4 , both the Commission and other Member States are entitled to submit detailed opinions explaining why they believe that the measures envisaged create barriers to the free movement of goods .
If the Member State in question does not take account of such opinions it must give clear reasons why it is unable to do so .
This provision applies only to the Information Society services aspects of the directive .
Amendment No 5 refers again to provisions for the freedom of establishment of service operators and it is justified for the reason I have already given .
I believe the amendments to be realistic ; I believe the amendments to be minimalist ; and I believe the amendments are aimed at achieving maximum consensus and therefore , I hope , a qualified majority tomorrow in Parliament .
I look forward to the support of this House for the second reading .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Hendrick on his report , which contains a number of intelligent arguments .
Allow me to quote : " The rapid pace of expansion of new information services calls for innovative ways of regulating them to the extent that is needed without hindering their development , or of adapting the existing regulations that could prove outdated or counterproductive . '
It is , of course , extremely important to consider carefully the way information technology is to be regulated .
The risk is that old-fashioned regulatory zeal may take hold and be viewed as an easy way of solving problems and obstacles within the new technology .
There are many who believe that we can solve problems by creating more rules and instituting laws in the traditional fashion , but this is seldom the case .
In certain cases , of course - precisely as Mr Hendrick points out - initiatives are required at Community level when it comes to drafting regulations and laws for this sector .
Precisely as was also pointed out in the speech , it is the Member States who in the large majority of cases will be responsible for most of the new regulations .
It is obvious , in view of the particularly cross-border nature of this sector , that there is a continuous exchange of information about what is going on .
In those cases where anomalies and problems are encountered , they must be discussed among decision-makers within the Union and , to an increasing extent , globally .
But at the same time we must not forget to include in the discussions those players who operate in this market in order to get their view of the problems and to find out about possible solutions .
If no other way can be found , then it is perhaps necessary to resort to regulation .
But it is extremely important that this should not lead to separate national regulations , which run the risk not only of being wholly ineffective but also of hindering trade and the dissemination of information and erecting new barriers within the Internal Market .
In this respect I believe that the Council 's common position is a good one .
The Council is taking up the problem of crossborder activity , but is not , as a consequence , expressing any ambitions with a view to taking regulatory action .
We in the PPE group believe that the amendments proposed by Mr Hendrick and accepted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy are likewise viable in the context of the approach that I am advocating .
I would like to conclude by once again quoting from Mr Hendrick 's preamble , which states " ... that the Commission shall in particular investigate and , where necessary , take initiatives in order to adapt rules promptly in order to encourage the European development of new services . '
I would personally like to add that I am convinced that it would be best if we were not to see too many regulations within this field .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , technical standards and regulations are an extremely important instrument of economic policy .
Their function is to create transparency and promote communication .
I would like to distinguish between two levels : the horizontal level , which involves activities in the Member States , and the second , European , level .
It seems to me quite important to include in these considerations those countries which seek accession and finally also to initiate communication with " the rest of the world ' .
The vertical level is also very important .
I believe that by means of harmonization we have achieved a certain degree of progress on the vertical level , but also that the system of mutual recognition has also brought with it many advantages .
A third level , the duty of provision of information , can also provide a basis for the free movement of goods .
I wonder if it would not be advantageous to allow these systems to exist side by side .
For us it is important that the market can react quickly and at a low cost .
The question is how we in Europe can support the formulation of standards .
I believe it would be useful to set up a task force for these new regulations .
Something could also be done within the Framework Programme on Research and Development in order to be able to take any emerging developments into account in advance .
For this we need infrastructure , although it may be possible to merely reorganize existing infrastructure , and of course we also need education .
Mr President , I can limit myself to speaking briefly , although in doing so I would not quite do justice to the significance and quality of the report .
It is significant in that if we can implement such a rule here and in the area of goods , an achievement now possible due to the efforts of Parliament , we avoid fragmenting the market ; as our experience shows , this cannot be achieved using any other method .
What we are discussing today is undoubtedly a very important development .
But in view of time restrictions and the fact that we are basically in agreement on all matters , I will merely thank the rapporteur and note that we will adopt all the draft amendments presented by him , so within a short time we hope to have as our legislative basis a considerably improved proposal .
Thank you , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at noon tomorrow .
Operator number portability and carrier pre-selection
The next item on the agenda is the recommendation for a second reading ( A4-0127 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee of Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and the Council amending Directive 97 / 33 / EC relating to operator number portability and carrier pre-selection ( C4-0104 / 98-97 / 0250 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr W.G. van Velzen ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking my colleagues for the pleasant and effective way in which we have cooperated . I would also like to thank them for the speed with which we have been able to complete the second reading , as far as Parliament is concerned .
Now that businesses in particular have been the first to benefit from the liberalization of the telecommunications sector , I am pleased that , with the present proposal regarding number portability and carrier pre-selection , the ordinary consumer will finally also be able to benefit from the liberalization process .
The proposal has as its aim the introduction of number portability and carrier pre-selection .
This way consumers will be able to keep their telephone number when changing their telephone company , and , in addition , by keying in a simple code they will be able to switch operators for each call .
Mr President , I am absolutely convinced that these instruments will substantially stimulate competition between the telephone companies , and this usually leads to prices falling . This is good news for the consumer , of course , particularly if the service also improves at the same time .
Mr President , an amendment was tabled on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy . If competition in the telecoms market is to develop healthily , it is vital that users are not discouraged from moving to a different telecoms operator .
At the beginning of January we saw the effect this has . National regulatory authorities must therefore ensure that interconnection pricing for carrier pre-selection is based on cost and that any direct charges to consumers do not discourage use of the facility .
Accordingly , your rapporteur has tabled an amendment which was accepted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I am using the definition of cost-based as used in the Interconnection Directive , and this means the dominant market position of the parties must be taken into account .
This obviously does not apply to entrants into the market , the new , smaller companies .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission to monitor the introduction of number portability and carrier pre-selection stringently .
I would welcome an annual report from the Commission to the European Parliament .
I pay tribute to the Commissioner in that once again the Commission tackled five Member States yesterday , because these Member States are not implementing , or not implementing properly , the licensing system nor the Interconnection Directive .
Mr President , I would also like to say something about the European emergency number 112 , and this means venting some frustration .
I already asked the Commission some questions about this a few months ago , and I was given a reply which left me none the wiser .
We later asked some more questions , and hitherto have not received a reply .
The 112 emergency number in the European Union was to become operational not later than 31 December 1996 , pursuant to the Council Decision of 6 August 1991 . But over the past few months , Mr President , it has turned out that , in practice , the emergency number has been leaving much to be desired .
Many foreigners , for example , experience difficulties with 112 in a number of Member States , as the staff manning the emergency switchboard do not speak enough languages .
How can I as a Dutchman make myself understood in Greece when I dial an emergency number ?
In addition , in some Member States the new number has been introduced alongside the old number .
I would point out to you that in Belgium , for example , the police are still driving around and displaying the old emergency number .
Belgacom issues lists which do not mention the 112 number .
My response is , Mr President , that the parallel existence of two emergency numbers , a national and a European number , is not in keeping with the intention to have a single European emergency number .
I also think this means that the symbolic function will be lost on our citizens .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner which countries have not yet introduced the 112 emergency number ?
If the Commissioner does not have this factual information , would he see to it that an urgent inquiry is launched .
My second question is , which steps , what action will the Commission take to ensure that the Member States meet their obligations resulting from this decision ?
What are his views on the idea that emergency switchboard staff in Member States should speak at least three of the most commonly-spoken languages , in order to able to respond adequately when addressed by a hapless tourist in this respect ?
In conclusion it remains for me to say that my group would be glad to agree with the common position supplemented by the amendments .
Mr President , Mr van Velzen must be tired of hearing my congratulations .
We spend our time congratulating each other late at night , with only the Commissioner to hear us .
But nevertheless , it is the conclusion of another piece of the jigsaw in the telecommunications internal market . I congratulate him on it .
I have little to add to his own remarks except to say that I very much support his comments about the need to recognize the merging of the mobile and fixed point telecommunications markets .
It is happening so fast that from the consumers ' point of view , they really do not care too much whether they make their telephone call from a fixed point or a mobile , as long as they get through efficiently and cheaply and can make their calls .
It seems to me entirely reasonable to be calling for number portability in the field of mobiles as quickly as possible .
I very much hope that the Commission will be able to make some comment about that .
We have the famous review coming in 1999 but we really cannot bundle everything into the review .
We must make sure that where the market is merged we have regulations and a legislative framework to recognise that .
My second point is about something in the explanatory statement which the rapporteur has referred to , and that is the use of the 112 number .
I should like to add an extra question to those of the rapporteur to Mr Bangemann .
Is there any evidence that in certain countries , consumers using a mobile phone to make an emergency call , whether on the 112 number or any other , have to pay for that call ?
If you do not have that information I would be very grateful if you could let me have it in writing .
There needs to be a great deal more caution than perhaps the rapporteur 's explanatory statement would suggest in introducing a change from national emergency numbers to the 112 number .
The picture that the rapporteur paints is very worrying .
But I perhaps would come to a different conclusion : that far from accelerating the process we need to take a great deal more time and trouble on a programme of public education to make sure that before we make a final and irrevocable move , consumers and citizens - particularly the elderly and those who are not so used to using the telephone - are absolutely sure what the emergency numbers are and what the procedures are for using those emergency numbers , both for fixed point telephones and mobile telephones .
So I am urging caution and would appreciate an answer to that particular question .
Otherwise we support Mr van Velzen 's report and commend it to you .
Mr President , what Mrs Read said is correct .
We do not need to congratulate ourselves once again ; we worked very well together .
The rapporteur 's proposal for this is also acceptable to us .
I will merely go into the issues .
As Mr van Velzen already said himself , if the amendment tabled by him is adopted it will lead to a situation where the Member States cannot fix the costs of carrier pre-selection for those market participants who hitherto have not had any great market power .
But he said that himself so we do not need to argue about it any further .
We will then formulate it accordingly .
As far as the 112 number is concerned , the only country which has not yet implemented it is Greece .
We will therefore continue our proceedings against Greece .
However , we cannot continue our proceedings against the other Member States who did not originally do so as it is de facto no longer valid .
However , we do want to take Mrs Read 's comments very seriously .
We must discuss with the regulation authorities and in a different way the Member States who are introducing this new 112 number the issue of advertising the number and publicizing it , as otherwise quite an odd situation arises , one in which there is a new number which is not known .
The old number , which is known , can no longer be used .
The two must go hand in hand but it can definitely be done .
The requirement that emergency operators should be in a position to work in at least three Community languages - well , in principle , as the satirical Radio Eriwan would reply - will be very difficult to implement in practice : if even the control towers at airports are not in a position to speak English and that is the only language that should be spoken there , then I have my doubts as to whether it would work immediately with three languages at these telephone exchanges .
However , we can examine this ; we can advertise it and see how far we get , as these numbers are used by people who are visiting or who just cannot speak the language of the particular country .
I believe those were the questions I was to discuss .
I hope that the final decision will soon follow .
Thank you , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at noon tomorrow .
Labelling of certain foodstuffs produced from genetically modified organisms
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A4-0181 / 98 ) by Mr K. Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on a draft Council regulation relating to the compulsory inclusion in the labelling of certain foodstuffs produced from genetically modified organisms of further information in addition to that specified in Directive 79 / 112 / EEC ( COM ( 98 ) 0099 - C4-0227 / 98-98 / 0811 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , it is a pity that the rapporteur is not there but I would like to discuss the position of the PPE group regarding the Collins report .
On Friday of this week we celebrate a memorable anniversary .
The novel food regulation will have been in force for one year without the citizens of Europe experiencing any effects of this in practice .
This is certainly due to the fact that we still do not have any legally binding rules of implementation and to the fact that the products which have already come onto the market in great style - genetically modified maize and genetically modified soya - were removed from the novel food regulation or the Commission 's interpretation did not hold these to be novel foods .
At the time I was annoyed about this but I find it positive that it is now being proposed to label these foods too .
Mr Bangemann , you have been much criticized in recent years in connection with this dossier .
Here we have the opportunity to praise you for presenting this proposal and I believe that the proposal is , on the whole , not as bad as it is sometimes made out .
There are some points on which we could argue .
On the whole , the PPE group is in favour of the proposals of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection but opinions can vary . We are of the opinion that a de minimis threshold should be set but that it should not be 5 % , as suggested by some , as this would mean that in principle we could not assume that there are any genetically modified foods .
Everyone would be able to interpret it as they wished .
Instead , much lower thresholds must be set and the Scientific Committee for Food must make suggestions here .
A list of products which must not be labelled could be useful but I believe that none of the parties should become too involved in this argument as a compromise must be possible .
I personally am of the opinion that the Commission 's proposed " ' may ' provision ' is not so stupid ; according to this proposal , if it is not known whether something contains genetically modified products this should be allowed to be labelled " may contain ' .
My main request to the Commission , but also indirectly to the Council of Ministers , is : please reach an agreement at last !
Everyone must be willing to compromise .
Those who hold extreme positions should make concessions .
It simply cannot be possible that despite a regulation people must wait for rules of implementation .
We need a clear decision so that industry and consumers know where they stand , and for this it is essential that everyone is willing to comprise .
Thank you , Mr Lannoye .
The Chair will interpret the rules in a very indulgent way and agree that , as an emergency measure , our colleague , Mr Bowe , shall deputize for our rapporteur , Mr Collins .

But this is strictly on the basis of a highly indulgent interpretation , and I would like to make the point that the Chair should be given plenty of notice of requests for deputies to speak in such circumstances . They should not be left until it is almost time to take a decision .
Mr President , this proposal is extremely important in that it brings to what has in the last year been an extremely unclear and confused situation a degree of clarity which is long overdue .
The issue of labelling genetically modified food is a crucial one in order to maintain public confidence and trust in the development of the biotechnological industry and in placing on the market biotechnological products .
The problem we have had is that with reference to particular products derived from GM soya and maize appeared on the market before the novel foods directive came into place .
Consequently , there has been a legal vacuum and no really effective labelling procedure for them .
The original Commission proposal , which is still under discussion in the Council , tries to address some of the problems relating to the labelling of genetically modified products .
However , I have to say that if you examine the Commission proposal , it is rather like the curate 's egg - good in parts .
In particular , I would take issue with the Commission proposal where it suggests that there should be a label ' may contain ' .
It would seem to me that the ' may contain ' label is one designed to create confusion , distrust and lack of confidence among the public , rather than trust .
Consequently , Parliament has come forward with a proposal which will clarify the situation , ensure that products which contain an element of genetically modified produce that is identifiable by reasonable tests , at a reasonable price and of reasonable accuracy , are adequately labelled .
This will engender some trust on the marketplace and hopefully a degree of sympathy and understanding within the population , which will encourage the continued production of genetically modified products and the biotechnology industry in general .
One should not underestimate the importance of public trust and confidence in establishing a clear framework in which the biotechnology industry can develop .
Legal frameworks are fine and are extremely important and legal stability and clarity are fine .
But , in addition , you need public confidence if these products are to be marketed properly .
The proposal you have in front of you provides rules and regulations which are clear , understandable , based on sound science and provide the public with the information it requires to make an informed choice .
It is quite clear that if we take these present rules and regulations and apply them to products in the marketplace , a substantial number of products in the ordinary supermarket will be labelled .
I do not think we should have any fear or concern about that .
We should be pleased that the public is given information , on the basis of which they can make a choice .
Having been given that information and having a quiet confidence and trust in the product , I feel quite confident that in the case of some of the early products that have been placed on the marketplace - I refer , for example , to the genetically modified tomato paste which is now outselling ordinary tomato paste in the United Kingdom by 2 cans to 1 - you will see a slowly developed preference for genetically modified products amongst the population when they realize they are harmless , of good quality , dependable , reliable and that in no way reflect the will of a large biotechnological company seeking to make profit or a dangerous product which may threaten their health .
I think that the public , once it has had the labelled product before them and seen the benefits that derive from the use of genetically modified products in the marketplace , will think that our work tonight - of this happy few who are here tonight , almost this band of brothers - will be a stepping stone towards a much more logical , sane and sensible arrangement of the European marketplace .
It is one in which biotechnological products are accepted as normal , sensible , healthy and acceptable , against the current view which treats them with suspicion , distrust and almost as the product of some strange unacceptable science .
I hope the Commission hears what we say and is prepared to modify its proposal because we know what the public thinks .
I am telling you now , if you want to sell these products they need this labelling .
Mr President , I have a query for the Commissioner .
There must be an error or an inaccuracy in the draft regulation as it mentions products which had been on the market and labelled before the regulation came into force .
The English word is " products ' but I assume it should in fact refer to previously existing stocks or supplies .
It means that which is already in stock .
But if the term used is " products ' this is ambiguous .
In my opinion no misunderstanding is possible here as the relative clause states clearly : " which were on the market before entry into force ' .
This means that it is either a stock or a product but it must have been on the market before entry into force .
This is completely clear !
Whether it was a stock or a product that is perhaps only in the production process is therefore irrelevant , it depends on the timing .
Mr President , I have one short question for the Commissioner .
If the Commission wants people to accept these products , why does it not give people what they want , which is simplicity and clarity .
Get rid of ' may contain ' .
Why do you want ' may contain ' ?
Just give people simplicity and clarity .
Let them choose .
Have some confidence in the people .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at 12.00 noon tomorrow .
( The House rose at 11.38 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
Mr President , please permit me , despite the fact that today is Thursday - a play on words which perhaps only Scandinavians will understand - to ask for a correction to the Minutes .
The fact is , my name was missing yesterday , even though I was demonstrably present at the vote .
I would therefore request a correction .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr Killilea , your observation is of course a courtesy for which I must thank you , but I do not think the Minutes are the proper place to portray reactions to comments or the way in which the sittings are conducted or not conducted .
Improvements in the functioning of the Institutions
The next item is the report ( A4-0117 / 98 ) by Mr Herman , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on improvements in the functioning of the Institutions without modification of the Treaties - making EU policies more open and democratic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , experience has shown that , for the most part , institutional improvements yielded by successive amendments to the Treaties have not so much been the result of negotiations at the Intergovernmental Conference as the sanctioning of established practices , either by means of institutional agreements or following Court of Justice decisions - for example , in the isoglucose ruling - or by extensive use of existing procedures so as to widen existing breaches , as was the case in the budgetary procedure .
It has also been noted that Parliament has acquired new powers as a result more of a gradual evolutionary process than of intermittent major advances .
We have made the transition in various areas from the information stage to consultation , from consultation to cooperation , from cooperation to codecision , from codecision to simplified codecision and sometimes even directly to the assent procedure .
The proposals set out draw heavily on this approach , which is more modest and less spectacular but would appear to be more effective in the long term .
Your rapporteur 's proposals are moreover among those pursued with continuity and perseverance by the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
In saying that , I am thinking mainly of the Aglietta report on commitology , the Anastassopoulos report on a uniform electoral procedure , the Theato report on the improvement of budgetary control and the Randzio-Plath report on democratic scrutiny of the ECB , as well as of proposals by Parliament which have the same aim , that of improving the functioning of the Institutions without amending the Treaty .
Owing to the demands of the timetable for introducing monetary union and the need to examine the other problems in greater depth , I have split this report into two parts .
For the moment we will discuss only the first part , for reasons of urgency , as we must take advantage of the occasion of monetary union to do what the Treaty of Amsterdam was not able to do .
It was in effect decided when drawing up the Treaty of Amsterdam that the provisions relating to monetary union should not be touched in any way .
The general feeling was that opening this Pandora 's box would create a series of difficulties .
It is true that at the time the Treaty of Amsterdam was being prepared the problems of the unemployment crisis had priority and it was very dangerous to approach monetary problems , which were very much disputed in certain countries .
That is why this area was left aside , while recognizing that the broad aim of the Treaty of Amsterdam was to improve democratic control and transparency .
But Parliament did not interfere with the area involving monetary union .
It was however admitted that in areas where greater coordination of economic policy was necessary , for example in the whole problematic area of unemployment , it was necessary to include Parliament in the consultation procedure , but this did not happen in the monetary area .
That is what needs to be put right with great urgency , which is what we are doing with this report .
We propose to sanction current practices with the Commission but not yet with the Council .
The Commission in effect took the initiative in consulting us .
It consulted us effectively , it continues to do so and it even did so yesterday .
In the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy we were consulted on recommendations relating to broad economic policy guidelines , or GOPES in our French jargon .
So we are consulted on these guidelines , but this consultation is informal .
What we ask is that the Council and the Commission , with Parliament , create a procedure by interinstitutional agreement which would formalize today 's practices .
That is the main part , which falls within the scope of today 's report .
It will be followed by other proposals in a second part , and I would ask you to excuse the fact that the report is not complete .
It had to be dealt with quickly because it was so urgent .
I would like to say immediately to my colleague , Mrs Randzio-Plath , that the report 's references to the democratic scrutiny of the Central Bank did not , at the time the report was written , mention her report .
It is not that I wish to take any less farreaching measures than she does , and I will ask straight away that a reference to her report be introduced in the amendments , to show that we are on the same wavelength .
Mr President , this report is highly significant , because ever since the beginning of the second stage of monetary union the European Parliament has been calling for an interinstitutional agreement between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , so that in the excessive deficit procedures , and more particularly in the basic aspects of economic policy and its enforcement , we can get to grips with the problem of democratic deficit .
We need the European Parliament to be actively involved in decision making , not only in all the other areas but also - crucially - in the area of economic and monetary union .
It is not just monetary union which begins on 1 January 1999 , it is economic union as well .
It simply will not do for Parliament 's involvement to be repeatedly thrown into doubt just by applying the principle of unanimity .
That is why the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy was emphatic that interinstitutional agreements should be reached in this area .
We must also consider to what extent it would be possible to use this agreement to achieve even more effective coordination of EU economic policies , because any distortion - such as that which currently exists between economic and monetary union - will be harmful to the European Union when it comes to tackling mass unemployment , stimulating investment and creating jobs .
It has been said quite rightly that the lack of economic coordination in the European Union will damage the prospects for growth , and that is something we simply cannot afford to let happen .
The European Council is therefore called upon to seize the initiative in this area and to respond positively to the approaches which Parliament has been making for many years , by concluding an agreement , or at least by agreeing to a proper cooperation procedure .
Mr President , the recent decision to proceed to the third stage of economic and monetary union and the stability pact , with the creation of the euro , represents a qualitative advance in the creation of a supra-national political power , but one which needs consistent institutionalization and democratic legitimacy .
After power has been transferred from the Member States to the European Union , these things can only be found in the European Parliament , because the control exercised by national parliaments is quite clearly insufficient and lacking in authority .
Furthermore all observers , whether in favour or critical of the European Union , have pointed out that monetary union is dangerous without effective coordination of economic policies within the Union , and without a budget capable of creating economic and social cohesion and a European taxation system . At the very least it would prevent us from realizing all the benefits of the single currency .
Also , everyone is concerned to find a way of ensuring that the institutions of economic and monetary union are responsible and accountable , without prejudice to the technical independence of the European Central Bank .
The Herman report provides an excellent reply to all these anxieties . The substance of the report is that if our expectations regarding the institutional reform of the Treaty of Amsterdam are frustrated , then we shall have to have recourse to the implementation of the Treaties - all the Treaties - making the fullest use of the opportunities they already offer , to give greater effectiveness to the European Union 's actions and to democratic control by a Parliament elected by direct universal suffrage .
And it will be so , if the political will exists to achieve it , both on the part of the European Parliament - whose work will have to be improved and whose responsibilities have already increased - and on the part of the national governments and political forces , which cannot be allowed to maintain the narrow nationalism which casts a shadow on the Council , the founders of the euro .
One of the methods that should be used is that of the interinstitutional agreements which have long been proposed in order to ensure that the European Parliament can exercise effective control and intervene effectively in the mechanisms already provided by the Treaty . If the political will is there , these will lay the foundations of a genuine ' economic government ' .
In order to counterbalance economic aspects with social considerations , there will have to be an increase in the mechanisms which the Treaty and agreements have already succeeded simultaneously in introducing in the field of employment .
There are a number of other important areas that still remain outside the democratic control of the European Parliament .
We must implement the proposals in the Herman report , which represent our determination to overcome the serious lack of democratic control in many areas of economic and social policy at European level .
That lack of control is all the more serious inasmuch as the institutional life of the European Union is experiencing an increasing tendency , similar to the one we are familiar with at national level , to drain real power away from Parliament to the executives or mere de facto economic influences - lobbies , professional associations , international financial capital , and so on - as regards our economic and social programme , the democratic monitoring and control of decisions and the periodic evaluation of their effects .
The Herman report seeks to strike a blow to make Parliament really influential , and I want to support and applaud that course of action . I want to make it clear that it is also our responsibility to promote participation by the people , by our social partners and by the European Union 's decision makers and all who are associated with them in that process .
Mr President , 2 May was a historic day .
Were it not for the fact that the term ' historic ' has been overused on many occasions , no doubt we would be able to use it in this instance too .
I think the only other comparable day was that day many years ago now when the EEC Treaty was signed in Rome .
Many years from now , we will realize what a giant step was taken in the construction of Europe with the launch of the euro .
The truth is that on the evening of 2 May , the least that can be said of the heads of state and government is that they were not on their best behaviour , but I do not think the anecdote should be given too much importance .
Also , I think the European Parliament has provided proof of its enormous responsibility when it comes to contributing to the launch of the euro . So I think it is now time to get down to work .
And that is what Fernand Herman 's report does : it gets to work .

For a long , long time , ladies and gentlemen - almost since the time of Mr Anastassopoulos ' ancestors - all ideas on political science and political sociology have been leading in the same direction : so as to arrange things in such a way that power limits power , as Montesquieu said , so there is no autonomous , completely independent power which is not answerable to anybody .
The system we have created - and that the Maastricht Treaty created in establishing a European Central Bank - is a system which is answerable to nobody . Precisely in order to guarantee its freedom and independence , no counterbalancing power was included in the Treaty .
What Mr Herman 's report tries to do is to ensure that , whilst safeguarding the European Central Bank 's autonomy , we representatives of the European peoples are informed of what is happening and can pass on our impressions to the directors of that bank .
That is very important because , in the resolution we passed in this Parliament on 20 November 1997 , we laid the foundations of the European Union as a union of states and a union of peoples .
So it is important for this Parliament to be kept informed , to be consulted and to state its opinion , in order to guarantee democratic responsibility .
That is what Mr Herman is trying to do in his report , and especially in the draft interinstitutional agreement .
So my group is going to support it , because we are convinced that it will help the European Central Bank , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council to collaborate efficiently .
We are going to support it .
And we are also going to support some of the amendments , which improve the text .
Mr President , as I said at the beginning of my speech , it is a good text with which to begin our work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I sincerely applaud the principles of openness and democracy in the operation of democratic institutions wherever they are upheld .
Yet whenever these matters are mentioned , we also talk about two essential sides to the question : the Community decision making process and the informing of Community institutions , particularly the European Parliament , as regards open questions .
On the first aspect , I would not wish to understate the fact that I consider the events of 2 May to have been historic .
I myself voted for the European Parliament 's recommendation on the creation of the euro .
But on this point , we are discussing matters concerned with the decision making process , and I am referring to questions of unanimity versus majority votes .
One of the things public opinion , and even some politicians , found most shocking , was the delay in taking the decision .
As we say in my country : " Alas for the King , it took eleven hours ! '
And it did !
It might have taken longer - or indeed , not so long !
The important thing , from my point of view , is that the countries harmonized their opinions and reached a final decision .
There are areas , ladies and gentlemen , where I think this rule should be kept when taking decisions .
With regard to democratic participation in Community institutions , I applaud Mr Herman 's report and consider it an important step towards raising the awareness not only of MEPs , but also of the national parliaments , as I would like to take this opportunity to underline .
I really do think the national parliaments should play an important part in checking and monitoring decisions , and in providing the information considered appropriate to enable everyone to participate properly in decisions that affect us all .
I am one of those people who believe that Europe will be richer , better and more acceptable to all its citizens if all those people , without exception , who have political responsibilities and have been elected by their peoples are able to participate in and be informed about decisions which , I repeat , affect everyone .
So to conclude , I think the report is an excellent step , an excellent resource , and an excellent way of starting out on the road to democratizing Community institutions .
Mr President , that part of Mr Alban 's text which is devoted to economic and monetary union , and on which I congratulate him , takes on a new dimension following the designation of the 11 countries which will take part in economic and monetary union , and the European Parliament 's approval of the composition of the executive board of the European Central Bank .
Personally , and I wish to say this before Parliament , I regret that such importance was given to the events surrounding the appointment of Mr Duisenberg .
The media and certain MEPs failed to distinguish correctly between the essential issue - the launching of a key phase of European construction - and issues of secondary importance , that is , the Council 's inadequate preparation for solving a problem which had been on the table for more than a year .
But let us get back to the essential issues .
The European Parliament , for the first time in its history , becomes the sole interlocutor of an institution as powerful as the European Central Bank . That represents a huge step forward in terms of Parliament 's legitimacy .
It has exclusive contact compared with the Council , the Commission and the national parliaments .
It now remains for Parliament to prove its ability to deal with this new responsibility , as regards its contacts with the ECB , for example the responsibility of becoming a link to the citizens and the opinions which are expressed . That will be the subject of Mr Herman 's future report .
It was Mr Schioppa himself who said in his excellent speech that the European Central Bank will need to explain its actions , not only to the market operators but also to the Community institutions , to public opinion and to the media .
The European Parliament , by means of its competent committees , will have to organize these relations .
Finally , how could we fail to be pleased by the conviction shown by several of the directors when they firmly stated that the need for economic and monetary union will be dependent upon the institutional progress of the European Union towards stronger and better integrated institutions , which would compel us all to clarify the objectives of the Union .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Herman .
His proposals are very useful .
He notes the need to reinforce the control of the European Parliament in areas such as economic and monetary union , and in particular the coordination of economic policies , but also competition policies , external commercial policies and even a revival of the issue of social policy .
So it is a very useful report , and one which is very relevant to events we are currently witnessing .
I must also say that the importance of coordinating economic policies was eclipsed by all the problems of control , strictly speaking , of the European Central Bank . It is surprising that we made so much of the opinion on the appointment of the executive board , which is not a core issue , while we are not currently discussing the content of the choices to be made in terms of coordination .
Perhaps favourable economic conditions are masking the importance of this issue .
There will only be democratic supervision of the European Central Bank if , simultaneously , a capacity for cooperation of national economic policies is demonstrated within a balanced concept of the institutions and the running of the institutions .
This requires a power capable of maintaining dialogue with the European Central Bank .
From this point of view , I understand the demand made of the European Central Bank in the report , that it clearly states its objectives , including those objectives which do not come strictly within its responsibilities , such as growth - and here I will add employment - , so that the dialogue between Parliament and that institution is fertile and so that it can be judged in full knowledge of the facts .
Having said that , allow me to underline two limitations to your approach .
Firstly it assumes that the European Parliament is capable of playing a political role in the substance of political and economic options .
Secondly , you are examining its relations with civil society and the social players , and you are confining yourself to a procedure within the institutions .
I regret that the proposal which you voted for here following my 1996 report was not applied , although there was an ample vote in favour .
It proposed that the European Parliament should deliberate economic policy options even before a Commission recommendation or Council decision .
And I proposed that our Parliament should have an annual meeting with representatives of civil society .
Your text proposes an internal resolution , following a recommendation by the Commission .
Why does the European Parliament not wish to take its political role more seriously ?
This is a test .
I will end by saying that in order to reflect on the consistency between the social objectives of the Union and the choices of financial and monetary policies , we absolutely must become much more involved in dialogue with the social players , the representatives of civil society .
That is the extent of your report , which is nevertheless excellent .
Mr President , as a colleague of mine on the Committee on Institutional Affairs , the rapporteur knows that I am not one of those people who simply follow established ritual by thanking and complimenting each and every rapporteur .
I therefore thank Mr Herman not because it is traditional to do so , but out of great personal respect for his influential voice in the debate on the democratization of the EU .
I consider this report to be very important indeed .
The report 's achievement lies in producing a frank and somewhat singular diagnosis of the democratic deficit in the EU and , by way of a clear and definite strategy , in producing a host of proposals , which I fully endorse .
However , I would like to say something about the rapporteur 's basic strategy .
The second part of the report is sadly missing from the diagnosis .
The original reason given for this was that the report had to be submitted by 2 May .
We are now well past that date , so perhaps that decision was not quite the right one . However , as has been said , we shall have to deal with the second part later .
The essential part of this diagnosis , in my view , lies in the fact that the rapporteur very clearly shows that parliamentary control is being withdrawn from the national parliaments in an increasing number of political spheres without this control being transferred to the European Parliament .
I consider this to be a quite decisive statement , because it is something which has not yet been properly grasped by the public at large .
It means quite simply that the EU 's chain of legitimacy has long since been broken .
It means that the public no longer has an insight into the institutional system . It means that our citizens ' right to parliamentary control - and hence to public control - of the executive has been undermined .
This leads me in turn to criticize that practice , that pragmatic strategy , which the rapporteur is proposing in order to extend parliamentary rights and tackle the problem of democratic deficit .
The previous strategy of muddling through , of continuous negotiation , of reinterpretation , of stretching things to the limit , certainly brought the EU success over the years , but I think the rapporteur overlooks the fact that this strategy has not been able to prevent the ever widening gulf between centralization in Europe and democratization in the EU , or the increasingly frequent breakages in the chain of legitimacy , or the emergence of major legal uncertainties in the structure of EU institutions , or the institutional system 's growing lack of transparency in the eyes of the general public , or the fact that such a strategy has failed to create a republican system of government , or that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Herman . On behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , he highlights a number of points , doubtless some of the most important , which leave the European Parliament dissatisfied following the Treaty of Amsterdam , and which above all propose a way to try to overcome this shortcoming .
Without by any means withholding my support , I ask the question : what can be done ?
We asked a lot of things of Amsterdam and hoped it would provide more adequate answers for Europe .
Those answers were not forthcoming , but I think they are essential ; otherwise a Europe of twenty or twenty-five will not be possible .
Having said that , there are two questions I would like to ask in this debate . I address them to Mr Herman , who knows my position well .
Firstly , can we continuously list after the event , so to speak , the litany of the causes of our dissatisfaction , which should have provoked a more vigorous reaction on our part when it was adopted , when we gave our political agreement to the Treaty of Amsterdam ?
Secondly , are the interinstitutional agreements the appropriate formula simply because there is no other solution ?
We saw this in the case of the Central Bank ...
However , were we not committed to an interinstitutional agreement ?
Of course but , by way of reply , we do not have one !
So is this formula the right one because the other side does not wish to agree with us ?
Those are the two questions I wanted to ask , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
Mr President , the Herman report regrets the fact that in European politics there are areas where national parliaments are deprived of democratic control , without this being replaced by European Parliamentary control . To solve the problem without amending the Treaty , he proposes that agreements be concluded between the European institutions in various sectors , thus allowing the powers of the European Parliament to be extended .
This type of process calls for various comments on our part .
Firstly , a situation where there is no democratic control is of course reprehensible , but if we complain about it - justifiably - we should not then also approve its extension .
But this is what is going to happen with the draft Treaty of Amsterdam , which the majority of this Parliament approves , but which will reduce democracy in Europe and deprive the national parliaments of their powers without offering any equivalent democratic control .
For example , may I remind you that the new Title IV of the EC Treaty provided by Amsterdam will remove from the national parliaments all decision making powers in the field of immigration , without providing any replacement control for at least five years , and then only the inadequate control of the European Parliament .
Such deficiencies cannot be remedied by simple interinstitutional agreements which have the distinction of being prepared in obscurity , leaving out the national parliaments , and not being ratified by the people .
The method and the objectives have to be changed .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations believes that to overcome the democratic deficit in Europe we need a new treaty - note the use of the word ' treaty ' rather than ' interinstitutional agreements ' - to restore the national parliaments ' role within the European decision making process .
In this respect , I regret that Members have once again shown ostracism , a few days ago , by excluding on principle the national parliaments from control of the euro .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Amsterdam Treaty constitutes a significant step on the road to the democratization of the European Union , and our journey down this road must continue .
The Intergovernmental Conference has agreed that the common institutions should use every means to improve their functioning without any change in the Treaties .
There is room for manoeuvre and the Herman report suggests various themes which we think are of prime importance .
Firstly , economic and monetary union .
The future president of the ECB has ensured us that he is willing to hold regular quarterly meetings to exchange ideas .
We emphatically welcome this readiness for dialogue , but it is something which should not just depend on the goodwill of whoever is in charge at the ECB .
That is why we want an interinstitutional agreement - one which also incorporates Parliament 's participation in the procedures for coordinating EU economic policy .
Secondly , Parliament continues to play a weak role , both in the area of foreign trade and payments policy , and in competition policy .
The current information procedures are in need of improvement .
The details of this should also be decided by interinstitutional agreements .
Thirdly , employment and social policy .
The fight against unemployment and the development of the European social model are priority issues , the importance of which is also confirmed by the Amsterdam Treaty .
The latter makes Parliament an equal legislator in many areas of social policy .
But there is a yawning gap in the democratic process where agreements between the social partners at European level are to be implemented by Council decisions .
The fact that there are no plans to involve Parliament is in stark contradiction to the principle that legislative actions always require Parliamentary legitimation .
Such a process must now be established , at least on an informal basis , and this is something which also requires an interinstitutional agreement .
After all , as we know , it is still true to say that more democratization in Europe logically means more reforms .
Mr President , the decision making process over the euro has demonstrated again that the degree of democracy in the European Union is still in need of urgent improvement .
Admittedly , we have made important progress with the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I estimate that some 80 % of legislation and the budget will soon be controlled by the European Parliament , but that does not alter the fact that a number of important areas are not included , as my colleague Mr Herman has indicated in his report .
Agricultural policy , fisheries policy , common trade policy , competition policy and development cooperation policy - none of these types of areas are yet controlled in this democratic way .
We are not likely to be able to do anything about this before the next round of Treaty changes .
Mr Herman has made an excellent proposal to try and improve this control in the meantime by concluding interinstitutional agreements .
I find this an excellent proposal , and I think we should do it - not just in relation to the area discussed in the report , but also in other areas .
At the same time we must ensure the Treaties are changed , and give our support to this , before a number of new Member States join .
Mr President , perhaps we should also get ready to show our teeth , because I for one am of the opinion that we should now start to withdraw our cooperation from measures which are not subject to democratic control , exercised by either national parliaments or by our own Parliament . We could do this at the consultation stage .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasize that cooperation between national parliaments and the European Parliament ought to be improved .
Many parliaments have so-called joint committees .
These do not yet exist in the Netherlands , but I hope that the newly-elected Lower House in the Netherlands will soon introduce such a joint committee , so that the twilight zone of institutional cooperation can be better controlled , by the national parliaments as well as by the European Parliament .
I should like to support Mr Herman 's proposal wholeheartedly . His report deserves wide support today , from the entire Parliament .
Mr President , congratulations ! You are making great strides in Dutch .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament likes to complain , and does so frequently , about the slowness of the European decision making process . We also tread new paths , as is our duty .
We like to signpost new routes for the future .
Despite this , European reality sometimes progresses more quickly than expected .
The promises about a continuous dialogue between the executive board of the European Central Bank and this Parliament strike me as a good and happy example of this .
My group and I will in future unfailingly continue to contribute to an increase in openness , transparency and accountability in all the Union 's institutions , as we have always done .
Some of these institutions are beginning to understand that the people of Europe will only continue to accept the Union if ' accountability ' , as it is called in English , is implicit .
The Commission understands this , and the executive board of the European Central Bank seem to understand this too .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to conclude by sharing with you my opinion that it is the Council , as an extension of the governments of the Member States , who have the greatest difficulty in understanding their duty with respect to safeguarding democracy in the entire Union .
Together with the rapporteur and our colleagues in this Parliament , we will see to it that their understanding continues to improve .
Mr President , the Herman report is commendable , indicating as it does the democratic deficit that exists within the Union .
The report shows very clearly something which , in effect , we already knew : that is , how much is wanting as far as democratic control , democratic legitimacy , openness and transparency are concerned .
This is a very serious democratic problem , not least in respect of EMU , the euro and economic policy .
To employ temporary arrangements to rectify or compensate for these democratic shortcomings retrospectively is perhaps akin to crying in the wilderness .
Nevertheless , I must support the interinstitutional agreement proposed in the report , since it at least helps to do something about the democratic deficit .
I shall also be voting for the amendment by the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , which states that such an agreement requires consultation with the Member States and also greater influence for , and consultation with , the national parliaments .
But the real deficit is surely the lack of support among the citizens for such issues as EMU , and the lack of dialogue .
Mr President , I would like to pay tribute to the rapporteur who is pursuing a line this Parliament has always pursued , namely taking the Treaties as they stand , recognizing their insufficiencies but trying to interpret them in the most creative way possible , trying to take the Treaties and , as it were , stretch them like a piece of elastic to try to get as much out of them as is reasonably possible .
Mr Herman is a veteran of the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
He knows very well what is possible and what is not possible in this regard .
He has come up with another admirable piece of work today .
Our colleague from the Europe of Nations Group , however , claims that this is undemocratic , that it is changing the constitution by means of backdoor deals in closed rooms between the institutions .
I must beg to differ with that view .
After all , what is done can only be done in the context of the Treaties .
It cannot change the Treaties .
So the Treaties as ratified by all our national parliaments will not be changed by the back door .
But there is always room for interpreting Treaties and for going for one interpretation rather than another .
It is quite legitimate for us to do this .
It is something Parliament has done in the past with great skill and we are doing it again .
Far from being undemocratic , any interinstitutional agreement is between the elected governments who meet in the Council on the one hand and the directly elected Parliament on the other .
It is an agreement reached in public whose text is voted in a public vote in the elected Parliament .
It is not undemocratic .
I very much regret that the EN Group - which I believe officially stands for the Europe of Nations Group but should really stand for Eurosceptic Nutcases - takes this particular view .
I am sure that the overwhelming majority in the European Parliament will back the resolution that has been put before us .
Mr President , the Herman report is very much to the point and has the relevance we have come to expect from our intelligent and tireless colleague .
Firstly , because the democratization of European economic policy is more necessary than ever since the arrival of the third stage of monetary union .
Also , because Amsterdam alone has not resolved the problem , since economic and monetary matters were excluded from the negotiations .
We do know , however , that it is becoming more and more difficult to get anything out of intergovernmental conferences , however hard you squeeze them .
An interinstitutional agreement to involve the European Parliament in the decision making legitimization chain is appropriate with the advent of an economic policy that will of necessity be more and more a joint one , in the wake of the single currency .
An independent single currency is the very symbol of an emancipated European civil society , of which the currency is more truly the expression than any political power .
That is another reason why the only body that represents that civil society - the European Parliament - should be brought into the front line of political participation .
So an interinstitutional agreement may be the right way to plug the gaps in the Treaties .
What is more , in some of the cases I have described , the European Parliament has already acted informally .
And the Council also accepted the institutionalization of participation by the European Parliament only last week , particularly as regards Agenda 2000 .
Everyone , therefore , is aware that our most important future task should be democratization above all .
I would like to thank Mr Herman for his work .
Mr President , I would like to concentrate on the lack of democratic control pursuant to the Euratom Treaty .
This is not an abstract issue but a very specific one .
Nuclear matters are an important part of European activities , and the powers of the Commission under the Treaty , especially in the context of international agreements , are quite extensive .
The present issue of non-proliferation in India is a case in point .
Paradoxically , the role of the European Parliament is minimal , or rather , non-existent in this area .
This is no longer acceptable in 1998-40 years after the signature of the Euratom Treaty .
I am therefore very pleased that Mr Herman has taken this point on board in paragraphs 15 and 16 .
We are now faced with the specific matter of KEDO , the Korean Energy Development Organization , which raises geopolitical issues and issues of nuclear non-proliferation , safety and energy , but the European Parliament is playing a very marginal role .
I am very pleased to see Commissioner Oreja here and I call on him to take the initiative to agree to institute a formal consultation procedure on the important matter of KEDO .
I hope also for the support of this House for Amendment No 3 , which asks the Commission for information on the financial consequences of this important issue before signing the agreement .
I think I have covered this in just under one and a half minutes .
Mr President , the procedure with interinstitutional agreements is , in my opinion , extremely questionable from a democratic point of view .
In the first place , it is not possible in any democratic country to amend constitutional laws in this manner .
Such amendments must be effected in a manner that is open and subject to the control of the citizens .
Secondly , the European Parliament cannot replace the authority of the national parliaments .
The national parliaments are , of course , founded on what we call the principle of national sovereignty - that is , they are the leading legislative institution within the state .
The European Parliament , on the other hand , is of course bound and trapped in a complex structure where the citizens truly lack influence and which is not ruled by the openness that prevails in national systems .
Moreover , the national parliaments have historically been carried forward by parties and movements struggling for democratic and civil rights .
The European Parliament , on the other hand , has been created " from above ' , and its tragedy is that it really lacks a civil foundation .
Thirdly , a genuine democratization of the Union would actually require a radical reform of its entire structure .
The power of the Commission should decrease , since public officials are not supposed to have political power or to be as important as elected politicians .
The power of the national parliaments should increase .
The Council 's power should also increase , since it , of course , consists of government representatives who have parliamentary accountability in their home countries .
Finally , the overall organization of the Union should be substantially reduced in size .
It is both wrong and unproductive that we sit here in the EU 's institutions , including Parliament , and decide upon enormous amounts of details and regulations .
Instead , we should be focusing all our energies on the major pan-European problems and questions .
Mr President , I too welcome Mr Herman 's report , particularly some parts of it that have hardly been touched on by previous speakers : the need to control power at European level where it has been lost by national parliaments , the need for greater parliamentary control over agricultural and trade policy and , in particular , its recognition that the European Parliament itself must be made more open and more effective .
We often criticize the democratic deficit and shortcomings in other institutions , but are less critical of our own .
Inevitably , however , our minds are on economic and monetary union , and I even welcome Mr Herman 's comments on the democratic accountability of the ECB .
I would prefer that the bank were under proper political control , but it seems that we are all now , or most of us , in thrall to the new religion of ' central bankism ' and the best we can hope for is that when the bank screws the people of Europe it will have to come to the European Parliament to account for it .
There is one major shortcoming in any possible control that this Parliament might exercise over the ECB and in the latter 's accountability to it , and that is the statement by Mr Duisenberg in the hearings that the minutes should only be published after 16 years .
This is wholly unacceptable .
The governors of the ECB are appointed for a fixed period and cannot be got rid of no matter how abysmal they turn out to be .
They have that at least in common with Members of the European Parliament .
They cannot be got at and it is therefore quite unacceptable that they should continue to behave as if they were members of some religious cell answerable only to the God of the Market .
I believe that the minutes of the ECB should be available to this Parliament in a matter of weeks - not after a period of 16 years , and unless we can find out how the deliberations go in a much shorter period I think that the whole notion of accountability is something of an illusion .
Mr President , the European Parliament must fight for its democratic rights .
That has been the case in years gone by and the future will certainly be no different .
Interinstitutional agreements are an excellent way for the European Parliament to acquire , in important areas , those rights which are appropriate to a democratic European Union .
Mr Herman 's excellent report indicates a number of important areas in which progress can be made and where our efforts must be directed in the near future .
I should like to direct our attention to some of the other major questions which will face us in the coming months and years , issues in which the European Parliament wants to - and indeed must - become more deeply involved , as is in keeping with current Treaty law .
Major reforms are imminent in the areas of the common agricultural policy and the structural policy .
We have had to negotiate a new financial perspective for the years ahead , and for all the areas in question it seems important for the European Parliament to be involved in the decision making process in a manner which is proper and appropriate to a democratic Union .
We shall have to fight for these rights .
In a quite significant area - namely in the pre-accession strategy and agreements - the British Presidency has already commendably stated its readiness to grant Parliament many of the rights and opportunities which we simply do not yet have under current Treaty law .
I am expecting the Austrian presidency to do likewise and to give this Parliament the opportunity to participate in the decision making process when it comes to the major issues facing the Union .
Mr President , the Danish referendum on the Amsterdam Treaty is now only two weeks away .
One reason many Danes are contemplating voting ' No ' is because they feel the system is closed , bureaucratic and undemocratic .
In many ways , I believe the EU system far outshines its reputation .
The European Parliament is much more open than the majority of national parliaments .
The Commission is surely no more bureaucratic than other state bureaucracies .
However , that does not mean we can rest on our laurels .
Many problems are waiting to be tackled and we should always be on the lookout for any improvements that could make us more open and democratic .
Interinstitutional agreements are often a good idea in our quest for more openness and democracy in the EU .
However , there is at least one area mentioned in the rapporteur 's excellent report in which I do not wish to see interinstitutional agreements increasing the influence of the European Parliament .
This is social dialogue .
Social dialogue is still in its infancy , and it is important for us to leave it to the parties to the labour market to achieve mutual agreement and establish a framework for collaboration .
Preferably , we should not get involved .
Now that the UK , too , has been included in the social protocol , there is even more reason to wait and see .
Now there is some hope of really speeding up the negotiations .
In terms of competition , no-one now stands to benefit by remaining outside .
In short , I am voting in favour of the rapporteur 's excellent report because of the many positive elements it contains and because we must never stop investigating how to make the EU more open and democratic .
But I have no desire to interfere in social dialogue ; let us keep our fingers out of the pie !
Mr President , I would also like to thank Mr Herman for an excellent report .
The immense new challenges of the European integration process , such as the eastwards enlargement of the Union and the single currency , will require a lot of time for the formulation of opinions . The imparting of information to our citizens takes unconditional priority .
An examination of the institutions is essential in this regard .
Openness and the democratic machine are difficult terms to define when we talk of a citizens ' Europe .
It is the people that make up Europe , not the institutes or the Member States .
Nevertheless , there is still only the vaguest reference to ordinary citizens when legitimizing so-called major projects .
Economic and monetary union has caused national powers of decision making to pass into the hands of the ECB , which is not controlled by any democratic body whatsoever .
A rather sadly comic example is that the EMU issue was discussed by a Union institution behind closed doors and barbed wire , hidden away from other people .
The media followed the EMU debate in the European Parliament unusually closely that weekend , because that was the only institution that was discussing the matter with the doors open .
It is important to correct the democratic deficit with increasingly effective partnership between the European Parliament and national Parliaments , in order to safeguard common parliamentary interests .
Increased openness cannot create a creditable base for a citizens ' Europe unless the institutions meet the great new challenges ahead .
The fateful and foolish decision of the Amsterdam Conference in favour of common democratic surveillance and reform of the institutions will inevitably have an effect on the timetable for enlargement .
How could our citizens give their support to an enlarged Europe if , despite the fact that the Commission has issued papers in a variety of colours , everyone can see that Union institutions and national governments do not have the political will to embrace real change , and openness seems merely a catchword ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to congratulate Mr Herman on his excellent report , which is another parliamentary initiative designed to make the European system increasingly democratic and responsible , especially when the provisions of the Treaty leave areas of uncertainty with regard to the quantity or quality of democratic control .
As the rapporteur has underlined this morning , the Treaty of Amsterdam represented major progress with respect to codecision , as regards both its scope and its procedures - in the appointment of the European Commission , in parliamentary control over the implementation of the budget , and in executive activities in general .
I would remind you in this respect that the Commission is preparing the review of the commitology decision of 13 July 1987 .
I also want to mention the growing role of the national parliaments and COSAC , the conference of specialized parliamentary committees .
Undoubtedly , the development of this process of participation by the national parliaments and close cooperation between representatives elected democratically at European and national level has benefited from the very positive climate of collaboration which has been established between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
And in that sense , I also thought it very timely that Mr Herzog mentioned the role civil society should play , and the suggestion of regular meetings .
The subject raised by the rapporteur is the strengthening of Parliament 's powers or , as it says in the proposal , its increased participation in essential sectors of the Union 's policies , using measures which do not modify the existing Treaties but guarantee democratic control , at least until the new intergovernmental conference .
In my opinion , most of the proposed measures are very useful and offer prospects for agreements to be negotiated at institutional level .
In that sense , we eagerly await the second part of the report , already announced by Mr Herman .
For example , I think that in monetary or foreign policy issues , the European Parliament should be able fully to exercise the right of control , without questioning the provisions of the Treaty until the next intergovernmental conference .
These sectors are too important to the future of the Union for there not to be efficient democratic control .
Of course , it is not a question of either subjecting the provisions of the Treaty to force or creating obstacles which might delay decisions , since these must be taken quickly .
But it is essential to remove the barriers which , in practice , prevent the European Parliament from fully expressing its point of view , which should of course be taken into account by the other institutions .
So we need to find and create that margin for interpretation , as Mr Corbett said , and as I understand it , that is also the rapporteur 's intention .
On the other hand , I think we need to avoid the excessive fragmentation of interinstitutional agreements .
The report proposes a series of sectors in which the agreements should accompany the Treaties , in a manner of speaking .
The rapporteur has identified these sectors well . However , I wonder if it is really essential to have a specific agreement for each of them , or whether it is not better to define , jointly , some principle of general application , instead of negotiating specific rules sector by sector .
But I am just asking a question . I do not have the answer .
I think it is something we can take into consideration .
Also , I do not think the interinstitutional agreements should distort certain Treaty provisions .
For example , I am thinking of the problem of approving agreements made by the social partners .
I do not think the approval procedure needs to be made more complicated . As everybody knows , it is of an almost legal nature , I would say .
The institutions can decide whether or not to approve that type of agreement but , of course , what they cannot do is decide to modify them .
I wonder if the European Parliament - which has to assess whether it wants such agreements or not - has not already got enough ability to express itself politically , both during and at the end of negotiations .
Also , we must remember that basically social policy is not implemented through this sort of agreement , but through the other Treaty procedures .
I would remind you that President Santer had to hold a conference for the social partners , to check their willingness to use social agreements for specific matters .
I am not going to repeat the details of this excellent report .
My aim with these comments is to show you that I have studied the Herman report in depth , because it merits careful study .
I also want to say that it ranks among the initiatives taken by the Committee on Institutional Affairs with a view to getting the Treaty of Amsterdam applied in the most appropriate fashion and , above all , guaranteeing that the Union 's decisions are democratic .
That has always been Mr Herman 's concern , not just in this report but for many years , and he always gives important clues about how to carry on making progress in the right direction .
This process , which extends the guidelines expressed by this Parliament in January 1986 , is being followed attentively by the European Commission , which places itself at Parliament 's disposition .
In its resolution to approve the Single European Act - Mr Herman will remember it - the European Parliament made a highly realistic commitment in welcoming the new Treaties and helping to improve the building of Europe , both through reforms and using an intelligent and forward-looking application of the existing rules .
Mr President , I note that Parliament is continuing along those same lines today .
We have seen how the speeches have demonstrated a clear majority in favour of these views , and therefore I want to repeat my congratulations to the rapporteur .
But a lot has been said about 2 May and I do not want to finish without mentioning the dates 8 and 9 of May , which saw the recent European Movement congress 50 years after the Congress of Europe in The Hague in 1948 .
And I want to convey to you the fact that many of the speeches made there , especially the one by the President of this Parliament , stressed that this century must not end without a great initiative being launched to allow us to create an institutional framework in keeping with the great progress we have seen in Europe over the last few years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Information and communication policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0115 / 98 ) by Mr Pex , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the information and communication policy in the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , our debate is running slightly late .
I must draw your attention to this .
We are keen to vote on Mr Pex 's report at noon .
I therefore request everybody to respect their speaking time strictly , and I will remind people of this where necessary .
Mr Pex , you now have the floor for six minutes . Please begin by setting us a good example .
Mr President , in its budget the European Union has allocated 27 eurocents per head of population to informing the citizen about what is happening in Brussels and Strasbourg .
That is not very much , which means this small budget must be managed carefully and everything must be done to ensure that the communications and information activities are as effective as possible .
This Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , and latterly also the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , have made efforts over the past few years to improve the information policy .
This has led to the own-initiative report which I am able to present to you today .
The report carries my name , but the text is the fruit of the excellent cooperation between all the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Institutional Affairs , and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I thank all my colleagues for their cooperation , and especially for their input .
Briefly , these are the things my report deals with . Firstly , actually improving the coordination of information activities .
Secondly , improving the coordination of activities between the different European Union institutions , especially between the Commission and the European Parliament .
Other institutions could become involved in this .
It is this point in particular which has created difficulties in the past .
In my opinion , this policy has focused too much - and sometimes still does - on demonstrating the merits of the respective institutions , and not enough on the citizens ' need for information .
The third aspect is the decentralization of activities down to the level of Member States and the regions within the Member States .
The message from Brussels does not always come across .
The message needs to be translated for the local culture and views , if the message is to be understood .
That means more must be done by the national offices of both the Commission and this Parliament , so it is important that these offices are reorganized .
The fourth is the creation of so-called " European Union Houses ' , which are an amalgamation of the national offices of the Commission and this Parliament , so that the citizen can access information in a single location .
It is of the utmost importance that these European Union Houses should be established where they can be easily recognized and accessed by the citizen .
They should be able to enter them as easily as entering a shop .
Separate counters should be provided for Parliament and the Commission if required , as each European institution must continue to be able to retain and fulfil its responsibilities , irrespective of the amount of cooperation .
The fifth point is to improve the quality of information , partly by employing modern communication techniques , an improved audiovisual service , and the proper use of electronic information technology .
The information policy is not a means to an end .
What matters is that the citizen becomes interested in what Europe does for him and what it means to him .
In the Netherlands we have a saying : " The farmer does not like what he does not know ' , and also : " Unknown , unloved ' .
All the surveys show that people are not terribly interested in European issues , and they do not know much about the institutions .
This is made manifest by the most important poll of all , the European elections .
In my country , the turnout for the 1994 election was a mere 35 % .
What will it be like in 1999 , if the policy does not change ?
The issue is , first , to arouse interest amongst the citizens of Europe , and after that , to meet the information requirements adequately .
The organization of common activities of both institutions requires special attention .
A moment ago I mentioned the need for actual coordination , and this means we cannot leave it at fine words about good cooperation , as was the case until recently .
It means that the organization , management and control should be set up in such a way that there is true coordination .
In this , a distinction must be made between political management and implementation .
According to the rules of this Parliament , the political responsibility for information policy rests with the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
Carrying out the specific information activities of this Parliament falls within the remit of the Bureau of this Parliament .
And the general information initiatives carried out in conjunction with the Commission are the responsibility of the interinstitutional Working Party on Ongoing Information Activities which is to be set up .
This is a clear structure which is , in fact , already in existence and headed competently by Mr Anastassopoulos .
However , it should be used more specifically , so that the policy can be laid down appropriately and implemented .
The advantage of this approach is that we will be able to start implementing the new policy tomorrow .
A practical aspect of the cooperation between the Commission and Parliament is that they can both use the communication infrastructure .
I am thinking of audiovisual services and press facilities .
Cooperation here means cost savings and higher effectiveness , and a better service for the press .
We need good communication channels .
I have sought to let the relationship with Euronews function on a new basis , and to intensify the relationship .
This could also be the case with other broadcasting organizations , of course , especially with regional and local ones . ' Europe by satellite ' could play a special role here .
This , too , requires a customer oriented policy .
I would like to conclude by thanking my committee and my colleagues for all the work which has been done .
I hope that all those involved in the policy , and first and foremost the Members of this Parliament , will want to participate in this customer oriented policy , placing the citizens at the centre , with the institutions subservient in the background .
Mr President , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights paid particular attention to the institutional question of a modern and efficient information policy .
Essentially , the situation is simple .
The European Union has a duty to inform people and this is implied in the Treaties , its powers and its objectives .
The citizen is entitled to receive accurate information about what we do for him .
It is true , no other international organization in the world has such a direct impact on the lives of ordinary citizens .
A working party chaired by myself as far back as 1993 highlighted the information policy 's lack of strategy guidelines .
There is no general message common to all the institutions in which the citizens can recognize themselves .
If the message is to get through , it must be expressed in clear and simple terms .
Moreover , if it is to be understood , it must reflect reality , and that means that the message to the citizen must present an accurate and unambiguous image of the European Union .
Who is to convey this message ?
Undoubtedly , both the Commission and Parliament play a part .
The Commission , as a supranational body and guardian of the Treaties , retains a leading role in communication .
But the European Parliament , whose impact and role continue to increase , must be able to fulfil its obligation of communication towards the citizen .
Not only as far as the overall policy of the Union is concerned , but also primarily concerning its own input into the European integration process and its impact on life in the European Union .
Or , to put it briefly : we , as Parliament , must show the citizens that the political institutions are there for them , and not the other way round .
Mr President , in a report which I submitted to the Bureau on 21 March 1995 on an information policy for the European Parliament , among other things I recommended the drawing up of a report by the competent Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and an annual debate in the House on this important issue .
However , it has taken three whole years to arrive at today 's debate .
During this time , the information issue has not ceased to concern us greatly and the Bureau has pushed forward a number of actions which have sketched out a new policy .
Our starting point was the realization that a great lack of communication separated the European Union from its citizens .
I am not a blind devotee of opinion polls , but when in all the opinion polls , year after year , 60 to 70 % of citizens declare that they have no knowledge of what is happening in Europe , or that there is a lack of information on the subject , the problem can only be regarded as crucial for democracy in Europe .
How can there be serious discussion about a citizens ' Europe or citizens ' participation under such conditions ?
To begin to reduce somewhat this significant lack of communication , we attached primary importance to the development of cooperation with the European Commission , which has more general responsibility for information on European activities .
The Commission responded and set up an organizational working party chaired by Mr Oreja and myself .
This group has worked hard over the last few years and laid the foundations for more methodical coordination and a more systematic policy .
Such terms as partnership , decentralization , dialogue with the citizens , and communication without propagandist undertones took on a new meaning .
The PRINCE programme for the three major actions in this field served as a laboratory for the implementation of our new ideas and methods in an effort to turn the rapidly developing new technology to advantage .
We also had the satisfaction of seeing our original cooperation with the Commission finally take on a trilateral dimension , as the governments of 11 Member States signed agreements with us and shared in the joint effort .
Thanks to the spirit of cooperation shown consistently not only by Commissioner Oreja but also by his colleagues , for which we thank them , the framework of our actions has thus been traced out and put to the test . And from within this general framework has come the report we are debating today , after so much delay .
The problem of our communication with the citizens naturally remains , and it is enormous .
The little progress that has been made is not enough to significantly reduce this lack of communication .
We need more money .
The approximately ECU 100 million a year represents little more than the budget of an average European company which normally advertises a single product .
We need even better cooperation with the Commission and even better coordination .
We need even better cooperation with governments , and governments must cease to claim all successes as their own and to present the European Union as the scapegoat for all failures .
We need to make even greater use of the new technologies and to have greater access to television , which is the chief or only source of information for 70 % of citizens .
The main thing , I think , is that we must not be discouraged by the difficulties , and we must persevere .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the citizens of the European Union will very , very soon be faced with this electoral date which is going to be very important for Europe , that is the re-election of Parliament , without forgetting , of course , the reappointment of the Commission .
Unfortunately , I am not sure that the communication policy applied today has achieved its aims , whether this policy is specialized or intended for the general public .
Who is familiar with the functioning of the institutions ?
Who is familiar with the content of the Treaties ?
Who knows the risks of enlargement ?
Who knows our decisions ?
Only the farmers know about the worrying CAP plans . Their organizations have an excellent system of communication .
As a result , information is achievable .
Let us try , therefore , to make the general public aware of what the European Union has achieved and the advantages it presents . This would help them in their choice , and create support for a European construction which is in accordance with their wishes .
In all parliaments , the risks of communication are political and are therefore a matter for the democracy and authority of their executive .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media is also , as its name indicates , the committee responsible for media . It therefore has a duty to consider and form an opinion on the subject of this policy .
Our group was involved fully in this work and while we always supported the theory of the rapporteur , Mr Pex - which was to optimize the joint resources available at an institutional level - we defended the idea that Parliament did not necessarily have the same political ideas to communicate as the Commission .
In effect , this diversity of opinion prepares the public for an understanding of what is at stake .
A committee on European information was proposed by the rapporteur as a kind of executive of the communication policy .
I , for my part , have never supported this idea and today it seems that its adoption would not have any binding legal value .
Our political group recognizes the importance of the overall consideration which has been given to this important topic and congratulates the rapporteur , Mr Pex , on the work which has been accomplished .
We agree with the main objectives which have been determined : objectives of decentralization , interinstitutional cooperation , intensifying contacts with citizens , value for money , research and transparency .
All of this is extremely important to us .
The fundamental message of the Treaty of Amsterdam was to force the European Union to communicate more intensively with its citizens .
Let us try to apply the Treaty ourselves , and let us prepare the citizens for an understanding of what is being decided for them .
I would not like to finish without congratulating the rapporteur once again .
Mr President , since the outset this report has created a certain feeling of uneasiness , as also demonstrated by our President , Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado 's speech , an extremely rare event in a public sitting . He thinks the text goes against the Treaty and Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
This ambiguity remains after amendment .
If it is a question of ensuring a more effective information policy , it will suffice to study the improvements which can be made in the functioning of the Directorates-General responsible , with full respect for Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , and obviously in relation to Parliament 's Bureau .
Many of Mr Pex 's suggestions are also interesting in this respect .
The report goes further , however .
In paragraph 16 it grants a degree of power to an ad hoc body , but in this case it must guarantee its objectivity .
That is not the case .
The composition of the working party , which is made up essentially of political representatives and not civil servants , shows the exclusive presence of the two large political groups in this Parliament .
This situation is unacceptable for a body which goes beyond the study and research of better means of communication , the only task which the President of Parliament , Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , had suggested , but which the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media did not accept .
In the form in which it is presented in paragraph 16 of this report , and given its powers , this working party which the report proposes to institutionalize could be turned into an EU ministry of information , a ministry which , moreover , would not be democratically accountable .
Ladies and gentlemen , to this we can only say no !
Pluralism is essential in the information society , but not in a form which consists of two speeds , one being direct control by the PSE and the PPE , and the other being a vague monthly report on the body 's activities , intended for the other political groups .
So if the majority of this Parliament does not vote in favour of our amendment on pluralism , I will , regrettably , vote against this report .
Mr President , information policy is an important aspect of democratic culture , but it is also a power issue .
The way in which an institution behaves in this critical area is an indicator of its democratic qualities .
The background to this report , the inadequate objectives which have been set , and the composition of the working party all clearly demonstrate that a majority of the Members of this House regard information policy as purely a power issue .
The result is a tendency to confuse information with propaganda , and the representation of Parliament becomes confused with the self-representation of the majority groups .
Mr President , it is already a mouth-watering prospect that according to paragraph 6 of the report , information policy should ensure that " European citizens are provided with quality information , targeted where possible , which reflects their concerns and gives them a positive image of the European Union . '
Is it the duty of the European Parliament 's information policy to give people a positive picture , or the knowledge which allows them to form their own independent and critical judgement ?
The attitude of mind which prevails on this issue in this House can be seen in recent events , when the majority groups actually used the protest demonstrations - which are quite normal , which have occurred hundreds of times in the history of this House , and which still go on - as a motive simply for conjuring up images of the downfall of democracy .
To withhold pictures of these demonstrations from the television companies , to expel photographers from the gallery , shows an attitude of mind which does not shrink from censorship and which , instead of informing the people , only seeks to indoctrinate them .
In my opinion , such actions are hardly a fitting testimony for the European Parliament .
Mr President , in taking the initiative of studying the problem of information in the European institutions , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media has done something worthwhile .
However , even though everyone sees the need for it , the actual completion of such a project is not an easy thing .
We must thank Mr Pex for having buckled down to the task , and our colleagues from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and the Committee on Institutional Affairs for having helped him to avoid certain pitfalls .
Nevertheless , whatever false images people may have of Europe and its institutions , it is important to distinguish between information for the citizens and the actual communication policy .
Information includes helping our fellow citizens to have a better perception of the European institutions and a greater knowledge of the decisions taken , while communication , in political terms , is the duty of the political groups and the Members of the European Parliament themselves .
Our mandate obliges us to learn to pass on the message and to explain our choices .
No institutionalized communication policy could replace this .
Furthermore , simpler institutions which are easier for people to understand would ease their sometimes conflicting relationship with Europe .
This is a question which cannot be evaded , but it goes beyond the scope of this debate .
More specifically , with regard to the problem of setting up a permanent working group , my group has reservations .
Nevertheless , such a body could not exist without all the political groups being represented .
We are therefore voting for the amendments which go in this direction .
This is the sine qua non of a true information policy .
Mr President , you wish to vote at 12.00 noon .
I would like to ask you to explain clearly why Mr Pex 's report was still not ready for distribution last Friday , and why the amendments were not available until yesterday .
Which powers wish to hamper a normal parliamentary discussion ?
The citizen generally views the increasing European integration critically .
The national administration may be remote from the experiences of the citizen but the distance between the citizen and the European institutions is even bigger .
As Europe is gaining more and more powers , this distance must be reduced .
That is why I am pleased with Mr Pex 's lucid report .
In the run-up to the 1999 European elections it is necessary , amongst other things , for the citizens to know that their choice in these elections is of real value .
It must also be pointed out to them that the strengthening of European integration , in which citizens can all but follow the policy makers , is a battle which is not over yet .
I have a few questions and comments about the report 's substance .
The report rightly points out how inadequate information about the Union 's policy is .
The report argues that this is caused by the lack of successful public support for European policy .
To a certain extent this is true .
If the citizen does not know which decisions about what are made at European level , it is unlikely he will quickly become very enthusiastic about it .
However , we need to put this into perspective .
The argument has been put forward several times that better information will convince the citizen of the benefits of the Union .
Citizens will begin to realize the good things about European integration " as a matter of course ' , as a result of better information .
This causes me to ask what kind of information goes out to the citizen ?
Is it genuinely objective information supplied to the citizen as part of the improved information provision , or is it merely propaganda further to stimulate European integration ?
Of course , it remains to be seen whether , as a result of openness in European decision making , the citizens will indeed be convinced of these benefits .
This openness could also lead to them forming a clearer idea of the disadvantages .
The core of the resolution consists of a proposal to the Commission to submit a legislative proposal with the aim of integrating the information services of the Commission and this Parliament .
In itself this would seem beneficial , because this way the citizen will be given unambiguous information .
How to explain what distinguishes the institutions from one another , however , seems to me to be a difficult task .
This point therefore merits attention in the evaluation mentioned above .
Mr President , the very first paragraph of the explanatory statement to Mr Pex 's report already shows the mentality with which this document , and occasionally this Parliament , are imbued .
I quote : " European Citizens are in general not very enthusiastic about the development of European integration .
One of the major reasons seems to be a lack of communication with Brussels and Strasbourg and a lack of information about targets and means by the European Institutions ' .
So , if I understand the report correctly , people who are critical of the current state of affairs in official Europe are either stupid or badly informed .
This demonstrates , with all respect , a certain Euro smugness .
In my own country of Flanders , for example , there was for many years a rather general positive preconception , which I also shared , about European construction .
If this positive view is now crumbling , it is not because people are badly informed but , on the contrary , because they are becoming better informed .
And because they conclude , on the basis of extremely concrete facts , notwithstanding all the constantly biased European propaganda , that the subsidiarity principle for instance , which is so highly praised , is being violated systematically , deliberately and continuously .
That Europe should lay down who should have the right to vote in my country , for example ; that European institutions do not show the least respect for the language laws of Flanders ; that Europe avoids referendums like the plague ; that benefits of scale in the form of efficiency , so highly praised , are by no means always realized .
Those who wish to gain more enthusiasm from the European citizens for the European project should not spend billions , but should start by respecting the European nations who do wish to cooperate closely , but who are not interested in European uniformity .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Pex for personally pushing this item onto the agenda of the House .
It has been a critical area which has been neglected for a number of years , because the lack of visibility within the EU , in particular within the Member States , has been lamentable and there was , and still is , a need for better direction within DG X and our own information policy within Parliament .
There is a massive amount of work to do , and it is not surprising on the basis of the way some of the offices of the Commission work within the Member States .
I want to talk specifically about the disaster of the Cardiff Office of the Commission in Wales .
For years , this building has been proudly standing there .
For 15 years we have not heard a squeak from it .
How could the Commission have allowed this situation to continue for so long ?
How could the Commission accept such inactivity ?
It has cost thousands of pounds of taxpayers ' money to maintain such a building , a silent building , which has told the Welsh people nothing about the EU .
It is not only that : the office has had the cheek to pass on information requests to the Commission to Members ' offices .
Last Thursday I found out what the office is doing for Europe Day : nothing , absolutely nothing !
What I want to know is this : how typical is this of other offices within the Member States ?
At last the Commission is starting to pull its finger out and will soon be appointing someone .
But it has taken almost a year to appoint someone for the Cardiff Office .
By the time that replacement is there the opportunity to ride on the back of the British Presidency will have been lost and the Cardiff Summit will be over .
Mr Pex 's report will make sure that this situation never arises again .
DG X is changing and it is improving , and there are some great examples of direct communication , especially using the Internet .
I just want to put it into perspective : the EU spent 10 % of what Pepsi Cola spent on telling us about the difference between changing its coke cans from red to blue - so we must keep it in perspective .
Mr President , the proposal on the future of the European Union 's information and communication policy , on which Parliament is invited to vote , contains a number of important points which I would like to highlight .
First of all , however , I must congratulate the rapporteur , Peter Pex , on his initial audacity , but also for the flexibility he has shown in this long and complicated process .
It is that flexibility that has enabled him to complete this report , which deals with a highly important subject for all the Union 's institutions .
The text we are to vote on is the possible wording .
But , if there is sufficient political will in the institutions - and that is a critical point - it could be an excellent instrument to strengthen our citizens ' sense of being Europeans .
The essential points I wish to bring out are these : it should be customary for Commission and Parliament to cooperate together , and for both of them to cooperate with the other institutions ; Parliament should have more control over the definition and implementation of policies ; there should be more openness from the ordinary citizen 's point of view ; and , finally , information policy and the profit / cost ratio should be more efficient .
I would , however , like to emphasize one aspect the report does not touch on , Mr President , and that is the irreplaceable role played by the regional and local media in keeping the people informed .
Since the press is one of our targets , we should specifically make room for the means of information that are closest to the people , because it is they that keep institutions in touch with local life , and are able to translate the Union 's political messages into specific terms .
If we fail to do so , we shall be throwing away a valuable ally .
The attention the report proposes to give to regional television stations should be expressed by using the initiatives that already exist in that field , particularly the regional CIRCOM , which consists of 376 regional stations in 39 European countries .
The European elections in 1999 will be the next major test of how serious we are in our attempts to improve the idea Europeans have of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to congratulate Mr Pex on his excellent work and his delicate mediation in drawing up this own-initiative report .
An efficient and organic information policy represents a fundamental instrument to ensure that the citizens understand the values on which the European Union is based , the objectives proposed and the efforts required to attain these objectives .
In fact , it is only with clear , continuous and open information that the citizens can know and participate in the mechanisms and complexity of the European structure , and sometimes unexpected results and contributions can be achieved .
It is therefore necessary to enable the citizen to have easy access to sources of information , to encourage him to know more , to examine matters closely , and become close to the institutions , and not to see them as inaccessible and incomprehensible .
It is therefore important to identify , on the one hand , the best communication systems , and on the other hand , what should be transmitted .
I believe that information transfer systems must always give priority to the principle of ease of access , and it is desirable to coordinate the structures in which Parliament and the Commission can physically share their technical resources and infrastructures .
This point is in agreement with the rapporteur 's idea of decentralizing the information centres , to make it easy to make contact even with people who live far from the capitals .
As for content , it is most important to consider the objectives in the major areas , the direction in which the European Union is going , and the fundamental role the citizens play in this development .
Secondly , the function of each of the institutions - Commission and Parliament - should be considered : their common and individual objectives , and their different responsibilities .
Cooperation between the European Parliament and the Commission is very important , above all to identify the effects of information on major topics , to coordinate the specific contribution of each of the two institutions .
However , any strengthening of coordination must leave each institution sufficient autonomy , and safeguard the visibility of the roles and responsibilities of each .
In fact , if it is feared that the citizen has difficulty distinguishing between Parliament and the Commission , the solution is not to unify the image but , on the contrary , to show the different roles clearly .
On this point , it should be stressed that it is the job of Parliament - more than any other institution - in its capacity as an assembly of directly elected representatives , to show the decisions taken by the assembly and the various bodies it consists of , respecting and reflecting the diversity of opinions which are expressed within it .
Lively , pluralistic information is the fundamental element of democratic debate .
Parliament must vouch for it .
Mr President , first of all I would like to state that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party intends to vote in favour of this report .
The future of the European Union depends on the support of its citizens .
No excellent information policy can cover for a chaotic structure or poor decisions , but much of the dissatisfaction felt by our citizens stems from the EU 's distant stance .
It is hard to discern any connection between Brussels and its bureaucratic decision making machine and normal , everyday life .
The big challenge for the EU 's information and communication policy is to bridge the abyss that separates the EU institutions and the people .
It will require information to become communication that goes in both directions .
The bridge over the abyss can be built only through partnership , involving both the institutions of the Community and the Member States .
The new telecommunications technology will allow more and better interactive communication .
At the same time , the EU information machine must regionalize . It must bring our citizens closer , with the aid of regional information outlets and local media .
For example , libraries make an excellent place for this kind of activity .
It is obviously also important that the language of EU information should be as clear and comprehensible as possible in all communications .
Mr President , the European Parliament is not very successful in its information policy .
There is little doubt about that in this House , but unfortunately opinions tend to differ somewhat on the reasons for this .
However , I can assure you that it does nothing for the credibility of our information policy if the services of the European Parliament remove the cameras when things happen which are not agreeable to a large part of this Parliament , or take other measures to avoid the press finding out about them .
To be honest , not only did this happen this week , it happens regularly here .
It contributes nothing to the credibility of the information policy .
Moreover , this Parliament also manages to ignore its own failures when criticizing the information policy , whilst blaming others rather easily . Yet it would add to this Parliament 's credibility if it were to show its teeth once in a while in instances when it is able to do so .
I only mention the inauguration of the Commission , or the customs union with Turkey .
These are just a couple of examples .
Consider this Parliament 's buildings policy , or the fact that we have to meet in more than one assembly . I can assure you , that adds nothing to the credibility of this Parliament in the eyes of the outside world .
An information policy is hardly sufficient to counter this kind of thing , even if you try to implement it in conjunction with the European Commission .
There is really no point , unless this Parliament polishes up its own credibility . That would truly be the best way to convince the voters of the European idea .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to congratulate Mr Pex on this long overdue report .
If Europe is to become a Europe of the people , then its tangible benefits , its aims and its perspectives must be more clearly understood by the people .
That means democracy in its absolute sense , and the right to have things explained .
We all know from our own national organizations just how much uncertainty and ignorance still prevails on the subject of Europe .
There is a serious information deficit - incidentally this also applies to the national governments - and a clear disparity between the successes of the EU and its image .
This has resulted in the unpleasant fact that interest in the EU has long centred around negative stories from Europe , and the sceptics have been gaining ground .
As has already been said , people do not know about the European Parliament 's rights of codecision after Amsterdam , for example .
How many citizens of the EU are aware of the legislative rights of this House ?
Do we even know how the great euro information campaigns permeated down to the ordinary citizens ?
Was the success of these campaigns ever analysed or discussed with us ?
How did we ever get into such a situation of no confidence in the democratic legitimacy of decisions taken at European level ?
I believe we need a more efficient front-line mediation structure , and information on European Parliamentary decisions must be circulated quickly .
We must also pay attention to the amount of information we supply and to the language used , particularly with regard to those target groups who are in urgent need of it .
I would just like to say one more thing . I cannot imagine that efficiency will be further enhanced by setting up more wonderful - and wonderfully expensive - EU offices and other bodies in Brussels .
This will only be achieved by a further decentralization of our information services .
The " Europe Info Points ' , which proved a big success , would be eminently suitable for this task . These units must be extended , for they operate at the grass roots and offer the ordinary citizen a shortcut to EU information .
Local authorities are willing to cooperate here .
Let us make use of the opportunity provided by central , regional and local authorities , and let us at last launch a confident offensive for the European cause .
Mr President , there is a lot of discussion about drawing our citizens closer to the EU and its institutions , but this is surely just as much a matter of the institutions , the European Parliament included , coming out to meet citizens and learning what priorities they place on the various interests . The institutions must make themselves more transparent , easier to comprehend and perhaps a bit less boring .
They should endeavour to get people to take an interest in European affairs , encouraging them to want to get involved in things , thus motivating them to take a stance while also giving them a sense of value in doing so .
As we discussed here earlier this morning , that is also important for democracy .
And the positions and efforts of national parliaments at the European level could contribute to making citizens more aware of European issues .
What we need is a personal dialogue .
Dialogue does not just mean campaigns , because to me , the term ' campaign ' sounds almost like psychological rape .
Forthcoming policy in the area of information will have to mean taking citizens seriously and treating individual countries with sensitivity .
( NI ) . ( DE ) Mr President , the rapporteur correctly points out that the EU 's information and communication policy should be made more efficient .
But what does he mean by this ?
He comes to the conclusion that by increasing efficiency in this area we would be able to dispel the negative climate of opinion surrounding the EU , and consequently force the pace of European integration .
I do not share this view .
The widening gulf between the citizens of Europe and its institutions is not being caused by the inadequate information policy but by the unsatisfactory answers which have been given to Europe 's most burning questions , such as that of the 18 million unemployed .
While the rapporteur stresses the multilingual talents of the people of Europe , the Committee on Institutional Affairs is already discussing the future adoption of Esperanto as a common European language .
While the rapporteur stresses the importance of the moving picture , Members of this House are proposing that the cameras be removed from the Chamber .
While the rapporteur underlines the importance of intelligibility in the drawing up of legal documents , Members are declaring that they are unable to understand the language of the regulations which have been submitted on agricultural reform .
As these examples show , the claims which have been made simply do not live up to reality .
Pretty wrapping paper is not enough - the contents of the package must also be right .
If the communication policy of the institutions is to be regarded ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media wishes to coordinate visiting and information policy for EU institutions .
This may sound alluring , but that is not necessarily the case .
A certain degree of coordination and exchange of ideas may be fine , but we should remember that the institutions are independent units .
People should be able to differentiate between the Court of Justice and Parliament , the Commission and Council .
When visitors come here , they obviously often say they are going ' down to the EU ' , but there is no need for us to confirm that all the peas are from the same pod .
In this matter , our only responsibility is to the European Parliament .
The others will manage just fine .
We should allow visitors access to the House so that they can see the openness with which we operate .
For example , our committee meetings are open compared to those of the national parliaments .
Visitors should have access to our work rooms so they can get the feel of a democratic , open institution .
I have often asked the administrative management of the House to make proper rooms available for visitors .
The Danish Social Democrats alone will probably have up to 3000 visitors this year , and that is only for four members .
We must find space for them , and that might well be some meeting room where the parties can set up their stands and computers .
Our information policy has two key elements .
On the one hand , we must provide information about ourselves , and resources have been set aside for this , but beyond that , we must also be accessible to the representatives of the public , including the press .
Over the last couple of days , I have been shocked to hear colleagues complaining about the zany dress of other Members and the fact that the media were curious to know what these Members meant by it .
It seems utterly idiotic for us , in a democratically elected Parliament , to have any interest whatsoever in restricting press access to our official meetings .
Mr President , this report represents a large collection of contributions by various groups on the question of information , and is also a clear indication of Parliamentary cooperation .
When we remember that communication is a core issue in the information society , and takes place mainly via the mass media , we could hardly be dealing with anything more important .
That is because the legitimacy of the whole Union rests very much on the image that people get from our work - the very people who directly elect us .
We struggle with the professional media , we struggle with the advertising used by mega-corporations , and sometimes it is in downright desperation that we wonder how democracy might be marketed so that it might come to the attention of the people , people whose lives , nevertheless , still depend somewhat on democratic decisions made both at home and in Europe .
I think we must continue to improve our information systems , because the appropriation we allow for the provision of information is very little compared to what , for example , is put into the worldwide marketing of a drink extract or a trademark .
This means that democracy has , as it were , been bypassed by mainstream information systems , as global companies attract international notice and , in certain countries , are already entering our schools .
As long as we bear this in mind , we shall be on the right track .
Mr President , my own county , Essex , is the gateway to Europe , home of the major ports of Tilbury and Harwich with airports at Stansted and Southend , a major beneficiary of European defence conversion , industrial adaptation , fishing and social funds .
And yet it is still too often known falsely for its notorious Euro-sceptics .
That is why I would like to announce two pieces of good news in this morning 's debate .
First , this week 's EU announcement of a new European Information Centre serving the business community in conjunction with Essex County Council .
Essex has been a black hole in the Brussels network with many local small businesses giving up before they had started with European programmes , tenders or exports .
This new European Information Centre will give them direct and free access to all European documentation .
It will make the requirements of European legislation and the opportunities for European funding easily understandable to them .
It will provide an opening to other businesses through the network of 232 centres throughout the European countries .
Secondly , on 28 April we had a coming together of local government , education and business representatives over the whole of the East of England .
They have agreed to improve coordination of European information .
That is very good news , which I wanted to pass on to colleagues this morning .
Mr President , I will say briefly that it was about time Mr Pex 's report came before the House .
The compromise which was reached was approved unanimously by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , in the presence of the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets and the DGIII and DGX services of Parliament and of the Commission .
I support it too .
I would also call for vigilance on the part of our Parliament to ensure that this European body which we are setting up can , in addition to its tasks of coordinating common areas of information , also exercise control of this information and communication policy which we want so badly .
We must not , by passing it off as an otherwise desirable decentralization , privatize this sector by entrusting it to external offices made up of experts from outside the Commission and Parliament , and thus without any form of control .
That would also open the way for harmful misuse .
Let us therefore pay close attention to ensure that the elected members of this body exercise their political mandate independently and resolutely .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will make this a very short speech , although I must admit that Mr Pex 's important report deserves a long comment .
I want to congratulate him on his initiative .
I share his concern over the need for the European institutions to promote and develop an active and effective information policy .
It is not an easy task .
It is not easy , simply because of the technical complexity of the decisions taken at Community level . It is also not easy for a structural reason , because it is difficult to talk about the existence of public opinion in Europe , at a European level .
There are national public opinions , but it is hard to convey the content of our institutions ' decisions at Community level , to public opinion at a Community level .
The basic message of Mr Pex 's report is that there should be more coordination between the information activities of Parliament and the Commission .
Thus he rightly stresses in his report that the Commission and Parliament have objectives in common , but that they are not identical , which means that communication policy should either be developed jointly or in a differentiated manner by each institution .
So I fully share his view that we have to coordinate and collaborate better wherever such coordination and collaboration is possible , with full respect for the institutional autonomy which allows each one to develop its role efficiently .
In regard to the report 's two sections , I am not going to make any comment about the Commission 's information policy because I agree , and these are partly policies which are already being implemented .
So I will concentrate on the second part of the report , on the mechanisms to ensure cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
I must confess , I have certain reservations here as regards parts of paragraph 16 of the report .
Firstly , the Commission is invited to present a legislative proposal by 30 September 1998 , in order to create an interinstitutional working party .
I think it will be hard for the Commission to adopt a legislative proposal on this question by that date .
A whole series of questions needs to be examined first , of a legal , technical and institutional nature , before we would be ready to formulate such a proposal .
Furthermore , I note that the rapporteur himself fails to request in his report that the proposal be presented by reason of Article 138 B , which is the channel provided for in the Treaty to request the Commission to propose Community acts .
Thirdly , I think it could be a good idea to set up a working party like the one mentioned in the report , and I fully agree , but I do not think we need to create a new body in order to put this idea into practice .
It is working well and yielding results , and it needs to work better and better .
In my opinion , it is not necessary at the moment to create new institutional structures in order efficiently to develop a better coordination of information policy .
As regards the " European Union Houses ' , I just want to say one thing . Parliament and the Commission can be based in the same building or in neighbouring buildings , and that is a good approach .
I share that objective .
That is exactly the policy I have been following ever since I have been responsible for this area .
What we must do is avoid duplications , and I am sure that , together , we will manage to establish and share archives , libraries and conference rooms .
As for the other matters mentioned in paragraph 16 , I agree with the whole set of initiatives - Euronews , ' Europe by Satellite ' , and the European Union on radio and CD-ROM .
On all these points , I fully share the rapporteur 's views .
I will conclude by saying that those are the reflections sparked off by Mr Pex 's important report , which has the great merit of raising important , urgent questions affecting the European institutions ' policy of information and communication with the people .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Welcome
It is my great pleasure to welcome Mr Dan Tichon , chairman of the Israeli Parliament , the Knesset , who is doing us the honour of visiting the European Parliament and who is seated in the official gallery .
Votes
Madam President , Members will recall my question to the President yesterday in this Parliament : he advised us that it would be the Bureau , and only the Bureau , which would review and make decisions relating to the 50 % voting attendance in Chamber during roll call votes .
This is what the President told us .
As Members of this Parliament , we believe this is undemocratic .
We believe that the Bureau is taking decisions which could have a knock-on effect in the future because a precedent is being created .
We have therefore decided to protest in this manner .
This is the only avenue of protest that we have regarding the way the Bureau is handling this particular crisis .
Therefore , my presence in the Chamber is noted for this roll call vote .
I may wish to vote on some occasions but on this occasion I merely wish my presence to be noted .
I appeal to other Members to do likewise .
Madam President , my presence in the Chamber should be noted .
Ladies and gentlemen , presiding a sitting would not be the same without a comment from Mr Falconer .
It has become a pleasant habit . We take it in good part .
Mr Falconer , we note that you are not taking part in the vote but that you are indeed present .
( Mr Falconer requested the floor ) Mr Falconer , I cannot allow you to speak again ; that would be once too often .
After the vote on Amendment No 18
Yes , Mr Falconer , you are still there . I can see you .
Are you going to insist , Mr Falconer ?
If it really is for a point of order , it will be the last .
Madam President , that is not what the instructions from the Bureau say .
The instructions from the Bureau say that you will make it known at the vote .
I wish to be known at the vote and so therefore I wish to be recorded before the vote takes place .
That is what the instructions say , so please obey your own instructions .
Mr Falconer , to save time I promise to check that you are present , but you will understand that I am not willing to participate in your game .
We have a lot of amendments .
I can see you are there . Whether you vote or not , I know you are present and I have recorded it .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr Falconer , I will allow you to speak on condition that it is for a final point of order .
Madam President , if the opposite side and other Members in this House wish to bleat like sheep and act like sheep when someone tells them what to do , and then they follow blindly , how can their electorate expect them to represent them ?
How can the electorate have any faith in this Parliament when their own representatives are being dictated to ?
Madam President , you said : ' I am not willing to participate in your game ' .
Mr Falconer did not start this game !
The game was started by the Bureau .
It was the Bureau that held these instructions down , not Mr Falconer .
I therefore ask you to withdraw those words !
I ask Members of this House to stop behaving like sheep !
Madam President , this concerns an oral amendment which has two parts .
I have the French text in front of me .
Recital G begins : ' Inquiet du non respect par Israël des engagements ... '
The first part of the oral amendment consists in replacing this phrase with the phrase : ' Convaincu qu 'Israël doit respecter ses engagements ... '
The second part of the amendment consists in adding at the end , after the phrase ' novembre 1995 ' , the phrase : ' et des accords d 'Oslo ' .
Thank you , Mr Dimitrakopoulos .
Are there any objections to this oral amendment ?
Madam President , on behalf of my group I would just like to express my approval and full support for this oral amendment .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , we all know that yesterday it was decided to start a dialogue between the population of Kosovo and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
In paragraph 3 we call on them to begin this dialogue .
I would therefore recommend the following changes in paragraph 3 .
This paragraph will start with the words : ' welcomes the opening of a dialogue between ... ' . It continues : ' without preconditions on the future status of Kosovo ' .
This is all that is in paragraph 3 .
( The President noted that there were more than twelve objections )
Ladies and gentlemen , there is something I do not understand .
There is a request for an oral amendment .
You did not protest initially .
At the end you can always vote against .
Your attitude is completely stupid .
First you listen and then you say : ' No , I did not want to listen ' .
It is completely contradictory .
We were within the framework of the procedure . You cannot begin at the beginning again .
One day someone should explain the rules clearly to you .
When the resolution was drafted we did not know what was then happening in Belgrade .
We did not have the facts as now presented by the speaker .
We should have been given the chance at least to put arguments in favour of the proposal before it was rejected .
I regret we did not have that chance .
One thing which is certain is that we are not going to start a debate on the matter .
We are all aware that the rule was fully respected in this case .
We were faced with an oral amendment of which , by force of circumstance , our colleagues were unfortunately not aware in advance .
That is what happens in such cases .
I shall now give the floor to Mrs Pack , since she will tell us the reasons for this opposition to the oral amendment .
I should just like to point out that no new information whatsoever has been forthcoming since yesterday .
We already knew by midday yesterday that Mr Rugova and Mr Milosevic intend to meet tomorrow .
More than this we do not know .
We therefore have nothing new to add .
We hope this discussion can commence without any preconditions , as stated in the resolution .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , on the subject of this Amendment No 4 on the reduction of working hours , taking account of the debate underway in a number of countries in the European Union and taking account of the votes in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I wanted to say that , as rapporteur , I cannot ask for this to be supported .
However , as author of the report , I support this amendment .
Good , I think the House is now clear on this .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I will be very brief .
The third indent refers to a working document which , in the meantime , has been replaced by Mrs Randzio-Plath 's resolution , and therefore it must be updated .
I would ask for Parliament 's indulgence to amend as necessary to ' having regard to its resolution of 2 April 1998 , doc .
A4-0110 / 98 ' .
I will ask for the floor in a moment , on the subject of paragraph 9 , for the purposes of a very minor amendment .
( During the vote on the amendments , Mr Falconer requested the floor several times )
No , Mr Falconer , we agreed that that was your last point of order .
I am sticking to that and I think I have been very patient .
( Mr Falconer insisted - protests from the House ) Mr Falconer , this is really very unpleasant .
I will speak frankly : I am asking you to stop !
All the Presidents who have occupied this rostrum have shown a great deal of patience .
But that is the end of it .
I would like us to continue with the vote .
On paragraph 9
Madam President , I would ask you to change the wording slightly , not for purposes of economy but to avoid any possible differences in interpretation between Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report and mine .
I propose to replace the words ' or given the chance ' with ' to enable it ' .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I congratulate Mr Herman and I apologize to Mr Pex but it is too late to vote on his report now .
The vote will take place this evening , following the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
I wish you bon appétit and I now give the floor to Mr Falconer !
( Mixed reactions )
Madam President , I hope and trust that you will respect my rights .
Obviously Mr Blak does not want to respect them but that is for his electorate to judge .
My point was this : how many persons have approached your services to advise them that they will be in the Chamber but not voting ?
That is my first point .
My second point was to ask : can your services identify if they were still in the Chamber ?
I believe that is a genuine point of order .
It is part of the procedure which we have adopted .
I know that one person approached me and told me that he had registered that he was going to be in the House .
I did not see that person in the House during the vote and I am just enquiring as to how many more persons actually did that to register their protest .
Mr Falconer , I will reply immediately .
The presence of the Members is checked throughout the votes . I can assure you of that .
Thank you , Mrs Green .
I appreciate what you say .
Madam President , I should also like to thank you for your patience .
I also thank Mr Falconer for standing up for the rights of Members .
Like our rapporteur , I am delighted about the Council common position organizing the introduction of operator number portability in the telecoms sector and of carrier pre-selection .
These are two very important measures to guarantee that competition in this sector functions properly and thus to promote the interests of the consumer .
The deadline of 1 January 2000 for most Member States also seems adequate .
Also like our rapporteur , however , I regret that the Commission has submitted no proposals for introducing number portability in the mobile telecoms sector .
I agree with him that it is essential to make the use of the 112 emergency number operational in all countries of the European Union .
I believe that the citizens ' Europe can more easily be made reality by means of practical measures like this than by a proliferation of incantatory declarations .
K. Collins report ( A4-0181 / 98 )
Given the complicated title of the proposal for a Council regulation which is submitted to us , it would be useful to remind you that the text on which we are going to give our opinion aims to indicate with precision which genetically modified soya or maize based products must be labelled as such and , where necessary , precisely how they should be labelled .
In my opinion it is essential that we take a firm stance in favour of clear wording in the case of these products , especially as this regulation will probably be used as a reference for precise measures for the labelling of new foodstuffs and ingredients , for which we have waited a long time .
We cannot drop our guard now , knowing the effort we have had to make to gain acceptance of the principle of a specific supplementary labelling , one as complete as possible , within the context of the adoption of the novel food regulation .
Consequently , I fully support the amendments which aim to reinforce that part of the wording which is fully justified and which is submitted to the consumer , as well as to clarify its content .
I support in particular the development of a better scientific evaluation of the presence of GMOs . This means doing away with the possibility of a ' may contain ' label and replacing it with the clear label ' contains a GMO product ' , and the possibility , where necessary , of an abbreviated label ' genetically modified ' , which has the advantage of not being excessively long or complex while still remaining sufficiently clear .
I am voting in favour of this report that will force the labelling of certain foodstuffs that contain genetically modified organisms - GMOs .
I would have liked it to go a little further .
Yet let me make it clear , as a scientist my judgement is that GMOs are safe for public consumption .
However , as has been so sadly proved on many occasions , science and scientists are not infallible .
I want Community law to allow those consumers who make a different judgement to mine to be able to exercise that choice in Europe 's shops and supermarkets .
That is why labelling is necessary , in that without forbidding GMOs it maintains the individual 's right of choice .
The Danish Social Democrats do not endorse the report because it compromises the labelling of GMOs .
Removing the possibility of labelling foods with the wording ' may contain ' is an affront to the consumer 's desire for information .
It was a European Parliament proposal that originally advocated that doubtful cases should be labelled .
This assures genuine choice for those consumers who categorically do not want foods which contain GMOs .
Tindemans report ( A4-0171 / 98 )
Madam President , I am presenting this explanation of vote on behalf of my Group , namely the Green Group in the European Parliament .
It relates to a report which has produced a fundamental change in the policy of this House .
The Green Group , like a few other groups in this Parliament , belongs to that section of the House which does not consider it necessary to be armed to the teeth in order to achieve a democratic , ecological and socially just European Union .
In this respect , we condemn the fact that in spite of massive protests by a minority in this House during the ratification process for the Amsterdam Treaty , and despite the fact that some Member States of this European Union are neutral , such a report was put on the agenda .
The result is that this initiative by the European Parliament anticipates matters which go much further than the Amsterdam Treaty and therefore will severely disrupt the ratification process in the neutral states . Most importantly of all , it will certainly not be in the interests of freedom of choice for the citizens of Europe .
We were given no mandate from the people to do this .
In the midst of all this confusion a serious change has taken place .
At the conclusion it was not made clear that the name of our committee , the " Subcommittee on Security and Disarmament ' , has been changed to the " Subcommittee on Security and Defence ' .
This too goes far beyond the Amsterdam Treaty .
On behalf of the Green Group , I wish to register a strong protest against the attempts which are being made to change the procedures in the European Union by way of initiatives , and to do this against the will of the European people .
Foreign and security policy consists of different components : foreign policy , aid , trade , conflict resolution and peace , disarmament policy , refugee policy and military defence .
Security policy is therefore not the same thing as military defence .
From a modern security perspective , the security of the people is the central consideration .
The threat to the people may be anything from environmental disasters to social exclusion .
Conflicts between states are becoming increasingly unusual .
Instead , intra-state conflicts are becoming ever more common .
Most of these conflicts have their origins in social antagonisms of an ethnic and / or religious nature .
Such conflicts cannot be resolved by military methods .
Many of the EU Member States do not accept a common defence policy .
In Sweden , 70 % of the population is opposed to this .
The realization of a common defence policy has been removed from the agenda for a long time , to come as a result of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Parliament does not have the right to decide on a common defence policy .
Unanimity is required within the Council of Ministers in order to adopt such a policy .
We cannot support the report .
I voted against this report because although I want the EU to move towards a common foreign and defence policy as part of a federal Europe , I cannot support the basis of that policy as that of nuclear deterrence .
The British and French nuclear weapons should be dismantled in accordance with Article 6 of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and in line with the judgement of the International Court of Justice in 1966 .
Then we can develop a common defence policy .
I support the development of an EU defence policy .
I consider that it is an indispensable part of European integration .
Therefore I totally support the proposals contained in Mr Tindemans ' report .
However , I would like to take issue with Ms McKenna 's remarks during her contribution to the debate .
She has claimed , wrongly , once again that the Amsterdam Treaty establishes a European defence policy , thereby undermining Irish neutrality .
It does no such thing .
The Amsterdam Treaty specifically respects the current defence and security polices of each Member State .
This is a specific Treaty commitment to respect Irish neutrality .
An EU defence policy can only be established if it is agreed unanimously at a future Council meeting .
Furthermore , it would require amendments to the EU Treaties and would therefore be subject to a referendum in Ireland .
She should desist from making those fraudulent claims which she and her colleagues have made during every referendum in Ireland .
The fact that they have consistently proved to be without foundation unfortunately does not prevent their repetition .
I also take exception to her personal remarks about Mr Tindemans .
They are intemperate , offensive and ill-advised .
Mr Tindemans is the spiritual father of European Union and no-one in this House has done more than he has to bring about permanent peace and reconciliation in Europe .
Ms McKenna and her colleagues would do well to follow his example rather than criticize him .
The Tindemans report as approved stands for a thinking that at least partly reflects Cold War attitudes .
It is wishful thinking , considering the Amsterdam Treaty and the four militarily non-aligned countries , to talk about integrating the WEU into the Union .
Finland is at present the only Union Member State having a common border with Russia .
We do not see Russia as an enemy and we hope that the ties between the Union and Russia will be strengthened , creating an even larger area of peace , stability and prosperity .
We do not see military means as a primary answer to the problems facing us in the immediate neighbourhood of the Union .
This was the reasoning behind the Finnish-Swedish initiative to include Petersberg tasks within the scope of the Union .
The Tindemans report is not based on clear-headed thinking about European defence and security needs .
We therefore had to vote against the report .
The Danish Social Democrats have chosen to vote against the resolution .
The Tindemans report regards the EU from the outset as a military power and , in its recommendations , goes further still in its efforts to make the EU the standard-bearing regional superpower .
The report concludes that Union initiatives with regard to problems arising in areas such as the Middle East and the Balkans have been too little and too late , and that the European Parliament 's natural role as a responsible player on the world scene has not been very evident to the Commission or the Council of Ministers .
As social democrats , we cannot take issue with that .
However , the report 's proposed solution to this problem involves suggesting a rapid assimilation of the WEU into the EU .
An EU as a potential military superpower is a step in the wrong direction for a united , peaceful Europe .
The report also sets out a number of points to accelerate the integration of the WEU into the EU , strengthening the common defence profile that Mr Tindemans so earnestly desires .
However , the rapporteur offers no solution to the difficulties the EU would face in explaining itself to its neighbours , who would object to an EU bent on arming itself .
Similarly , taken to its logical conclusion , a common defence policy would mean French and British nuclear weapons having to come under Community jurisdiction .
So , like others in the social democrat group , we have chosen to vote against the resolution .
Europe already has a joint security identity in the form of NATO and the OSCE .
It does not need another one .
We have voted against the Tindemans report because it represents a considerable step on the path to militarization of the EU , which unfortunately confirms the fears that many of us have been voicing for some time about trends in EU cooperation .
Through the Tindemans report , the European Parliament is lining up behind the view that the EU must be developed into a military superpower with objectives broadly in line with those of most of history 's superpowers : the unilateral defence of its own interests , including security of supply , by force of arms .
The report also represents the view that the EU should be entitled to act as a kind of " global police force ' and intervene militarily in other countries ' affairs as it sees fit .
We advocate an international legal system , which may also include peace initiatives of a military nature of the type undertaken for some time by the UN and the OSCE .
We can also envisage various forms of reinforcement , within the framework of the UN Charter , of the UN 's and OSCE 's roles in this connection .
We are opposed , however , to individual superpowers or regional blocs independently pursuing military interventions outside the UN framework , for which the Tindemans report unfortunately paves the way .
It is also evident that the vision of security policy underlying the Tindemans report does not in the long term leave any room within the EU framework for non-alignment by the Swedish model .
This unfortunately also bears out fears that we have voiced in the past .
In conclusion , we would like to point out the significant fact that the Swedish version of the title of the Tindemans report translates ' defence policy ' as ' security policy ' , which is such a serious misrepresentation that it gives a wholly misleading picture of what the Tindemans report is actually all about .
Joint resolution on Euro-Mediterranean cooperation
Do I need to say it again ?
For us , the Mediterranean Sea is an inland sea .
Our relations - and the quality of those relations - with all the countries bordering on it are vital , both for them and for us .
That requires partnerships and voluntary actions , with full respect for our differences , our constraints and our histories ...
This process has been improving for a few years . However , there have been too many delays , too much mixing of genres , and sometimes too much of a superior attitude on our part , not to mention hints of neocolonialism .
On the subject of Algeria , Morocco or the Middle East , no-one has " the perfect answer ' .
Certainly , we all agree that we must eradicate terrorism , perfect democratization and relaunch the peace process .
We may have ideas or suggestions and defend them keenly , but we must be able to listen to those who are in contact with these grave and dramatic problems .
Laxness , denial and pretended superiority should not form the European guidelines .
Nor should we forget to demand that the Member States of the European Union ratify their agreements quickly , so we can make the necessary funds available , help the countries of the south , open our markets and also demand that our political weight be recognized in our common quest for solutions .
I believe in our success if , and only if , we manage to use political means .
Euro-Mediterranean cooperation , launched by the Conference of Barcelona in November 1995 , is a sustainable element of stability and economic development of the entire region .
In fact , for the European Union it is a matter of promoting growth to reduce unemployment in the region and decrease migration pressure , contributing in general to the stability and security of the Mediterranean countries .
This strategy will consequently have positive repercussions on European security .
Europe is discovering a basic concept : an ECU invested in Asia will create jobs , wealth and security in Asia , while an ECU invested in the Mediterranean will create security for the whole of Europe .
That is why the European Commission must relaunch decentralized cooperation , which has been paralyzed for too long , as quickly as possible .
When does the European Commission intend to reactivate the application of the MED programmes ?
These programmes do not function through national governments , but with a multilateral cooperation decentralized to regional and local level .
In other words , they are very important as they make it possible to form direct links between persons , groups and organizations which share the same interests and which have the same aims , both within the EU and the Mediterranean partners , and between those partners .
In this way economic development can be encouraged , through the formation of a ruling and entrepreneurial class which represents the various strata of society and not only the positions of the élite .
And this will be good not only for the Mediterranean region but for Europe as a whole .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the motion for a joint resolution on Euro-Mediterranean agreements .
We have done so based on considerations of the importance of supporting EU projects in this area .
We should be involved in helping to secure peaceful development in terms of trade , democracy and human rights in the countries bordering on the Mediterranean .
One deficiency in the motion for the joint resolution is that it does not put strong enough emphasis on human rights .
The Danish Social Democrats wish to urge the Commission at the earliest opportunity to propose a strategy to promote adherence to human rights in the Mediterranean area .
Furthermore , the Danish Social Democrats consider it a matter of importance for pressure to be brought to bear on the Commission to increase grants to promote adherence to human rights in this area .
Setting aside ECU 9 million for such initiatives is not enough .
Sufficient funds should be set aside to allow activities to be expanded and programmes to be made more comprehensive .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , while I have every respect for the Commission 's efforts in launching the MEDA programme and the MED-MEDA programmes , I do have a specific criticism to make on behalf of my group .
The MED programmes have been terminated by Commissioner Marín , though no individual criticism was directed at them , solely as a reaction to the deplorable state of affairs generally .
In this way , good projects have paid the penalty for the failures of the Commission .
This course of action is extremely unpolitical and is indicative of the Commissioner 's helplessness .
His intervention in yesterday 's debate was also , regrettably , quite out of place .
I would therefore ask the Commission to put a stop to such behaviour when similar circumstances arise in the future .
Terminating good programmes unfortunately does not make up for poor programme execution , in fact quite the reverse , for even greater damage is inflicted .
I only hope the Commission now puts the MED programmes into effect with even great urgency .
Madam President , I should like to stress that I was happy to vote for the Kosovo resolution , even though I was extremely annoyed about the manner in which yesterday 's debate was handled .
I do not believe there is any sense in having such a discussion when the representatives of the Council and Commission are not present - and some of them even failed to attend the evening session .
I also think it was an awkward situation , because the Council and the Commission are obviously not acquainted with the latest developments in this area , for these were not entered into .
The manner of the postponement , with the undoubtedly important and interesting debate on India being brought forward , is at the very least questionable .
I am nevertheless convinced that we have to debate this matter in much greater depth , and that in doing so we should not lose sight of the real culprit - for he sits in Belgrade and not in Prishtina .
In 1989 Milosevic acted unconstitutionally in annulling Kosovo 's autonomy and he is without doubt also guilty of those crimes against humanity which were recently perpetrated in that country . There is therefore no doubt in my mind that he should not be sitting at the negotiating table but rather standing before the Court in The Hague .
We have abstained from voting on the resolution on Kosovo .
Our inability to vote for the resolution is due to point 6 , in which a request is addressed to the UN Security Council , the OSCE , NATO and the WEU to take all necessary measures to prevent the conflict spreading .
We believe that this request should only be sent to the UN Security Council and the OSCE , which make decisions on measures based on a political analysis .
The solution to the conflict in Kosovo is not a military question , but a political and diplomatic one .
In other respects , however , we view the resolution as a correct analysis of the current political situation .
In our resolutions we continuously reiterate the need to support the forces of democracy in Kosovo .
It is then all the more regrettable that to the best of my knowledge not a single project has been funded this year through the PHARE democracy programme .
On behalf of my group I would therefore like to ask the Commission exactly what it intends doing in the very near future to organize help from the democratic programme for the civilian population of Kosovo .
If the Commission is looking for proposals , then my group is ready to submit ideas right now .
Caudron report ( A4-0138 / 98 )
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Mr Caudron 's report on the competitiveness of European industry .
In our opinion , the report contains several good points regarding how to ensure that European industry can become more competitive .
However , we cannot endorse the rapporteur 's view that all countries should impose an equal burden on their companies as regards environmental requirements .
In accordance with Article 100 A ( 4 ) of the Treaty , each Member State should have the option of creating whatever environmental legislation it may deem necessary with regard to sustainability , health and welfare , and in the future , environmental policy will increasingly be based on Article 130 , implying that Member States may build on EU minimum requirements .
We are also against the rapporteur 's approach to the harmonization of fiscal policy , in paragraph 15 .
We strongly distance ourselves from any type of harmonization of income tax .
E. Mann report ( A4-0173 / 98 )
Madam President , given the rapid increase in European-wide teleshopping , I support the rapporteur 's proposal that it should be regulated at an international level through the World Trade Organization .
It is also vitally important that action is taken to ensure that the teleshopping trade is subject to the highest consumer standards .
Consumers must be protected against purchasing defective or dangerous products .
I have noted the rapporteur 's suggestion that the Commission should investigate whether or not it is feasible to tax Internet sales .
However , I would point out that any such decision should not simply be to dissuade EU consumers from buying cheaper items by taxing them .
Our energies should be more directed to ensuring lower and more transparent prices within the EU itself so that non-EU products are no longer an attractive alternative .
Hopefully , the introduction of the single currency will significantly contribute to achieving this .
However , harmonization of the various VAT and other rates also has an important role to play .
Herman report ( A4-0117 / 98 )
Madam President , Mr Herman 's report on the reform of the functioning of the institutions without modification of the Treaty shows a surprising approach which I regret that no-one here in this Parliament is reacting to .
On the main subject of the report , that of control of economic and monetary union , we are blandly told that the weakness of democratic control is unacceptable , which we have known since the beginning , but that the negotiators of the Maastricht Treaty did not want to weigh it down , and those at Amsterdam did not want to do anything either for fear of reopening Pandora 's box .
In other words , to avoid giving rise to a new debate , it was better to tolerate an indefensible situation .
The result is that today , on the eve of the entry into force of the single currency , everyone is worried about the weakness of democratic control and the European Parliament is reduced to having to come up with emergency secondary measures to give the impression that the citizens will have a say in the matter .
The Herman report notably proposes initiating reforms by means of so-called interinstitutional agreements between the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .
These agreements do not by any means have the value of a treaty , but allow those in favour of integration to agree among themselves on progressively extending the powers of the European Parliament , in order to create a situation which will later be presented as an established fact .
We obviously do not agree with this type of procedure .
The Herman report succeeds only in making the constant manipulation of recent years plain for all to see . The aim of this manipulation is to have only scraps of discussions approved , to constantly postpone full debate and to prevent the citizens from giving their considered opinion on the process of monetary unification .
If any additional measures are required for this monetary unification , let them be discussed and put clearly to universal suffrage .
g . ( SV ) We cannot vote in favour of this report because its thrust is that the European Parliament should be the channel through which democratic control is gained over the European Central Bank and other political issues .
This essentially means a weakening of the national parliaments .
In many Member States , the national parliaments have double the democratic legitimacy of the European Parliament .
The level of participation in the various elections around the EU Member States speaks volumes .
In order for the European Parliament to acquire the democratic responsibility to function better in the EU , it would be better if its Members were chosen by the national parliaments .
It is around the time of the elections to the national parliaments that democratic political debate occurs in Europe today .
Since its first election by universal suffrage in 1979 , the European Parliament is truly the product and the representative of the citizens of the Union .
Anxious to absorb the democratic deficit of the European institutions , we constantly aim to bestow on our House all the attributes which belong to a true parliament in a state of democratic law .
From Intergovernmental Conferences to revision of the Treaties , European construction is advancing gradually down this road .
We should note that , while the Maastricht and Amsterdam texts are going in the right direction , they remain nonetheless insufficient in this area .
The citizens of the European Union are losing patience .
Despairing of better transparency and greater democratic control in the functioning of the European institutions - which are too often regarded as a technocratic machine insensitive to their true aspirations - some citizens will from now on be tempted to withdraw into themselves .
Following the Brussels Extraordinary Summit and the adoption of the single currency , the report we are examining today comes at just the right moment and proposes a number of measures which , even if they can only be provisional , nonetheless represent a necessary palliative to a persistent democratic deficit .
While awaiting another new and necessary Intergovernmental Conference in the future , we need to conclude agreements of interinstitutional cooperation in those areas of competence in which the loss of control by national parliaments has not been replaced by that of the European Parliament .
In fact it must be obvious to everybody that the citizens of the European Union will not accept that issues as crucial as economic and monetary union , the Stability and Growth Pact and foreign economic policy should escape the control of their elected European representatives . We all know the impact these issues have or will have on employment and social questions .
In implementing the different proposals for interinstitutional agreements contained in the present resolution , the European institutions will contribute significantly to reducing the lack of comprehension which separates a number of our fellow citizens from a European construction which many of them claim to want .
The Danish Social Democrats are abstaining from the vote on Mr Herman 's report , despite the importance of ongoing considerations of how to make EU operations more open and democratic without amending the Treaty .
Moreover , it is correct to highlight interinstitutional agreements as an important means of achieving this goal .
The report contains several excellent proposals .
We endorse the ideas of more openness and democratic control of the European Central Bank and general economic policy within the euro zone .
Despite Denmark 's legally binding derogation concerning participation in the third stage of EMU , it is of great importance to us that decisions made in these areas should be as open and democratic as possible .
However , paragraph 6 of the report contains wording that could be interpreted to the effect that compromises made in Amsterdam and Luxembourg in the area of employment are devoid of tangible content .
That is not our perception .
These compromises are an important contribution to the strengthening of employment policy in Europe , and the results are already beginning to manifest themselves little by little .
Furthermore , we would like to emphasize that we cannot endorse the idea of the European Parliament becoming involved in social dialogue .
Social dialogue must be supported and expanded , and in our opinion , that is best done by giving the social partners the freedom to negotiate to their mutual satisfaction .
g . ( SV ) What is needed in order to strengthen democracy , improve openness , increase public participation and thereby reduce criticism of the EU is reform from the bottom up .
That will not come about via this report .
The powers of the national parliaments must increase with regard to proposals , current business and control .
The powers of the Council must also increase .
The Commission 's powers , on the other hand , must be substantially reduced .
Its exclusive right to submit proposals is completely unacceptable .
It is as if only the mayor were to have the right to submit proposals in the municipalities - an absurd thought !
The powers of the European Parliament must not increase , since this would lead to a federal system .
However , the European Parliament 's working methods must be improved with a view to achieving more contact with the general public , less time spent in Brussels and more time in the homeland , more direct contact with the national parliaments , more questions of principle and concentration on the major political issues and dispensing with all questions of detail .
The undemocratic system of dividing up speaking time through the group leaders must be abolished .
A more democratic model needs to be created that gives all elected representatives the opportunity to speak on questions in which they are involved .
Speaking time must also be adapted to match the importance of the issues in question .
That two weeks should be devoted to questions of detail , but two and a half hours to the most important question - the EMU debate - during the entire session of Parliament illustrates the current imbalance .
I thank our colleague , Fernand Herman , for the own-initiative report which he has drawn up on possible improvements to the functioning of Community institutions without modification of the Treaty .
The democratic deficit which the institutions of the European Union generally suffer from and the possible solutions to this are set out perfectly clearly .
Like our rapporteur , I believe that the most substantial institutional improvements have been the result more of practices established on the basis of either institutional agreements or case law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , or indeed of the extensive use of existing procedures , than of formal modifications of Treaties .
The role of the European Parliament must be strengthened urgently in two areas : social policy , which is particularly important in the eyes of European citizens ; and economic and monetary union .
I would stress the problem of democratic responsibility in the economic and monetary areas , where the European Parliament , according to the Treaties , does not have any formal role .
We cannot , for all that , neglect the areas of common commercial policy , international agreements and competition policy .
In future , we should even extend our thinking to include foreign policy and police and judicial cooperation .
Our rapporteur recommends reaching an interinstitutional agreement . I share his view entirely .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.27 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0498 / 98 by Mrs Günther and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0506 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0523 / 98 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the political situation in Sudan and the humanitarian crisis in southern Sudan ; -B4-0534 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mr Fassa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0539 / 98 by Mr Hory and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0541 / 98 by Mr Newens , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0552 / 98 by Mr Pasty and Mr Andrews , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in Sudan .
Madam President , the Sudan lies at the heart of a region where stability is often threatened .
In the forefront there is of course the clash of cultures , in this case the Muslim-Arab north versus the non-Muslim south .
Consequently the Islamic State of Iran backs the Khartoum faction - and China too , though this is mainly to annoy the USA - while the neighbouring countries are frightened because a united fundamentalist Sudan seems to them a dangerous prospect , as this religious spark , as it were , could well flash over into the Muslim populations of these nearby states .
The hope attached to the Nairobi talks resides in the fact that a compromise may be possible this time due simply to the respective weaknesses of both sides in the conflict , for at the fruitless peace talks held six months ago the same peace plan , more or less , was on the table .
The intention now is to agree , for a transitional period , on a loose federation between north and south and then , after several years , to put to the people in a referendum how they wish to be governed .
However , it is to be regarded as a sign of the helplessness of the European Union and the rest of the international community that we are now grateful for being allowed to provide aid to the suffering population of that country , while it is those very people in power in Sudan who should be responsible for this .
Madam President , when you talk about the Sudan , you are talking about my family .
My two children were born there , and the country means something to me .
To see 400 000 people once again near starvation , it gets me , it gets everyone .
Especially if you know that the cause is the ceasefire which has not been declared by the governing party , let alone by the resistance movement in the south .
The Union must increase pressure to the maximum .
They must be persuaded to take up the numerous peace initiatives again .
I would have thought all types of pressure are legitimate , including the freezing of IMF and World Bank funds , because 400 000 to 500 000 human lives are at risk .
In the meantime , this same Union must not renege on the humanitarian front .
That is why I thank Commissioner Marín , and in any case the Commission , for the recent ECHO flight with ECU 8.8 million in emergency aid .
People must not lose interest in the helpless Sudanese .
Madam President , sometimes when we put forward topics for discussion marked ' urgency ' people say : ' Where is the urgency ? ' There can be no doubt whatsoever that Sudan is an urgent situation , even though we have discussed the tragic situation in that land on many occasions .
Pictures on the television screens of Europe are sometimes what it takes to alert people to human tragedies , such as the continuing crisis in Sudan , and we are absolutely right to come back to it .
We are not alone , however , because at the ACP Joint Assembly in Mauritius recently , to everybody 's agreeable surprise , there was a solid majority of the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries voting separately , at their request , from the EU , condemning the Sudanese .
That is not , however , enough .
We have to look for a long-term and permanent solution .
This is where the example of Eritrea and Ethiopia , which were in a similar situation not that long ago , is instructive , and so we should welcome the prospect of a referendum , and reinforce the right of self-determination of the south .
Madam President , over the past 15 years a million people are estimated to have died in the civil war between north and south in Sudan , and hundreds of thousands more are now threatened by imminent starvation caused partly by a twoyear drought but primarily by armed hostilities .
In the hardest-hit region of all , Bahr-al-Ghazal , northern-backed forces are reported to have burned crops and grain stores , and here and everywhere else deliveries of emergency food aid have been barred , while people have been eating their seed stock and leaves and dying in swarms .
In this merciless conflict human rights have been totally ignored . Action by the international community must be stepped up to try to avert an even greater human tragedy than has already occurred .
The Sudanese government has an appalling record of ruthless repression in north and south alike , apart from its military operations : imprisonment , torture , execution and the use of terrorism against its own and neighbouring peoples .
The Sudanese government has ignored UN Security Council resolutions on human rights .
In these circumstances , sanctions on development aid , but not on humanitarian aid , will have to be maintained .
Peace is desperately needed , and it is therefore sad that talks in Nairobi this week broke down .
Peace , however , is only possible on the basis of accepting the right of the peoples of Sudan to democracy and democratic self determination .
We must welcome the fact that agreement has been reached to lift some restrictions on food aid destined for those in dire need , but all possible pressure must be maintained to ensure that humanitarian aid gets through everywhere .
The European Union has already made an important contribution , but we must ask that efforts be intensified to provide relief in this appalling human catastrophe .
This is the aim of this motion .
Madam President , everyone knows that the drought of the past few years has quite plainly only aggravated the problem of the war in Sudan .
In other words , the main obstacle to combating famine and promoting peace must be removed by working on peace negotiations .
We know that the result which has been achieved as part of IGAD is still incomplete at the moment , and that both parties still have some way to go .
Yet I think it is important to signal from within the European Union that we expect further results as part of IGAD .
Secondly , as far as the problem of the now acute food shortage is concerned , and since access is possible again now - thank God ! - the European Union should also take the lead in ensuring that the food reaches the starving population for the time being .
Madam President , I have been dealing with this question for five years in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly .
Sadly , nothing positive has yet been achieved for the people of Sudan .
We need an immediate ceasefire , we need negotiations between all parties , otherwise nothing can be achieved - for partial negotiations have so far not proved successful .
Human rights and democracy , the right of the population of southern Sudan to self determination , these must be respected , and we urgently need humanitarian aid before another 100 000 people starve to death , helpless in the face of the current conflict .
What we need are sanctions against the government of Sudan , and these should be imposed not just by the EU but also by the international community , so that more pressure can be brought to bear and the neighbouring countries can be protected .
Madam President , as the honorable Members are aware , the Commission stopped all development aid to the Sudan in 1989 because of the persistent lack of respect for human rights , the absence of democracy and the lack of significant attempts to negotiate a peaceful end to that country 's civil war .
Since there has been no sign of real change , and unless substantial progress is made with regard to the peace process and human rights , there is no reason for the Commission to change its position .
Nevertheless , the Commission is following developments in the humanitarian situation in southern Sudan very carefully .
In 1997 , the Commission was the largest aid donor , with ECU 23 million . Added to the Member States ' bilateral aid , that represents 65 % of all the humanitarian aid received by the Sudan .
In November 1997 , a decision was made to give the Sudan ECU 6.7 million , out of the total sum of ECU 23 million I just mentioned , to help the world food programme .
I should point out that a large proportion of the food currently being distributed in Bahr-al-Ghazal , in the south , forms part of this contribution .
On 23 March this year , the Commission approved a decision to the sum of ECU 11.8 million , in the form of an overall plan for humanitarian aid to meet the needs of the victims of the war in the Sudan .
That aid - from this year , 1998 - is being implemented by 35 non-governmental organizations and this time covers both the south and the north of the country . It basically focuses on the medical , food safety and health sectors , especially drinking water .
This decision also includes a reserve of ECU 1 million which is being used to provide additional funding for certain activities in Bahr-al-Ghazal , again in the south of Sudan .
Nevertheless , the situation in the north of the region is still very worrying and may deteriorate when the rainy season arrives . That may hamper the delivery of humanitarian aid , as has happened in the past .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0504 / 98 by Mr Macartney and Mr Weber , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the possible re-entry into service of the Mochovce nuclear plant in Slovakia ; -B4-0509 / 98 by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and Mr Voggenhuber , on behalf of the V Group , on the entry into service of the Mochovce nuclear power plant in Slovakia ; -B4-0515 / 98 by Mrs Flemming and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the entry into service of the Mochovce nuclear power plant ; -B4-0524 / 98 by Mr Papayannakis , Mr Campos and Mr Sjöstedt , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the Mochovce nuclear power plant ; -B4-0536 / 98 by Mr Eisma , Mr Frischenschlager and Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the entry into service of the Mochovce nuclear power plant ; -B4-0542 / 98 by Mrs Graenitz , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the planned entry into service of the Mochovce nuclear power plant .
Madam President , the resolution on Slovakia is a compromise resolution .
I think all of us have reservations about certain points .
For example , I have reservations about recital F. A point one should make to our Slovak colleagues , if they are listening to us , as I am sure they will be , is that we are not singling out Slovakia in particular for criticism .
In this House my group put forward a proposal to bring in Dounreay in Scotland as well because the situation there in many respects is just as serious .
So we are certainly not singling out Slovakia . When we say that the Slovak authorities have failed to provide any clear answers to the problem of nuclear waste storage , as in paragraph 5 of the resolution , that certainly obtains in many other countries too .
What I would say is that the resolution is a package .
If you take recital H which expresses doubts about the safety of the Mochovce station alongside paragraphs 2 and 3 , these add up to a reasonable request that the evaluation study which will be published , we understand , within two or three weeks should take into account any criticisms and problems .
All of this adds up to a responsible , balanced and fair package and should therefore be supported .
Madam President , the history of nuclear energy in eastern Europe is that of unparalleled decline , whether you take the defunct reactors in Bohunice and Chernobyl or the Mochovce nuclear plant .
This sad decline has for years been accompanied by anxious resolutions from the European Parliament , which have basically done no more than lag behind events with half-hearted measures aimed at risk limitation .
These have all come to nought , as the case history of the Slovak nuclear plant shows .
This plant is being built without containment , it is full of defects and it is to feature equipment from a Russian nuclear reactor which has never even been tested .
Even the most impartial observer must now realize that the strategy of the European Union , which has been to re-equip the nuclear plants of central and eastern Europe and bring them up to Western safety standards , has now failed . I believe the reason for this is all too evident .
As long as the European Union fails to realize that nuclear energy cannot be made safe and that we need to develop a non nuclear-based energy policy for the future , then we shall continue to lag behind events .
Our main demands are : no start-up of the Slovak nuclear plant ; complete shutdown of the defunct reactor in Bohunice ; and no reduction in European nuclear safety standards as part of EU enlargement , until such time as this view finally prevails .
Madam President , I first wish to thank all the people whose support has led to the adoption of this joint resolution , and also the operators of the Mochovce nuclear plant and all those NGOs which were prepared to provide us with comprehensive information in this field .
Of course it is the right of every sovereign state to make its own decisions on the use of its primary energy sources , but in recent years , and certainly since Chernobyl , we have come to realize that we are all nextdoor neighbours when it comes to the nuclear plants of Europe . It is the right of every neighbour , in the face of such potentially dangerous technology , to demand the application of those safety standards which are taken for granted in Germany , France and the UK .
This is all part of the acquis communautaire .
Without adherence to the strictest possible safety standards there can be no talk of accession to the European Union .
Two international panels of experts have visited the Mochovce plant in recent weeks .
It was taken for granted that the start-up of the plant would await the outcome of these investigations and any identified defects would be put right beforehand .
But no , the operators announced to an astonished public that whatever happened , they intended to commence operating trials on 21 July .
This is something we cannot accept .
We are also still owed an answer as to the nuclear waste , for this material certainly cannot be sold to Russia .
The law is absolutely stringent on this .
Neither Austria nor the EU can force Slovakia or any other country to collaborate with us , but compliance with the findings of the two panels could constitute the starting point for creating international structures for greater transparency in nuclear matters , and for this Slovakia would earn the gratitude not only of Austria but of the whole European Union .
Madam President , our draft resolution asks for a very small number of reasonable things from Slovakia : an assessment , and the promise that the findings of that assessment will be respected .
I remind you , however , that at Mochovce , as a result of a previous assessment , 201 cases of inadequate safety measures have already been detected , some of which are outrageous , such as the lack of insulation , corroded material and inexistent fire protection .
I therefore think that we have the right to intervene and to call on Slovakia not to go ahead with putting this nuclear plant into operation . It is not simply a matter for Slovakia alone .
We know very well that it is a pan-European matter and , I would venture to say , a global matter . We would be more convincing , Madam President , if we announced a programme to replace nuclear energy throughout the whole of Europe and if of course we promised credible assistance to Slovakia , to ease its way through this period during which it will need energy until it can give up its own nuclear energy .
Madam President , this is not the first time we have discussed Mochovce .
More than three years ago we came together here to form an opinion on the same topics .
I think the safety of the nuclear plants in central and eastern Europe will keep us busy for many years to come .
The situation in Slovakia becomes increasingly urgent when we look at the nuclear plants over there . The Slovak authorities intend to start up the nuclear plant in Mochovce in just a few weeks ' time .
We are very worried , because there is still no clarity about the storage of nuclear waste and the safety of the installation itself .
I therefore beg the Slovak authorities to postpone the start-up as long as this uncertainty still exists .
That is why it is so important for us in this Parliament to make a statement today .
In a few weeks ' time our Joint Parliamentary Committee is due to meet with Slovakia , and they should be given a proper brief from this entire Parliament .
Madam President , I hope we will all adopt this resolution unanimously , so that our imminent delegation to Slovakia knows the position of the European Parliament , and the position the Slovak authorities ought to adopt .
Madam President , I have been asked by many people why such an urgent resolution on Mochovce is being tabled now .
I believe this resolution has become important for the following reasons . The inspection visits carried out last week and the week before by independent international experts have shown that progress has been made , not least because funding has been provided through the PHARE programme .
They also showed , however , that some questions have still to be answered , particularly that of evaluation .
The investigations revealed that some problems have still to be solved , particularly the lack of any containment in the normal sense , and that the systems which have been installed for this purpose have not been inspected to see whether they are capable of guaranteeing safety in the event of a serious incident , such as occurred at Three Mile Island or Chernobyl .
It is worth recalling here that the results of radioactive contamination from Chernobyl can still be detected in the European Alps .
Secondly , I think the results of these inspections should be submitted prior to the commencement of operating trials , so that any improvements deemed necessary can be undertaken before rather than after the event .
In this context , I must also mention that it seems strange to me that one expert was excluded from the visit .
This particular person was involved with the Greifswald nuclear reactor and his experience would be most valuable .
I should also like to point out that the last meeting of the Council of Ministers , which discussed the problems of integration and enlargement , dealt with the subjects of Mochovce and also the shutting down of Bohunice , in the event that other energy sources are available .
Everybody there was of the opinion that nuclear plants which are not safe should be shut down .
We are very concerned about the safety of the citizens of Slovakia , the transition economies , the European Union and everyone in Europe .
I do not want to see - and I think this goes for all of us - any irreversible steps being taken in Slovakia which might threaten the safety of all these people .
Madam President , this Parliament must respect Slovakia 's right as a sovereign country to determine its own energy policy and to operate a nuclear plant if it so wishes .
We should note that Slovakia has signed all the international conventions , that it was a Member of the International Atomic Energy Agency Board between 1993 and 1996 and that Mr Lipar , the head of the regulatory authority , is vice-chairman of the Nuclear Safety Assistance Coordinating Committee which is operated by DG XI in the European Commission .
Because of a previous resolution in this Parliament , the completion of Mochovce has gone ahead without European Union financial assistance .
As a further result , there is no legally binding international agreement to close Bohunice number 1 reactor when Mochovce is in operation .
This Parliament bears the prime responsibility for that situation .
It is to the credit of Slovakia that the completion has gone ahead not only with their own national engineers and with the assistance of the Russian designers but also with the involvement of Siemens , EDF , Westinghouse and Framatome , all western experts in the nuclear field .
The completion has been made to standards set by Risk-Audit , an organization established by German and French nuclear safety authorities .
There has been a study carried out .
The indications I have had are that it is a favourable study but we ought to wait for the study before we jump to conclusions .
It is due in June , and the date that I have for the proposed start-up of Mochovce is July .
Most of this resolution is irrelevant to the Mochovce circumstances .
What we need at European level , and we still do not have , are standards which all the countries have to apply to the safety of their nuclear reactors .
Madam President , we all want the central and eastern European countries to progress economically and to have safe nuclear plants .
Just as we want all the nuclear plants in the world to be safe , together with coal mines , factories and every other type of installation .
I have heard a lot of silly things being said here , Madam President , and I am surprised that people say such things without knowing what they are talking about .
I am a member of the delegation to Slovakia .
They have explained a lot of things to us .
I think they have the sovereignty to do whatever they think is right , and it is their responsibility to protect the Slovak people , their neighbours and the whole of Europe .
In 1995 this Parliament refused all assistance .
That was a great mistake , but they have no right to say the things they are saying now .
So , Madam President , I shall not be supporting some points of the resolution .
It will not be fully approved , Mr Eisma , because it is not particularly correct .
Slovakia imports 15 % of its electricity . It is growing a lot and it needs help .
I wish them great success , and I hope the Mochovce nuclear plant works well and safely .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a letter from Austrian MPs to the Slovak government and to the Members of the European Parliament reports on the possible dangers associated with putting second generation reactors into service in the nuclear plant in Mochovce in Slovakia .
On behalf of the Group Union for Europe , I must note firstly that the Slovak Republic ratified in 1995 the convention on nuclear safety which was adopted by the IAEA in 1994 .
This convention came into force in 1996 .
Secondly , the modernization of sections 1 and 2 of the nuclear plant in Mochovce , although it was not subsidized by the EBRD and thus does not benefit directly from European funds , received financing which affects the whole of Europe .
This work was granted to Slovak companies and to a consortium of Czechs , French , Germans and Russians .
The prescribed level of security will from now on be identical to that of Western sectors for the same technology , and it meets IAEA criteria .
International experts recently confirmed that all precautions had been taken in terms of the safety of modernized installations .
In this context , one cannot help but be surprised by the terms used in the letter addressed to the Slovak President .
Slovakia must guarantee energy production at the level required by its population .
It cannot say no to Mochovce .
From now on there is no reason to do so , in that all nuclear safety precautions have been taken for starting the operation of second generation reactors , which are henceforth as safe as the reactors used in the European Union .
So let us wait for the results of the evaluation , which we will have at the end of June , and allow the Slovaks , who are sovereign in this area , to bring back into service , for the benefit of its population , a nuclear plant which guarantees all necessary security standards .
Madam President , the start-up of the Mochovce nuclear reactor is a decision which will have farreaching consequences for the entire future of nuclear power generation .
This reactor would never have been approved as safe either by an EU Member State or in the USA .
The nuclear industry is placing its high-risk installations right up against the borders of the EU .
This is a cynical gesture to the safety of the whole of Europe .
Added to this is the fact that we are for the first time faced with a situation in which the start-up of a suspect nuclear plant may well be part of an election strategy .
The Slovak Prime Minister , Vladimir Meciar , is keen to show the world that he heads a determined and strong government , prior to the autumn ballot .
The nuclear plant is to go into operation in spite of the fact that internationally recognized experts consider that building a new installation would be more cost-efficient that refitting an old one to meet international safety standards .
A panel of experts has recently examined the plant and their findings are to be made known shortly .
I propose that the European Parliament should invite these experts to a hearing on safety standards at the plant .
Slovakia does not have a credible energy policy .
I recall that the Slovak government originally promised that the start-up of Mochovce would be accompanied by the closure of the two unsafe units at Bohunice .
This was also the basis on which the German-based Hermes Bank provided a credit guarantee for Siemens-KWU to supply equipment for the start-up of the Mochovce plant .
Contrary to all promises , Bohunice is being refitted , rather than closed , at a cost of over ECU 150 million .
Slovakia recently declared that Bohunice would be put into service along with the start-up of Mochovce .
The European Parliament and the Hermes Bank have clearly been deceived .
In view of these events the resolution in question is very restrained , but it can be accepted as a minimum response to the situation .
Madam President , I will be brief and make just two points .
I would say to the people of Slovakia that nuclear energy may in many respects be a clean form of energy but it is one that allows no room for any mistakes at all .
That is why neighbours worry and I understand the Austrian position in this .
I am from the south of England and had to take environmental health officers to France where we wanted to look at French nuclear power stations .
Those are concerns people have about any nuclear energy .
However , I would say to this Parliament that , as the vice-president of the joint parliamentary committee with Slovakia , I met yesterday senior safety officials from Slovakia and the Slovak Electricity Authority .
I have no doubt they take their responsibilities very seriously , and we should welcome the action of the Slovak government in inviting an independent panel of experts to inspect this plant .
If those independent experts give it a clean bill of health , we should respect that and , just as we often pass condemnatory motions on Slovakia , we should also respect good news when it comes from Slovakia .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you will remember that after independence the Slovak authorities decided to complete the two first reactors with Western assistance , for which they requested a loan from Euratom and another one from the EBRD .
Because of that request , the Commission promoted a major modernization programme for these reactors during 1994 and 1995 .
The programme consisted of a large number of measures which , if implemented , would have guaranteed safety levels absolutely equivalent to those in the West .
However , before the Commission and the EBRD had announced their decision about the loans , the Slovak government decided to withdraw the loan requests and use other resources to finance the installation of the reactors .
The project was indeed carried out , mainly with the assistance of the Czech Republic and Russia . Certain Western companies also participated , by means of bilateral export credits .
As a result , the Commission ceased to participate in the management of the project or in defining the safety improvement programme .
In its opinion on Slovakia in Agenda 2000 , and in the association agreement for Slovakia 's accession , the Commission has mentioned the need for the Mochovce nuclear plant to work to international safety regulations , and for the implementation of a realistic programme to close the Bohunice reactor .
At the moment , the Community 's participation in this project is limited to supporting the Slovak authorities .
The PHARE programme is funding a project for experts from the EU to review the Mochovce units under the direction of Risk-Audit , which is a company effectively composed of independent organizations of safety experts from France and Germany .
In order to evaluate the safety of the reactor , the Commission agrees with Parliament that it is important for the experts to have access to all the documentation related to the modernization programme , and other details about the reactor .
This assessment , by the independent organizations I just mentioned , could be available by the end of 1998 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Guatemala -B4-0493 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the political assassination of Bishop Juan José Gerardi in Guatemala ; -B4-0516 / 98 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , Mrs Ferrer and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the murder of Juan Gerardi , auxiliary bishop of the archdiocese of Guatemala ; -B4-0525 / 98 by Mrs González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the murder of Bishop Gerardi in Guatemala ; -B4-0544 / 98 by Mr Cabezón Alonso , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi in Guatemala ; -B4-0555 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi in Guatemala ;
Colombia -B4-0513 / 98 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the murder of Eduardo Umaña Mendoza in Colombia ; -B4-0526 / 98 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on murders in Colombia ; -B4-0550 / 98 by Mrs Miranda de Lage , on behalf of the PSE Group , on murders in Colombia ; -B4-0553 / 98 by Mrs Estevan Bolea and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the murder in Colombia of Eduardo Umaña Mendoza ;
Turkey -B4-0507 / 98 by Mrs Roth and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the V Group , on the sentence passed on the mayor of Istanbul by the Diyarbakir state security court ; -B4-0517 / 98 by Mr Langen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Turkey ; -B4-0532 / 98 by Mr Eisma , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the ruling against the mayor of Istanbul ; -B4-0543 / 98 by Mrs Karamanou and Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the PSE Group , on respect for human and political rights in Turkey ;
Malaysia-Indonesia -B4-0514 / 98 by Mr Telkämper , Ms McKenna and Mrs van Dijk , on behalf of the V Group , on human rights in Malaysia ; -B4-0533 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the unrest in Indonesia ; -B4-0545 / 98 , by Mr Titley and Mr Harrison , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights in Malaysia ;
Tibet -B4-0511 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta , Mr Orlando and Mr Kerr , on behalf of the V Group , on Tibet ; -B4-0537 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mrs Larive , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the political situation in Tibet following the death of a Tibetan hunger striker in New Delhi ; -B4-0538 / 98 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the ARE Group , on Tibet ;
Sale of human organs in China -B4-0496 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the sale of organs from executed prisoners in China ; -B4-0500 / 98 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the sale of organs from executed prisoners in China ; -B4-0510 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta , Mr Tamino and Mr Ripa di Meana , on behalf of the V Group , on the death penalty in China and the traffic in organs of executed prisoners ; -B4-0519 / 98 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on trade in human organs in China ;
Death sentences in Myanmar ( Burma ) -B4-0557 / 98 by Mr Telkämper , Ms McKenna and Mrs Aglietta , on behalf of the V Group , on death sentences in Myanmar ( Burma ) .
Guatemala
Madam President , the murder of Bishop Juan José Gerardi is seen by many as an attack on the peace process .
He played an important role in opening up the files on the murders and attacks which took place during the time of the civil war .
It is essential for the consolidation of this peace process that lawlessness is brought to an end , and that is why the perpetrators of this murder should be found and punished quickly .
The so-called high level committee which has been set up by the government must work with speed and credibility .
Maintaining credibility is essential for the progress of this same peace process .
We think the murderer , or murderers , tried to upset this peace process .
They must not be allowed to succeed .
The EU must call upon the Guatemalan parties and support them in continuing down the road towards this difficult and lasting peace .
The EU was there to condemn the civil war ; now we must be in Guatemala to promote and maintain peace .
Madam President , on behalf of my political group , I also want to express our most energetic condemnation of the murder of Bishop Gerardi and our solidarity with the Catholic community and the whole of the Guatemalan people .
I think the compromise resolution satisfactorily covers not just Bishop Gerardi 's worthy pastoral activities , but also his firm and resolute commitment to democracy , human rights and the peace process in Guatemala . The government of that country has expressed a strong desire to identify the perpetrators of this horrible crime and bring them to justice .
In order to do so , as Mr Bertens mentioned , it has set up a committee , which we hope can act as quickly and diligently as possible .
I think , Madam President , that if we were to ask ourselves who benefits and who is harmed by this assassination , there can be no doubt that it was a hard blow for all those people who have shown determination and commitment to the Guatemalan peace process , which was so difficult to achieve .
So , Madam President , I believe the best way of paying a tribute of admiration and respect to the memory of Bishop Gerardi and the ideals for which he laid down his life is for the European Union to continue in its efforts - and now I am addressing the Commission and its representative here , Mr Marín - to carry on making all possible efforts to support the Guatemalan peace process , as it always has done .
Madam President , I think we have talked about impunity many times during this session , and about the way these murders are sometimes directed against the people who defend human rights .
I think Bishop Gerardi 's report , which contains more than 5000 statements from people whose rights were violated during the previous era , is aimed precisely against that impunity .
The objective of Bishop Gerardi 's report is that acts such as those which took place in Guatemala should never happen again . In fact , when he finished his report , he said : ' Now I can die in peace .
May nothing like that ever happen again in Guatemala ' .
So the other speakers are right to say that the peace agreement should remain . It should remain , but in the absence of impunity .
During the course of the afternoon we are also going to discuss human rights in Colombia .
More than three human rights activists have been murdered , two of them after having spoken to Members .
We think it is extremely serious that there should be this impunity , which allows the constant disappearance of the people who defend human rights in either of these countries .
As Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra said , the Commission must make whatever efforts it has at its disposal to prevent this from happening .
Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been said , during the night of 26 April , Bishop Gerardi , the auxiliary bishop of the archdiocese of Guatemala was murdered in Guatemala City .
In expressing our regret and condemnation of this crime , we must also express our solidarity with his relatives and collaborators , and with the Guatemalan people in general .
As has been said , Bishop Gerardi had coordinated the documents reflecting the human rights violations which occurred in that country during the years of armed conflict , and the conclusions of that work had just been presented to the public .
We must of course be somewhat prudent and not speculate at the moment , but we must demand that the Guatemalan government and judiciary complete their investigations .
We are obviously keen to hear the conclusions of those investigations .
Violent acts of this nature cannot go unpunished , and cannot be used cynically as a tool against the peace agreements for anybody 's selfish interests . The Guatemalan government is committed to those agreements , as are most of the parties and civil organizations in that country , as well as the group of friendly countries which supported the dialogue which culminated in those peace agreements .
The European Union must also carry on lending its political and economic support to the content of the Guatemalan peace process .
Such an act , so painful and worthy of condemnation , cannot call a country 's image into question , but we find it worrying as an expression of a violence still all too present within Guatemalan society .
The people of Guatemala deserve the best possible future after decades of armed confrontation and violence .
Peace in Guatemala also marked the culmination of a process of pacification throughout Central America .
The Guatemalan people deserve our full support for the way they are relying on solving the conflicts through dialogue rather than violence .
We trust that the investigation into the crime against Bishop Gerardi will have a more satisfactory conclusion than other processes underway , such as those relating to the murders of the politician Jorge Carpio Nicol or the lawyer González Dubón .
Madam President , the authorities and the military in Guatemala should take responsibility for the serious and systematic infringement of human rights in that country .
This was one of the main aims of the thousand-page REMHI report which was prepared under the direction of Bishop Juan Gerardi .
As the latter said in one of his last interviews , this will not suit a lot of the people who are seeking to make a clean break with the past .
Bishop Gerardi 's brutal murder took place against a background of continuing impunity .
Neither the armed forces nor the secret services have been exculpated as a consequence of the peace treaties .
The report finally names the people responsible and calls for action to be taken .
This includes the immediate disbandment of the military and civilian instruments of repression , the prosecution of paramilitary groups , an end to impunity and compensation for the victims .
REMHI restores the dignity of the people .
Project collaborators must be given protection , and this includes those working up-country .
Europe supports many projects in Guatemala , including the build-up of new security forces .
Here it is essential for the EU to ensure that no support whatsoever is given to human rights violators of the old guard .
We should back the establishment of an international commission to investigate properly the fate of the people who have disappeared .
Madam President , we all sympathize with the death of Bishop Gerardi , which has been a grave loss for the people of Guatemala .
I believe , however , that even at a moment such as this we should be focusing on the fact that his work must go on .
But international intervention certainly produces no results .
The Guatemalan government has recently shown how anxious it is to establish peace and order .
After 30 years of civil war , however , it is simply inconceivable that such a thing can be achieved overnight .
However , given my experience of the Guatemalan people , which certainly does not compare with that of my friend Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , I continue to fear that if we intervene too vigorously they will do just the opposite of what we wish .
Nevertheless , we should make every possible effort to administer the legacy of Bishop Gerardi , and do everything we can to achieve his aims .
Colombia
Madam President , the murder of Eduardo Umaña Mendoza has shocked us all .
This sudden , politically motivated crime is the worst attack to date on the human rights movement and on all the opposition groups in Colombia .
This lawyer of many years ' standing was known to some of us personally .
He was even told that the recent cases he had been working on would cost him his life , for as Colombia 's most distinguished lawyer he had for 20 years consistently and uncompromisingly represented the victims of human rights violations .
It is an open secret as to which of the state and military forces were behind this murder .
Furthermore , those who are promoting economic cooperation with Colombia and granting customs waivers through the GSP are accessories to a terrible spiral of violence which continues to be fuelled by those who benefit from it .
Only yesterday afternoon some 30 soldiers with search warrants forced their way into the offices belonging to Justicia y Paz and other human rights organizations , allegedly in the hunt for would-be assassins .
Such intimidation of human rights supporters is completely unacceptable , and the Council should distance itself unequivocally from such a policy .
The Commission must review the terms of its entire policy of cooperation with Colombia , otherwise the people fighting for human rights in Colombia will soon not just be muzzled but murdered !
Commissioner , I would be pleased if you could for once give us answers to some of these questions .
I know you are a master of diplomacy , but a response would be most appropriate in this case .
Madam President , as a doctor , I can only deplore the development in Latin America of an aspect of epidemiology known as the epidemiology of violence .
It is not an act of nature .
It is not like the other diseases which are studied epidemiologically . Rather , the cause of this epidemic is the support given by North America to the dictatorships these countries have suffered .
In contrast , Europe is constantly defending human rights , justice and equality , so I think it is our responsibility to ensure that people realize the difference between the North American influence , which sows corpses , and the influence of the European Union , which sows peace and concord .
So the Commission should act forcefully to clarify and apply the necessary conclusions .
Madam President , it is with sadness , regret and anger , and also a sense of frustration , that I rise once again in this Parliament to condemn violence - all the violence committed in Colombia , and the rest of the world too .
This is a terrorist form of violence which is preying upon the defenders of human rights ; which has murdered Eduardo Umaña Mendoza , just as two days previously it cut down the lives of María Arango Fonnegra and Jesús María Valle Jaramillo , and so on and so on ; a terrorist violence which also murdered the former defence minister , MPs , lowly town councillors , journalists , peasant farmers , women and children - in other words , everybody .

This violence is committed in the name of justice - what irony ! - or to demand justice ; a violence which blackmails and kidnaps ; a violence which is fascist , drug-related , and mafia-like . It is a violence which threatens those who believe in democracy and the rule of law , and who do not resign themselves to this state of affairs because they believe there are ways to achieve peace , and who are so generous that they act as human shields in the fight for democracy , peace and liberty by means of dialogue alone .
Madam President , as counterbalance and hope , I want to emphasize the efforts of thousands of Colombian women and men who , with profound democratic convictions and different ideologies , are providing a real lesson in human dignity and civil heroism in a difficult and complex situation .
In a few days ' time presidential elections will be held .
It is important , necessary and essential for the process to take place peacefully .
Peace cannot wait much longer .
We must be vigilant and support these efforts . Most of all , we must call upon the violent groups to renounce violence , to realize that their time has passed and that , unless they want to kill everybody , they must understand that with democracy you win , whereas with violence you always lose .
Madam President , like the previous speaker , I can only point out that yet again we have to draw attention to the atrocities - and how often have we already condemned such actions ? - which are being committed primarily in Colombia , which , one regrets to have to say , is a land of violence .
Eduardo Umaña Mendoza is the third human rights activist to be killed in a very short space of time .
We really must demand that these human rights representatives are given better protection as they go about their work .
The government is clearly unable to take decisive action , but violence is not the solution - certainly not for the people of the country , who have suffered most from it . Colombia can to all intents and purposes now be considered as a country where violence prevails and its citizens can do nothing about it .
Nor will the elections of 31 May bring an end to the killings , as indicated by the murder of the former General Fernando Landazabal , who was advising presidential candidate Andrés Pastrana on various matters , including a future peace plan .
Other candidates ' names are also on the death lists , and this includes people on both sides .
This is no way to achieve democracy . This is no solution .
We call upon the government authorities , the candidates and all the parties to come to a peaceful political solution and at long last to bring democracy and peace to the people of Colombia .
Madam President , in its recent report on human rights the US State Department called the situation in Colombia poor , and that is saying something .
In particular , the culture of lawlessness was regarded as a deterioration in the situation there .
We have seen what this can lead to .
Human rights activists do important work , in Colombia as well .
The Colombian government has an interest in this .
I think the Commission and the Council must give another clear signal to Colombia that we are getting serious now .
Today 's motion for a resolution rightly calls for a Commission report on the human rights situation in Colombia .
Our agreement with Colombia contains a human rights clause , and for good reason .
I am also asking the Council , which is meeting on 18 May , to pay attention to this .
We must be on our guard .
Turkey
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again this House has occasion to express its concerns about human rights and freedom of speech in Turkey .
We do so without any exaggerated view of our own capabilities and without belittling our own problems , even within the European Union .
Nevertheless , the cowardly attack on Mr Birdal , the president of the Turkish Association of Human Rights , and the legal actions taken against members of the former Refah Party , in connection with political views which had been expressed , are quite dreadful events .
Democratic states are convinced that banning political parties hardly constitutes a solution .
It is certainly no solution to the internal arguments which have been waged in Turkey between those holding different political views , such as Erbakan 's party or the successor Fazilet Partisi ( Virtue Party ) .
Democratic states are quite rightly not very keen on banning political parties , for such bans soon get a reputation for being themselves undemocratic and for stifling political activity and freedom of speech .
Turkey itself is undergoing the process of transition to a normal society , which is something the laical constitution of Kemal Atatürk cannot live up to , for in my mind this constitution does not allow sufficient scope for religious freedom and for the religious activities of its citizens .
Neither a ban on political parties nor the threat of imprisonment can prohibit this process of transition , and this is a problem which Turkish society and the Turkish political parties themselves will have to solve .
Respect for human rights has certainly improved in a number of areas in recent years .
This is a fact which we should not conceal .
Nevertheless , it is shocking that attacks on journalists and human rights activists are not prosecuted with the necessary vigour .
Prime Minister Yilmaz has promised that firm action will be taken to find those responsible for the cowardly attack on Mr Birdal .
We can only hope that this will be the case .
The same applies to Mr Erdogan , the mayor of Istanbul , who was given a 10 month prison sentence for expressing his political views .
In our opinion , this state of affairs cannot continue indefinitely .
We are therefore calling on the Turkish government and Parliament at long last to grant its people freedom of speech and freedom of conscience .
Madam President , like most of you I think , I had the opportunity to meet Mr Akin Birdal , president of the Turkish Association of Human Rights .
He always had a certain sorrow in his eyes , a sorrow which is easily understood because in a country like Turkey you need not only courage , indeed foolhardiness , but also obstinacy to devote your life to the defence of other people 's lives .
The murder attempt of which he was victim does not surprise me .
I think Mr Birdal expected it too .
He had received several threats and he had never been able to receive any police protection whatsoever .
I sincerely hope that Mr Birdal will survive and will continue his activities .
I call upon the Turkish authorities to bring the perpetrators of this attack to justice .
Turkey , a signatory to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , cannot continue with its policy of repression and persecution towards journalists , magistrates , parliamentarians , defenders of human rights , Kurds and ordinary citizens .
The sentence pronounced against Mr Erdogan , mayor of Istanbul , is a further sad example , if one were needed .
Turkey must understand that there will always be Birdals , Erdogans and Leyla Zanas , to shout loud and clear that we cannot kill freedom .
Madam President , the assassination attempts , the incarceration of intellectuals , politicians and reporters , the immunity of the para-state and paramilitary organizations , the policing and penalizing of political life , the political prosecutions , the rigged incidents , the trivializing of politics and democracy , this is unfortunately the political reality of Turkey today .
The assault on the president of the Turkish Association of Human Rights , Akin Birdal , is the product of an unwholesome political climate which favours and breeds violence , and the activity of the para-state against the democratic and human rights of the Turkish people .
Moreover , on the pretext of an existent or non-existent Islamic threat , a pogrom of prosecutions has been launched against the political opponents of the regime , which has not hesitated to ban an entire party . Nor does it hesitate to fabricate legal rulings aimed at removing senior politicians , such as the mayor of Istanbul , Mr Erdogan , from public life .
We are waiting to see what will be the fate of Recai Kutan , who was this morning appointed president of the Fazilet Party .
The European Parliament must take urgent action and force the Turkish government to respect the rights of the Turkish people and to abide by its obligations , which arise both from the customs union and from its other international commitments .
We call for the immediate unmasking of those guilty of the assassination attempt against Akin Birdal .
We also call for the repeal of the ruling by the state security court against the mayor of Istanbul and the 16 businessmen .
We call for the release of all political detainees in Turkey .
Human rights are not simply an internal matter for a state .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are shocked and we are indignant , we are sad and we are enraged to learn of the brutal attempt on the life of Akin Birdal .
My dear Akin , we hope you will be restored to health , we hope that for today , for tomorrow and beyond you will be , and you will remain , the old Akin Birdal , always courageous , always determined , always full of hope , the Akin Birdal who was at all times full of humanity , full of cheer and above all uncompromising .
The attack on you , Akin , was an attack on democracy in Turkey ; an attack on human rights ; an attack on all those who are fighting for democracy in Turkey ; an attack on all who are pleading for a political solution to the Kurdish problem . The democratization of Turkey is directly bound up with the political settlement of this issue .
We call upon the Turkish government at this late hour to take the issue of human rights seriously , and not just to make proclamations at the prayer-wheel , but to create a proper and stable foundation for citizens ' rights , human rights , basic rights in Turkey , and to grant freedom of speech , freedom of the press and freedom to establish political parties . This must apply to everyone , even members of the Fazilet Party .
Finally , we call for talks to begin , because only dialogue can produce a political solution .
The military way is no solution .
What happened to Akin happens every day to many , many people .
The violence has got to stop .
Please , Akin , get well soon .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reason for today 's debate and resolution is the conviction of a number of politicians who were members of the former Refah Party .
It is bad enough for a country to think that it has to conduct its political arguments in a court of law , that political arguments with Islam , political Islam , fundamentalist Islam , have to be conducted in court and by application of court judgments .
But what is even worse is that something even more inconceivable has now taken place with the attempt on the life of Akin Birdal .
As has already been said by a number of speakers , Akin Birdal was , and is - and it is hoped will remain - a champion , an indefatigable and fearless champion of human rights , both in Turkey and elsewhere , because of the shining example he has set .
He never gave up the fight for human rights , even though he knew and felt that something such as this could happen to him .
That is why we are making a common appeal to Turkey .
Turkey wants to join the European Union , and it could well be that there were a few hitches - and in my view there certainly were - in the talks which were held primarily with the Council last autumn .
Nevertheless , the pure and simple fact remains that we can only accept Turkey into the EU when it decides to uphold human rights , among many other things .
Turkey must take note of one thing : upholding human rights also means protecting those who speak up for human rights and protecting those who fight for human rights .
I am convinced - for I am an optimist - that no-one in the government and no-one in the military was happy to hear of this attempt on Mr Birdal 's life .
But that is not enough .
What Turkey should be doing , instead of just being " not happy ' about it , is taking every possible measure to prevent such outrages . That is what we need to see before we can welcome Turkey as a member of the European Union .
The Turkish government must be absolutely clear about that .
Madam President , the two issues we are debating today - the assassination attempt on Akin Birdal , the president of the Turkish Association of Human Rights , and the prison sentence of the mayor of Istanbul , Mr Erdogan - have one thing in common : the idiosyncratic conception of human rights held by the Turkish establishment , particularly the Turkish army .
The assassination attempt against Mr Birdal is the culmination of a series of attacks and prosecutions perpetrated against him , often encouraged and instigated by the authorities , because of his sensitivity to human rights .
Turkey 's establishment cannot tolerate discontent , protest or a different outlook .
The sentencing of the mayor of Istanbul , on the other hand , shows the attempt to impose a secular state by means of violence .
It is undeniable that fundamentalism constitutes a threat to democracy . However , true democracy cannot be defended through persecution and violence .
It is defended through reasoning .
Excesses such as sentencing the mayor to prison for reading a poem strengthen rather than weaken his position in the eyes of the public , insofar of course as his position is indeed fundamentalist .
It must therefore be made clear : Turkey 's road to Europe has to pass through respect for human rights .
Let us hope the Turkish government will be able to move in this direction .
Madam President , however justified Turkey 's criticism of the European Union might be - that they feel abandoned in the context of MEDA , in the context of the customs union and in the context of accession - it does not relieve us of the duty to continue to point out to Turkey that they must observe human rights . In this context , the attack on Birdal was a blow to us , as was the sentencing of the mayor of Istanbul to ten months ' imprisonment for questioning the secular state in a political speech .
It is unthinkable that someone should be given this kind of sentence for that , and we expect the Turkish authorities to make every effort to summons the person who carried out the attack on Birdal .
We also expect the court 's sentence with regard to Erdogan to be revoked .
To conclude , Madam President , we urge the Turkish government to do something about the legislation needed for further democratization on the basis of the principle of free speech .
In this respect , I have nothing to add to what Claudia Roth has said .
Madam President , it goes without saying that I concur with the present resolution which rightly denounces the worrying violations of the most elementary human rights and freedom of speech in our neighbouring country of Turkey .
However , I would like to add that , as far as freedom of speech is concerned , this is no longer always guaranteed in our European countries either , for instance when I stand up for my political beliefs .
I hope you will allow me to say , nevertheless , that this resolution carefully avoids the crux of the matter , as is the case , for that matter , with that other subscriber to human rights violations , the People 's Republic of China .
The crux of the matter is that the European Union as a whole , and the Member States individually , have never ever spoken plainly towards Turkey , if this plain language were to mean more than a paper protest .
This very same Parliament approved the customs union with Turkey some years ago , and also 14 to 15 billion francs in European aid until the year 2000 , without setting even the least suspensive conditions .
Yet at that time we knew just as well as we do today what the human rights situation was in Turkey . We knew that the Turkish army was occupying part of Cyprus , and that in Turkey cultural genocide , if not worse , was being exercised on the Kurds , to give just two examples .
I must add that with this resolution we are once again missing an opportunity to say to the Turkish government and the Turkish people that we wish to maintain the best possible relationship with our neighbouring country and our neighbours , but that Turkey will never be able to join the European Union for the simple reason that culturally , historically , ethnically , and even geographically Turkey is not a European country .
If we do not have the courage to say that , then problems will only increase in future , and I am thinking not least of the problem of the millions of Turkish guest workers and temporary immigrants in Europe .
Malaysia-Indonesia
Madam President , the situation in Indonesia has been getting completely out of hand over the past few weeks , and in particular over the past few days .
The regime is taking extremely tough action against the demonstrators , and this has led to dozens of fatalities .
This is absolutely unacceptable .
Suharto said for the first time yesterday that he would consider stepping down once he had lost the trust of the people .
It is high time he did , then , because he has clearly lost this trust .
The economic crisis , which this regime is responsible for , is being shifted onto the people of Indonesia .
I must say in all honesty that the IMF is demanding measures from Indonesia which do not really improve the situation for the people , but which will lead to even greater poverty .
Nobody is pointing out the responsibility borne by the regime and the clique of friends around it , who have seriously enriched themselves over the past decades .
At the same time we are looking at Malaysia , where there are thousands and thousands of people from Indonesia , whether they have arrived there recently as refugees or not .
Others have been there longer and these people are being deported wholesale back to Indonesia , without respect for the person and without looking at their motives for fleeing their country , where a number of them are bound to be at great risk .
This situation really must come to an end .
Madam President , decades of political omnipotence , familial enrichment and a complete lack of interest in the fate of the Indonesian citizens have rendered the latter helpless and desperate .
They have nothing more to lose , except for a president .
Let us hope , as Mrs van Dijk said , that Suharto is indeed drawing certain conclusions .
His totally undemocratically arranged re-election already heralded a period of absolute terror .
The financial problems have got worse as well , and as a result of the political unrest and the way Suharto 's troops acted , it seems to me that the IMF and the World Bank might have to review their ideas .
The European Parliament , as usual , needs to make a clear appeal to the Indonesian leaders , and perhaps also to Suharto 's successors , to democratize . The Council and the Commission must stop all aid , except for humanitarian aid .
Likewise , the American government must do the same , with conviction .
Clear action to deal with the crisis will have the most effect . We are dealing with a huge country , and I think we will be able to avoid huge problems if we act in this way .
Madam President , in January this year I was part of the European Parliament 's delegation which undertook a fact-finding visit to Malaysia .
We were there at the height of the financial and stock market crises .
We sympathized with the Malaysian authorities as they struggled with the consequences of these troubles which include the plight of the immigrant workers of which there are some 1 million out of a population of 22 million .
Imagine our sorrow therefore to learn of the unacceptable repatriation of tens of thousands of mainly Indonesian foreign workers as a response to the economic crisis and to be acquainted with the deaths of eight Indonesians under detention at centres for illegal immigrants .
We were further disillusioned to learn of the threat of imprisonment of Lim Guan Eng , whose father we met in his role as opposition leader , for the simple reason of his articulating public concern over the treatment of a celebrated rape case victim .
It is a violation of the tenets of democratic freedom to deprive Lim Guan Eng of his seat in Parliament simply because of his mild criticism of the Malaysian government .
It also appears discriminatory that the Prime Minister 's daughter , Marina Mahathir , has not , on the other hand , been targeted by the authorities although she too has been a critic of the government from time to time .
In passing , I would say that our delegation was very impressed by her and her foundation 's work in combating the AIDS epidemic in Malaysia .
In conclusion , it must be right to emphasize that sustainable trade , investment and economic development cannot be achieved in the absence of the development of democracy , the rule of law , civil society and human rights .
We will always be ready to be friends with Malaysia to try to achieve these worthy ambitions and aims .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a regrettable fact that the economic and political situation in Indonesia is getting completely out of control .
The Group of the European People 's Party calls upon the Indonesian government to stop immediately the attacks by police and army units on peaceful demonstrators , and also to protect the country 's Chinese minority from attacks by looters .
A number of murders have already been committed among the Chinese community and it is the responsibility of the police to put a stop to this .
I fear , however , that the situation in Indonesia will ultimately only be brought under control when the political rulers of Indonesia step down in favour of a truly democratic government - and this means all those at the top , not just the President .
Let me conclude by appealing yet again to the Malaysian authorities , and to the Supreme Court , to respect the right of freedom of speech - and particularly that of the parliamentary delegates .
We have confidence in that court - we only hope our confidence is justified .
Tibet
Madam President , we are deeply affected by the fact that a continually growing number of Tibetan activists have decided to make the extreme choice of dying in a hunger strike .
It must be realized that all of this is the result of the desperation of the Tibetan people after 40 years of Chinese occupation and non-violent struggle .
The Tibetan people have made some requests which , we should point out , are addressed above all to the United Nations .
They want the debate on Tibet to be resumed on the basis of Resolutions 59 , 61 and 65 ; a special envoy to be appointed to investigate the situation in Tibet ; and a referendum to be promoted by China under the aegis of the UN , to ascertain the will of the Tibetan people . I believe we must show our solidarity with the Tibetan people and request with some insistence that the question of Tibet is placed on the agenda of the next General Assembly of the United Nations as quickly as possible , and that the Tibetan militants ' other requests should be met .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of Tibet is now in the news more than ever .
The United Nations , as has been said , can and must adopt at least three measures : firstly , to resume discussions on Tibet on the basis of its own previous resolutions ; secondly , to appoint a special envoy for that region ; thirdly , to ask China to promote a referendum to ascertain the Tibetan people 's right to self-determination .
These things were and are being requested by all the people of Tibet , and in particular the six hunger strikers , who have been prevented by the Indian police from continuing their protest on a pretext .
The second measure they request is particularly important : the appointment of a UN envoy , to which should be added the appointment of an EU representative for Tibet . It is deplorable that despite an earlier request by the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , nothing has yet been done .
The European Union cannot continue to be strong with the weak and weak with the strong .
Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , our Parliament cannot help but notice that its policy and proposals are systematically ignored by the Council and the Commission , with the exception of Commissioner Marín 's positive collateral measures and initiatives .
We have had no follow-up to our requests on the liberation of all political prisoners in Tibet , on the liberation of the Panchen Lama , on respect for human rights , on setting up a committee of inquiry , on the appointment of an EU high representative for Tibet , or on negotiations between Tibet and China .
Unlike our American friends , we did not even achieve the liberation or , even better , the expulsion of certain famous dissidents such as Mr Wei Jingsheng or Mr Wang Dan .
The European Union is not achieving anything and after long months , or even years , of requests from Parliament , we notice that there is a genuine obstruction of Parliament 's requests on the part of Mr Brittan and several members of the Council , at least .
I believe we could easily put into Mr Brittan 's mouth the words of Churchill at the time of fascism in Italy , if we were to paraphrase them slightly .
He said : " If I were Italian today I would be fascist ' .
Mr Brittan , like his famous colleague Churchill , could say : " If I were Chinese today I would be communist , or national-fascist ' , which is the same thing .
Madam President , I understand the reasons for preparing this text and I agree on the whole with the proposals .
However , I should like to point out that at the moment the troika is visiting Tibet for the first time , and will be there for some time .
We think it would be better to wait until this visit is over , and ask the Council to report on its results , because I think that might add something to Parliament 's position .
Once that has been done , our group is ready to discuss the matter with the Council and prepare a resolution which takes all these elements into account , a global resolution proposing the main point again - the request by the Dalai Lama for direct negotiations , without conditions - and many of the points stated by those who have spoken before me .
I think it is important to look at the conclusions reached by the troika on this visit , because it is the first time it has gone there .
That is the first point .
Naturally , our group agrees with the activists who are currently staging a dramatic hunger strike , and we state our commitment to bringing the question of Tibet to the forefront , with political discussion and a more complete resolution .
I would also like to say something on the subsequent text which relates to the organizations .
We think there is nothing to evaluate for our part .
We also wish to remind the House that in a few weeks , Parliament 's delegation will be visiting China .
Perhaps it would be appropriate , rather than voting on a resolution on which we do not have definite information , to ask the delegation to raise this question and try to acquire information during its visit .
Otherwise , I do not understand what these delegations are being sent to do .
When it returns , if these points are confirmed , we shall form a resolution on this subject .
That is the position of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Madam President , the two resolutions submitted to the European Parliament join the fifty or so adopted since 1994 which accuse China .
No other country in the world receives such treatment .
The Commission and the Member States are anxious to develop good relations with China , which does not exclude certain disagreements , notably on the issue of human rights .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament , under pressure from some of its Members , goes against this trend . Sadly , the majority remain indifferent , as there are scarcely twenty of us present .
The resolution on Tibet is based on events in India .
As for the resolution on the sale of organs , it is the result of a campaign without proof , orchestrated in the United States and Germany .
The encouragement of separatist tendencies which inspired the resolution on Tibet , notably with reference to a Tibetan government in exile , calls into question a basic international rule : respect of the territorial integrity of each country .
It is a dangerous attitude which will not in any way help to improve the situation .
Peace , like dialogue on human rights , implies mutual respect , particularly when it is a question of a country with over a billion inhabitants such as China .
That is why I call upon my colleagues to reject these two resolutions about China .
Sale of human organs in China
Madam President , arbitrary arrests , death sentences , executions , removal of organs , this is the terrifying scenario which must , with the utmost urgency , cease in China .
Executions of prisoners are increasing all the time , with 2100 executions in 1995 according to Amnesty International .
For fear of compromising its investments , the international community refrains from condemning these violations of basic human rights , or does so half-heartedly .
We know that the prison system in China remains largely impenetrable today .
Organs are removed from prisoners to then be sold and transplanted without the consent of the person concerned or his family .
As the Union is incapable of taking steps in relation to these violations , the parliamentary delegation which is due to visit this country soon must use all its powers of persuasion to put an end to these despicable practices .
In the meantime , the Commission must examine the possibility of establishing European legislation to deal with the trade in organs .
We ask that the Commission and the Council take all the necessary measures at an international level to put an end to this vile trade .
Madam President , since Mr Colajanni raised the question of the European Parliament delegation 's visit to China , I would like to ask my colleagues how many weeks there are in a year .
Well , there are 53 .
And when did our delegation go to China ?
The week of the anniversary of Tiananmen .
This is due to our secretariat , our delegation for relations with China .
This is our Parliament , this is its way of following up our request , our denunciation of the violation of human rights , the denunciation we are making today of an abhorrent fact - it cannot be called anything else - which is affecting Tibet .
This is the response to Tibet , Turkistan , Inner Mongolia and the fate of one billion , three hundred million Chinese people who - until proved otherwise - do not live in a democracy .
It is time to stop saying that we shall wait for something .
The Tibetans have been waiting for forty years and have had no response . The Chinese have been waiting for fifty years , since the Long March , and have not seen any progress in human rights .
We can continue to complain about India , and its nuclear experiments .
No-one is in favour of nuclear experiments , but , like France and England , which were faced with a Nazi regime in the 1930s , India - which is an imperfect democracy , no-one will deny that - is faced with the largest totalitarian empire in the world , and someone wants it to give up the possibility of defending itself !
I would appreciate it if we began to reason a little on this point .
Madam President , I believe we are faced with two very serious facts , which are occurring in several parts of the world : firstly , the continued use of the death penalty as an inhuman method to deal with crimes ; and secondly , the international traffic in organs .
These are two facts which exist in several parts of the world , but which are concentrated in the same country when we talk about China .
If anyone has any doubts about the existence of the death penalty in China - but how could it be denied ? - clearly for that person within this House , China still represents a beacon of democracy and communism .
The other important point is that commercialization , which is a feature throughout the world , is clearly also seen in China .
The information is sufficiently valid to show that , in China , along with repression , there is traffic in human body parts - a traffic which is spreading throughout the world and which we have favoured even within our own countries , with patents on living organisms .
Mr President , I hope you will not mistake me for Mr Falconer if I now say something about the roll call .
But first let me just point out that Mr Avgerinos is not present .
It is he who was entrusted with the work of reviewing matters of topical and urgent debate .
I myself am always present for the urgencies , but I rarely see Mr Avgerinos .
So it comes as no surprise to me that some of the ideas contained in his proposals are rather confusing .
Now to the urgencies . When one looks at what is going on in China , when one hears what previous speakers have said about the alleged trade in human organs , when one reads the reports presented by various organizations , such as China Watch and the Fresenius company , then it is like being in some kind of horror film .
Death sentences are being carried out to order and the condemned persons are being executed in such a way that certain organs remain unaffected , so that they can be turned into cash .
The number of death sentences , the executions and the methods used are treated as state secrets .
The new code of criminal procedure has been drawn up so that court procedures can be handled in such a way that the legal defence of the accused is impossible and something so basic as the presence of observers at court trials is totally out of the question .
The European Parliament has always pleaded for people sentenced to death , and has always spoken out against the death penalty .
Naturally we cannot remain silent about the gruesome consequences of these death-penalty decisions .
We have to adopt a clear position here .
I therefore believe that it is only natural for us to make minimum demands , for example that practices of this kind should be stopped .
The United Nations which , so we are told , this year at long last is to investigate the slave trade - an action which I believe has been inspired by a resolution from this Parliament - should also set up an international committee of inquiry , and the Council and the Commission should do everything in their power at least to put a stop to the activities of those European firms involved .
This is an issue which should certainly be addressed by our delegation during its forthcoming visit to China .
Thank you very much .
I would only like to say that Mr Avgerinos and I were invited yesterday to a meeting and on that occasion he ask me to excuse him .
I think he has had some problems recently .
Mr President , on the issue of the death penalty and its macabre exploitation in the Republic of China , we are now confronted by an extraordinary phase of routine horror .
On this issue at least , we appeal to this House to abandon its tradition of not letting the facts stand in the way of political and economic convenience .
The facts - not propaganda , which nowadays is going in the opposite direction - are overwhelming .
They show that thousands of executed people in the People 's Republic of China are exploited in a most cruel fashion to meet the growing demand for transplanted organs by rich individuals in Japan and in the West .
Last month , we asked to no avail the diplomatic representatives of China in Brussels , Mr Huang Daosheng , Mr Wang Wen and Mr Wei Min , to provide us with documented evidence disproving such ongoing horror .
We are still waiting !
For us , the moment to act is now .
Or shall we conclude that in this House , to act in moral equilibrium means our most sacred values must never be tested ?
Capital punishment in Burma
Mr President , in Burma , too , people are being executed .
Last week six prisoners , whom Amnesty International clearly regards as political prisoners , were sentenced to death .
Before that , 20 other prisoners who should also be considered as political prisoners died in prison .
From all appearances , this is actually another form of death sentence , or execution , which is being implemented .
Moreover , the Burmese army takes tough action against ethnic minorities and also executes people without any form of trial .
We would like to urge the Burmese government to abolish the death penalty , and , in any case , to stop the executions , whether or not these follow a sentence .
Individuals have a right to a fair trial , and political prisoners ought to be released .
It is high time we in the European Union urged the business sector to stop investing in Burma and start withdrawing investments .
Mr President , the military regime in Burma continues to persecute political opponents without restraint .
At the end of April two students were sentenced to death .
These two were part of a group of 40 people arrested in January because of opposition activities .
The other 38 were given prison sentences from 3 to 14 years .
Over the past few years , more than 20 people have died in prison .
So we know what this may mean .
Last week another 6 death sentences were passed .
They were all Burmese citizens who are regarded as political prisoners by Amnesty International .
That makes 8 death penalties and 38 heavy prison sentences in the space of a few months , with all the dangers which accompany prison sentences .
It is a good thing Commissioner Marín is present here .
In 1996 we abolished the preferential system for Burma after a series of exasperating acts of violence by the military regime .
The United States , and also the US Congress , want to introduce an investment ban .
In February we asked this House whether we should not be coming up with more measures , including an investment ban .
Is it not high time we implemented this restriction on investments , together with the USA ? We would thus force the military regime in Burma to respect democracy and human rights , and above all , to give Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , the elected president , who has been imprisoned at home for six years , the right to take up the seat she is entitled to , namely the presidency of her country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament has considered the dramatic problem of the death penalty more than once .
We have always been inflexible with the United States of America , and we are also inflexible with the Republic of China , even if it does not appear to please some people . We must be even more inflexible with Burma , if possible .
There are many reasons : firstly , the lack of respect for the least guarantees in terms of court proceedings , which should by right be recognized in all countries ; secondly , the nature of the crimes with which the condemned are charged , which are purely political and a matter of opinion ; and thirdly , the systematic use of this instrument , not as a penalty , but as a pure and simple repression of dissent , so that the army is accuser , judge and executioner at the same time .
The European Union must do everything necessary , useful and appropriate , including the strictest economic sanctions , to put an end to this intolerable situation .
Mr President , I am going to reply en bloc to the various resolutions on the different questions raised by the honorable Members .
As regards Guatemala , the Commission shares Parliament 's sorrow and indignation over the assassination of Bishop Juan Gerardi , whom I had the opportunity to get to know personally , as did many of you , because as you know , the European Union has been heavily involved in Guatemala 's pacification process and now , recently , in the peace process .
This crime , like others linked to human rights , is a frontal attack on the peace process itself , and all the more so because of the symbolism of murdering Bishop Gerardi when he had just finished his report on the truth about the terrible civil war in that country during the last 30 years .
What should we do ?
At the moment , the European Union has already made the appropriate contributions in terms of political cooperation with that country , and it is obvious that we need to reconsider a lot of issues , in general terms . This would be a good opportunity because the new consultative committee which accompanies the peace process is meeting in June .
This time the meeting will probably take place in Washington , with the Latin American Development Bank .
We need to reconsider how these things are happening , and why .
Above all , we also need to invite the Guatemalan government , the political forces and public opinion to make an effort , so that the peace agreements can really take shape and develop . In some aspects , these peace agreements are experiencing a really worrying delay .
So we are going to continue to point out to the Guatemalan government the need , firstly , to identify the perpetrators of the crime , and then to gradually regain the spirit of the peace agreements , so that such murders are not repeated .
What can I say about Colombia and the Umaña , Arango and Fernando Landazábal murders ?
I agree with the speakers ' descriptions of human rights in Colombia , especially the speech by Mrs Miranda de Lage .
Colombia 's problem is very simple .
At the moment , elections are just about to take place - on 26 May - and really serious things are happening in that country .
Human rights in Colombia will have to come as a direct result of peace .
If there is no peace , I very much fear that this situation of domestic disintegration will continue .
So the first obligation of the next president - not to the international community but , above all , to the Colombian people themselves - is resolutely to seek for peace , so there can be an end to all the causes which are provoking this sort of atrocity .
Because there are atrocities by the paramilitaries ; there are atrocities by the guerillas ; and there are atrocities - I believe - in a situation in which it is now very difficult to say who is responsible , resulting in that spirit of impunity which creates this sort of situation .
In any case , as you know , the Colombian authorities have created a special committee as part of the public prosecutor 's department , and it is going to investigate these murders .
We shall wait and hear what conclusions it reaches .
Meanwhile , what should we do ?
At the moment , the most we can do - and we want to do it , and have said so , even on our own account , without waiting for the United Nations - is to maintain the human rights office in Bogotá , which is in charge of monitoring the situation . That does not fundamentally alter the domestic situation , but it is no small matter to maintain an office to monitor events there .
And in order to do that , as you know , we have taken the decision to renew for another year the EU 's participation in that office , which is run by the UN representative , Mrs Robinson . We were not obliged to do that , because our commitment was only for one year .
On the other hand , something we shall have to see about in the future is how to increase our cooperation with Colombia in the judicial area .
It is true that the Colombian authorities have already made that request , but it would be quite interesting to see how , in this aspect of judicial cooperation , we can gradually make progress in the future .
But I repeat , whatever happens in the elections , no matter who wins the Colombian elections , the first priority is to seek peace , which will require major negotiations . From then on , the priority will be gradually to reduce the current tension in that country , which gives rise to the situations we have seen there recently , which are so hard to understand .
As for Turkey , the Commission also condemns the attack on Mr Akin Birdal , the Turkish human rights activist . Obviously , like Parliament , the Commission also wants the perpetrators of this crime to be found quickly and brought to justice .
As you know , the Prime Minister , Mr Yilmaz , the Deputy Prime Minister and many other ministers and MPs have also condemned this attack .
Furthermore , the Commission shares the European Parliament 's concern about the repercussions of the judgement against the mayor of Istanbul in connection with freedom of expression in Turkey .
We are equally worried by the events of January , sparked off by the decision of the Turkish Constitutional Court to order the dissolution of the Prosperity Party , to which Mr Erdogan belonged .
And the Commission is of course concerned that this sort of decision may have adverse effects on democratic pluralism and freedom of expression in Turkey .
As for the more general aspects of our relations with that country , the Commission of course fully abides by the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council , which restated that the consolidation of Turkey 's ties with the European Union also depends on that country continuing with the political reforms which have been started , especially to bring its human rights regulations and practices into line with those of the EU .
And despite Ankara 's decision , in principle , to end all political dialogue with the EU , the Commission intends to continue to inform its Turkish partners of the EU 's concerns in this area .
As for Malaysia , the South-East Asian economic crisis has grave social consequences for the people of the countries concerned , mainly unemployment and emigration .
During the last few months , the Commission has been fully engaged in a constant dialogue with the beneficiaries and other donors on how to increase our support for the region .
At the moment , following the ASEM conference in London , we are reconsidering , within the Commission , our cooperation programmes with that area and that country , in order to target additional funds on the most severely affected countries .
As regards the conviction of the MP Lim Guan Eng , the Commission 's delegation to Malaysia will follow this case closely , along with the appeal which has just been lodged with the Federal Court .
And as for the situation in the overflowing Malaysian detention camps , the Commission again shares Members ' concerns about the reports of bad treatment and human rights violations .
So I can assure you we are making sure that these concerns - about the refugee camps - are passed on to the Malaysian authorities , and we are going to urge the government to continue to cooperate with the High Commissioner for Refugees and the various non-governmental organizations in helping the refugees .
Turning now to Indonesia , we are of course also worried and concerned about that country 's current situation and the use of violence by the security forces to repress the latest demonstrations which , as you know , has already caused the death of a number of students in Jakarta .
The Commission is still in contact with the government on the question of human rights . At last , we have managed to arrange for a jointly funded human rights seminar to be held in Jakarta in June , organized by the current presidency of the Council of Ministers and the Indonesian National Human Rights Commission .
This will be the first open debate to be held on human rights in Indonesia with the joint participation of the European Union and the Indonesian National Human Rights Commission .
It is only one step , but it is an important step .
As for direct aid to the Indonesian people , because of the economic situation , there has already been an on-the-spot mission to assess the true situation .
The first assessment which has been made - by this team working on the question - is that there is often a difference between what the media depict and what is revealed by in-depth study .
Despite the images we have seen of people crowding round lorries to collect rice or other essential foodstuffs , in fact there is no general shortage of food .
There are some localized areas suffering shortages of food and drinking water , and a lack of logistics and distribution , especially in the most vulnerable parts of the country , and affecting the most vulnerable sections of the population .
We are already starting work there as regards emergency aid . But I repeat , in principle the situation does not seem to be as dramatic as suggested by the images we have seen .
Turning now to Tibet , the subject of that country is raised regularly , and the religious dimension of the Tibetan identity forms a constant part of human rights talks with China , and will continue to do so .
The Commission is going to evaluate carefully the results of the recent troika visit by EU ambassadors to Tibet , and will of course inform Parliament as soon as possible .
As for the sale of organs in China , I shall first give the background .
There is specific dialogue on human rights between the EU and China , which began in 1997 .
That dialogue has helped to achieve some concrete results , especially as regards China 's participation in the UN human rights instruments .
The question of the death penalty , and particularly the legal and administrative conditions governing executions , has been addressed in the context of this dialogue , and will continue to be raised in the future .
As regards the trafficking in human organs reported by the international media , the Commission will raise this problem with the Chinese authorities within the context of the human rights dialogue , on the basis of a detailed analysis of the facts .
Nevertheless , although this certainly does not mean we are not worried about it , the Commission would remind you that intervening in such matters is the responsibility of the Member States since , as you know , Article 129 of the Treaty does not confer legislative powers upon the European Community in this area .
Nevertheless , I repeat that although the Commission does not have the institutional competence , we are closely following the work of the competent international organizations : the Council of Europe is working on this , at European level , and supports cooperation between the Member States on this point .
As you know , the European group on ethics , science and new technologies - which has replaced the group on the ethical implications of biotechnology - will issue a statement in 1998 on the ethical aspects of human tissue banks .
Lastly , once the Treaty of Amsterdam has been ratified , the Commission will be able to study the possibilities for work in this field - that is , as regards the regulations which should be adopted in relation to the distribution or transfer of organs .
Perhaps that would be the right time to raise the problem generally , to consider not just the illegal circulation or transfer of organs from China - assuming the existence of such trade is confirmed - but also its occurrence in any other country .
As for Burma , you know that we in the Commission have always deplored the widespread human rights violations in that country , and we are aware of the recent death sentences passed against six prisoners .
Nevertheless , we think there is reason to be hopeful about these death sentences , insofar as no death sentence has been carried out in 1998 .
Let us hope the military junta continues along these lines , and at least does not decide to execute these six prisoners .
As for the possibility of an investment ban , as suggested by Mrs Maij-Weggen , the European Union is not able to forbid private investment on the part of European companies . Apart from the moral and ethical judgements each one of us can form for ourselves , there is no instrument at the moment to allow us to act at that level .
In any case , you know the state of our relations with Burma . There are no relations .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0502 / 98 by Mr Macartney and Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the arms export code of conduct ; -B4-0505 / 98 by Ms McKenna and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the European code of conduct for arms exports ; -B4-0520 / 98 by Mr Oostlander and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on a code of conduct for arms exports ; -B4-0522 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mr Frischenschlager , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on a code of conduct for arms exports ; -B4-0529 / 98 by Mrs González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on a code of conduct for arms exports ; -B4-0546 / 98 by Mr Titley and Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the PSE Group , on an EU code of conduct on arms exports .
Mr President , often in these so-called urgencies we are dealing with things which one might argue are not urgent .
However , here we have a chance to put our point of view and make a decisive contribution to an urgent decision which will be taken in ten days ' time when the General Affairs Council of the European Union will be asked to endorse a Franco-British initiative to have a proper code of conduct for the exportation of armaments .
It is hard to imagine anything that is more important for the long-term future of a world which is beset by strife of all kinds .
European weapons are responsible for the killing and maiming of many people .
So we have to ask the Council to endorse that initiative and to extend it to all Member States , not just the two Member States which are proposing it .
Equally , we have to say that the European Union cannot solve all these problems itself , and we have to look to support from the United States , Russia and China .
It is far from being a futile gesture for us to put forward a European code of conduct .
On the contrary , this is something where the European Union can lead the world .
Mr President , at the beginning of the British Presidency Tony Blair was making great play of the fact that Great Britain was going to take action on a code of conduct on arms exports , and we , the Green Group in the European Parliament , welcomed this warmly .
At last an initiative was to be taken at European level .
When Belgium drew up its arms export act in 1991 , the perennial argument on the part of Belgium for not going the whole hog was that this issue should be regulated at European level , otherwise Belgium would be at a relative disadvantage .
So there was genuine hope that Europe would grasp this opportunity .
Unfortunately , we have to conclude that the proposals which have so far been developed by the British Presidency in conjunction with France are frankly a disappointment .
During the ACP meeting in Mauritius on 20 to 23 April we saw that a majority of both the Europeans and the ACP representatives also raised this issue .
They clearly complained that the code in its present form will have no impact on the unstable regions , on countries which spend an excessive part of their budget on defence , and even on the countries which violate human rights .
Also , the fact that the draft does not expressly include the sale of light weapons in the regulation - those light weapons which are wreaking such havoc in Africa - is the cause of much regret .
On a procedural level there are also a great many snags , as a Member State which refuses an export licence must inform the others , but the length of time allowed for this is not defined .
There is no common certificate of end use , so the multiplicity of certificates , which has always led to chaos , will continue to exist . The problem of arms manufacturers from third countries operating with a licence from a Member State company has not been considered at all .
As far as we are concerned , we are calling very urgently indeed for this code to be made binding and meaningful after all .
Mr President , when we learned of the Franco-British initiative for a code on the arms trade , we got the impression that we should be on our guard more than usual .
I think Parliament 's resolution indicates clearly that we are indeed prepared to be on our guard , and to strengthen this Franco-British initiative where possible .
It is unacceptable , of course , that when some countries are behaving properly with regard to arms exports , in particular when they are desisting from exporting arms , others fill the gap .
Then the outcome is zero , morally speaking .
There is a great need to combat this cynicism .
Earning money from misery is a serious business which Parliament must take a stance against . It is very good that this Parliament is firmly unanimous about this resolution , so that the Council knows , and others also know , that the representatives of the European citizens have no doubt about what should happen on that front .
Hitherto the actions have always been very weak , for example against Serbia , which already manufactures excessive numbers of weapons itself .
A ban on arms exports to Serbia is in fact one of those useless hollow gestures .
It is much better to take a general line , with criteria which must be employed , including under those circumstances which make it economically less attractive to behave decently .
Mr President , this sort of proposal often tends to be symbolic in nature , and that is why I am underlining that one of the last parts of the proposal talks about the need to combat illegal arms exports .
It is all very well for us to organize everything by law , but if we do not ensure that the illegal export of arms is genuinely combated in an effective way , then we still do not achieve our objective .
That is why I think it is good that this resolution concludes with that point .
Mr President , the three previous speakers have already partly articulated what I wanted to say .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is disappointed about the outcome in practice .
The Member States do not have to accept this as binding .
It remains a political declaration of no value . There are no sanctions .
They are merely obliged to inform each other .
What are we gaining ?
We are not gaining anything .
This Parliament must make it clear here and now that this is not nearly enough .
The present proposal does not deserve to be called ethical politics , as the British Presidency still referred to it at the beginning of the year .
The scandal surrounding Sierra Leone and the American refusal - would you believe - to supply arms to the United Kingdom because of poor export controls , should send clear signals to Europe , as well as to the British , for that matter .
Let us start putting some real effort into strict and binding European regulations on the arms trade .
That is why the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is pleased that this resolution adopts a clear position , and asks the Council to remove the weaknesses in the proposals .
Transparency , Mr President , and multilateral consultation between all Member States are essential ingredients for a common policy .
Any concession on this front to the so-called sovereignty of the Member States makes a laughing stock of the European rules .
I therefore call on the Commission , as well as the forthcoming Austrian presidency , to continue the work of the British in case we end this presidency with a weak compromise .
The Commission obviously also has a job to do in this .
We are all awaiting with great interest what the Commission will do .
In conclusion , I hope the G8 will conclude international agreements during its next meeting , and I definitely also hope that the EU Member States who will be present will support the proposals for adopting the OAS code .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I would like to welcome the initiative by the British Presidency to establish a new code of conduct for the arms trade .
There is no doubt that the code of conduct governing the sale of arms , so that weapons from the EU are not used for internal repression or external aggression , is long overdue .
It is important in terms not only of enhancing human rights outside the Union but also of giving European defence companies a level and fair playing field in the sphere of arms exports .
Undercutting , when one country 's defence sector steps in to supply arms refused by another Member State , must become a thing of the past .
The latest draft of the code , in addition to defining circumstances of internal repression or external aggression , which would trigger denial of exports , states that consideration would be given to whether ' the proposed export would seriously undermine the economic and social development of the recipient country ' .
Furthermore , Member States would reserve the right to operate more restrictive national export policies while working to adopt the common list of military equipment covered by the code .
It is , however , to be hoped that the envisaged annual reports to the Council will be used as a basis for discussion and scrutiny in the European Parliament .
Further work needs to be done on countering the illegal export of arms .
Arms brokers and end use will require close monitoring .
The next step will be to extend the principles of the code to countries like Russia , China and the United States .
Nevertheless , the fact that we are on the verge of agreeing a historic code of conduct on arms exports , which I hope will be agreed on 25 May , is a hopeful sign for all those seeking a safer world .
Mr President , everyone in this House , with the exception of Mr Truscott , now understands that the British Presidency 's solemn announcement of a code of conduct for arms exports is nothing but a carte-blanche for the arms industry .
What all this is about is not the avoidance and prevention of arms exports , but the improvement of European arms cooperation , and especially an improvement in the position of the UK arms industry within this framework of cooperation .
Even the focus of the British Presidency - namely the implementation of a policy for the protection of international human rights - breaks down when it comes to the protection of arms exports .
The proposed code still permits exports to Turkey and even allows the UK government to send weapons to Indonesia and Sierra Leone , in spite of the embargo .
In view of this new situation , the German Bundestag is currently deciding about easing national regulations on arms exports in order to improve Germany 's position as an arms trader .
The UK presidency has misled all those who have been pleading for an effective control of arms exports .
We therefore call on the Commission to submit a draft proposal containing clear demands which are in line with those often expressed in this House and repeatedly voiced by the NGOs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the last few years there have been repeated calls both inside and outside the European Union for greater transparency in conventional arms exports .
The EU has taken the initiative in this respect in establishing common rules , in the form of a code of conduct on the transfer of conventional arms .
This draft code of conduct aims to establish a set of principles upon which to base all arms export decisions , and to provide a well-defined framework for action , as a context for discussions of each case of arms transfer .
The draft code of conduct also establishes the criteria for use in evaluating all arms exports .
Nevertheless , it must be made clear that the final responsibility for arms exports rests with the national governments .
The European Union has a great interest in seeing these principles widely accepted , including by the world 's leading arms exporters .
And having an agreement which covers the whole of the EU and has a consistent internal approach is important when it comes to putting pressure on third parties to adopt similar practices .
Progress has been made in drafting the code , especially in relation to the appropriate legal instruments for its adoption , and the future elaboration of eight criteria .
We do not deny that serious obstacles remain , and the presidency has offered the possibility of holding other limited consultations between governments during the next few days , after which a report will be presented to the Council - on 25 or 26 May - assessing the situation , and I should imagine a series of compromise solutions will be presented by the presidency .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Doñana National Park -B4-0492 / 98 by Mr Eisma , Mr Gasóliba i Böhm and Mr Vallvé , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Doñana ecological disaster ; -B4-0508 / 98 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the severe toxic spill disaster in Doñana National Park , Spain ; -B4-0521 / 98 by Mr Valverde López and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the environmental disaster affecting the Doñana National Park caused by the collapse of a dam for channelling mud from the Aznalcollar mines ( Seville ) ; -B4-0531 / 98 by Mrs González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the Doñana environmental disaster ; -B4-0548 / 98 by Mr Aparicio Sánchez and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the toxic spills near Doñana with serious economic and social consequences ;
Italy -B4-0497 / 98 by Mr Bianco and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the hydrogeological disaster in the Italian provinces of Salerno , Avellino and Caserta ; -B4-0530 / 98 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the floods in Campania ( Italy ) ; -B4-0535 / 98 by Mr Fassa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the tragedy in the Campania region of Italy ; -B4-0549 / 98 by Mr Colajanni and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on floods in Campania ; -B4-0551 / 98 by Mr Azzolini and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the flooding of 5 May 1998 in Campania ( Italy ) ; -B4-0559 / 98 by Mr Tamino and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the flooding in Campania ( Italy ) .
Doñana National Park
Mr President , in my capacity as president of a Spanish national park - Aigüestortes y Estany de Sant Maurici - I can only lament the disaster which has happened , or which may happen , in a large part of the Doñana National Park , which is the biggest and most important national park in Europe and has been declared a World Heritage Site .
Faced with this situation , I think the first thing to emphasize is the need for coordination in that region between all the authorities concerned , including those with responsibility for industry and mines - the precise cause of the catastrophe was the storage of waste water from mineral purification - as well as those directly responsible for the protection of the nature reserve .
I think we must also mention the need to increase our solidarity with all the people concerned , who have suffered harm on account of the polluted water which has flooded the zone .
In that sense I think that in future this sort of situation should be anticipated , and there should be no storage of dangerous substances which can damage wildlife areas such as Doñana .
Mr President , once again an inconceivable environmental disaster has occurred , this time in a valuable and sensitive area of southern Spain , in Andalusia .
The Doñana National Park , which was designated one of UNESCO 's World Heritage Sites , is now severely damaged .
Large areas were flooded with over 5 million cubic metres of contaminated hazardous waste water from mining operations when a retaining dam burst .
Over 2000 hectares of cultivated land has also been destroyed .
The fact that it is a Swedish company that is operating the mine in Andalusia is distressing , but at the same time it is also a challenge .
Green politicians from Sweden took part last Sunday in a large demonstration in Andalusia with over 10 000 participants .
The demonstration was arranged by environmental and peace organizations .
Together with the Greens in Andalusia , the Swedish environmental party demanded that the Boliden company should accept the economic and legal responsibility , compensate the victims and finance the remediation and regeneration of the area .
However , it is not only Boliden that is responsible .
In fact , many parties are involved in this incident , which is one of Europe 's worst environmental disasters .
In 1996 a local organization obtained a report smuggled out by a sacked technician about the problem with the dams .
On 27 February 1996 the company was reported to the Commission , which decided , however , that there was no risk .
The entire investigation was abandoned after having only heard from the local environmental authorities .
Boliden had added to the dam without permission .
Cracks had also been found in the dam , which were reported , but nothing was done .
Now we must accept collective responsibility !
The Commission must take action and support the affected parties .
Mr President , first of all I want to express my solidarity with the victims of the floods in Italy and add my support to that shown by all the political groups in drafting this resolution about the Doñana National Park .
It is important for the European Commission to find the means to grant urgent aid , and to work in close collaboration with the Spanish government and the Andalusian regional government in order to reprogramme the structural and cohesion funds to support the plan being prepared to decontaminate , restore and strengthen environmental protection in the area around Doñana .
And I think it is time to follow the advice of the committee of scientists which has been appointed and remove the toxic sludge as fast as possible , to prevent the irreversible spread of the pollution .
Mr President , Commissioner , as my colleague Carmen Díez de Rivera Icaza said at the start of this part-session , and as José Luis Valverde has just said , we deeply deplore what has happened in Italy because human life is the most valuable thing of all . There can be no doubt about that .
But Carmen Díez de Rivera Icaza asked for attention to be paid to the Doñana catastrophe , and it is quite right that we should do so .
We state here and now that we are going to vote in favour of the joint resolution , because it refers to Community law , shows solidarity with the people affected , requests expert assistance and financial aid from the European Union , and suggests that all the authorities should unite so as to be able to tackle the problem .
Well , we are presenting three amendments , together with our colleagues from the Green Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party - Mrs Carmen Díez de Rivera Icaza and Mr Collins , the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
These amendments address aspects not covered in the joint resolution , and we thought it would be appropriate to include them .
I am going to defend them even though I do not have much time .
Firstly , environmental protection groups should be included in the committee of local authorities , experts and so on , because they have years of experience of protecting Doñana against dangers , and they know a lot about the reserve .
Secondly , a committee should be set up to investigate and clarify responsibilities . Nobody is answerable here , but we can see a few people who should be .
We think the Hydrographical Confederation has a responsibility .
They say in the press today , in a study , that the aquifers which feed Doñana are at serious risk . We think the regional government of Andalusia has a responsibility , and the Spanish government .
And in the third amendment , we also think the European Commission has a responsibility .
In 1996 , a complaint was lodged by CEPA .
The European Commission requested information from the Spanish government , trusted what they told them , and archived the complaint . So the European Commission also has a certain responsibility for what is happening in Doñana .
I shall conclude by saying that we shall probably learn something from this catastrophe : that it costs far more to restore what has been destroyed than it would have cost to take preventative measures .
And of course , the mining company had the greatest obligation to take such measures .
Mr President , the Commission should put all its effort into helping both to correct a situation which still today continues to threaten the Doñana National Park - which is one of the most outstanding jewels of the ecological heritage of the whole Union - and to prevent similar disasters from happening in the future .
In reaching a decision on this joint resolution which I have the honour of proposing on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Parliament should be aware of three things .
Firstly , the bursting of the dam owned by the Boliden company near Doñana and the resulting spillage of toxic sludge is such a serious matter and poses such a threat that the Commission should not just implement its maximum financial and technical assistance , but should also ensure that such assistance is not discontinued as soon as the danger to the reserve is over , but should extend it in the medium term until the affected sectors have fully recovered in economic terms .
Secondly , so far there has been no damage within the reserve , and the damage caused to the ecosystem is not yet irreparable .
Thirdly , it is nevertheless extremely urgent that the leaked toxic matter be removed , because every day that passes without such removal being achieved represents an extremely high and growing risk .
Mr President , the Spanish administrations are collaborating mutually to solve the problem , and are counting on dependable scientific advice to help them , but it is enormously important for the Commission 's support - which the Commissioner has already announced in Spain - to be emphasized and extended along the lines suggested in our proposed resolution .
Italy
Mr President , Commissioner , I hope that the tragedy which took place on 5 May , when a mud slide destroyed several communities and produced hundreds of victims and thousands of evacuees , will be taken as a warning that a new land policy should be implemented , not only in Italy but also on a European level .
I am aware that the Commission has already taken some steps which may be important .
I hope the Structural Funds can be used to restore and relaunch these communities . However , I can tell you that my greatest wish is for the European Union and the Commission to implement an adequate policy throughout Europe - where these tragedies have occurred , such as Doñana which we have just discussed - in order to avoid these disasters , which cause so may victims .
Mr President , 145 dead and 135 missing : these are the first totals , which are increasing daily to give an even more tragic number .
It is certainly not the task of this Parliament to establish what was immediately responsible for losses which have affected three Italian provinces : disorganization of emergency services ; inadequate means ; criminal behaviour on the part of the local and state administrations .
That is a matter for the Italian judiciary .
The European Parliament has the larger , more demanding task of mobilizing Community resources and technology in a preventive plan of hydrogeological restoration in a territory which for a quarter of a century has been devastated by abuse , corruption , and environmental neglect .
But this is not only a tragic problem for Italy .
As shown by the recent environmental disaster in Spain , other countries within the Community are exposed to similarly severe disasters caused solely by an insane and criminal exploitation of the land .
The alarm for an Italian region should become the alarm for the whole of Europe . The institutions of this Europe , over and above their triumphalist self-praise for the single currency , must now - not tomorrow - defend the most basic rights of its people , who are threatened by a desire for profit and the theft of the environment .
Mr President , I have come to this House today to express profound grief and remember the very serious disaster which affected not only the Italian community but also the European community .
The natural events which recently affected the Campania region were certainly exceptional , but at the same time we cannot say with any certainty that they were unforeseeable .
For many years , the local authorities had been told that the areas struck by the disaster we are remembering today were in complete hydrogeological disorder . The authorities themselves denounced the situation .
There are two astonishing facts , which the President of the Italian Republic rightly referred to .
The first is that people are looking immediately for political responsibilities , rather than legal responsibilities - which sometimes appeared instrumental - rather than being led by a real desire to shed light on the facts . Secondly , people are attempting to use the tragedy in Campania as a pretext for satisfying national party political interests , which risk having little to do with a real reorganization of land management responsibilities .
I have said several times that the problem of southern Italy is not so much a national question as a matter for the entire European Union .
The Commission must therefore take into consideration the possibility of allocating Community resources to the financing of programmes , both to reconstruct and to relaunch the productive activities of the area .
But at the same time we cannot forget that Italy , which has recently entered the single currency with great emphasis - as stated by Mr Manisco - must show that it knows it truly merits the aid which , I am certain , will be given by the European Union .
Mr President , the terrible extent of the tragedy in Campania has already been discussed : 150 dead , 150 missing - it is difficult to imagine that there will be any more survivors - four communities damaged and in confusion , two provinces - Avellino and Salerno - seriously affected , and destruction of the land .
It is clear that responsibilities exist , and that they will be investigated .
Now is the time , first of all , for grief - which the European Parliament has already expressed at the opening of the sitting . Soon afterwards comes the time for solidarity - concrete solidarity .
I would like to emphasize this last point , because I was very pleased with what Commissioner Monti said , on the first day of Parliament 's current part-session , when he stated the possibility of concrete intervention .
This is the point I would like to emphasize , and on which I would like a response from Commissioner Marín - the possibility of using regional funds not used for their original purpose .
Can we have a decision from the Commission ?
Naturally , precise purposes must be established , and controls , as well as extremely clear agreement between the national , regional and community authorities , in the hope for clear management which is not excessively bureaucratic .
This would of course represent the concrete solidarity of Europe with those areas which have suffered the disaster we are remembering here .
We must try to provide this , and contribute to the rebirth of these very beautiful areas which have been so unfortunate in suffering the events which have occurred there over so many years .
Mr President , after listening to my colleagues from Campania who spoke before me , I think it is only right not to repeat the same observations and considerations , which occur naturally to anyone who , like them and like myself , has been to those places and comes from there , and has lived with those people through their drama of despair , profound grief , and great human dignity .
Anyone who saw it on television - and a great many people did see it , not only nationally but throughout Europe - could see great despair in the eyes of those people , but also great dignity . That is perhaps what most struck the journalists , who have become used to grief and profound sorrow .
Now we have to respond to that dignity , because it is difficult now to give answers to the dead .
We must answer the survivors , who need an answer , but I use a euphemism , because it would have been better for the Italian state , and the whole of the Community , to give an answer early enough , rather than have to count the missing as dead and the deceased as victims .
My point is along the lines of what Mr De Giovanni said a moment ago , which is to help these people understand what help can be given to relaunch the economy of the area .
I shall give one example . In Sarno , a hospital has been destroyed which is not only a central point for the health of the area , but a part of the economy , where 400 people live and work .
This means that the area 's economy will be repressed , if it is not immediately relaunched .
With the availability expressed by Commissioner Monti , we should remodel the resources and structural funds which , like Objective 1 , have more often been shown to be lacking in terms of cost capacity rather than planning .
We need to help the region , the land and the local bodies to reprogramme these resources , using a simple procedure , which allows immediate and optimum use of investments , Obviously the affected parties would not be compensated in the immediate future , but a significant programme would be provided , to remove the anguish of tomorrow and provide more certainty and hope for the area , and a social aspect , which we must all be happy with when it is implemented .
On behalf of my group and my colleagues in Campania , I am requesting commitment , which can be translated into realities rather than verbal solidarity .
Mr President , we are certainly all deeply affected and wish to express our grief for the families of the victims , because there are nearly 300 people dead and missing , very many injured and thousands evacuated .
But with this natural disaster as with others , it has to be said that bad luck has nothing to do with it . This tragedy is the result of human and political action , which caused the hydrogeological problem in Italy , which means that today small normal natural events can cause disasters .
We are therefore faced with the situation that we must have a serious prevention policy to prevent similar natural events .
For this reason we must ask the Italian authorities to provide stable and conclusive information , firstly as regards the persons evacuated . As soon as possible afterwards , however , we need information on preventive action , with an updated map of the risks in all the hydrogeologically compromised regions in Italy .
Above all , we ask the government to complete the necessary reorganization of land management responsibilities . For this reason we also ask the Commission to examine the possibility of using Community funds , together with the national and regional funds , to deal with these problems .
Mr President , I believe that the very serious tragedy which took place in Campania must be seen as a warning and an alarm signal for the European institutions and all Member States governments .
It should be seen as a warning because I think it is now a matter of urgency to define Community instruments of civil protection which can intervene with the speed which unfortunately our country cannot provide on its own .
On this point I agree with the call made by Mr De Giovanni , and I ask the Commission to respond .
There is a tragic emergency in Campania ; there is a request to use funds ; these funds are needed to bring life back to a region of the European Union .
I believe bureaucracy should be overcome , and we should try to resolve this problem .
Another reason why it is an alarm signal is that what happened in Italy has made it clear that without a serious land protection policy - with , on the contrary , ruinous work being done on the land - the perfect conditions are being created for these tragedies to occur .
I call upon the Commission to act as an intermediary , so that it can quickly do what has not been done in many of the EU Member States : to get to know the dangers in an affected territory , and monitor them properly , so that more tragedies do not occur on the scale of the one affecting my country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , due to a bureaucratic misunderstanding our group has not presented a resolution on this subject , but obviously we are happy with the arrangement upon which we shall shortly be voting . I think it is important to state not only our solidarity but also the need for these questions - which will undoubtedly become more frequent in the common European fabric which we are trying to build - to be dealt with on a European level .
From this point of view , I believe there are two possibilities . Either our demonstrations become pure ritual , as is often the case , or the European Union must really show not just solidarity , but that in some fields - in particular in land management in Europe - it can draw up a policy to deal with the situation .
In recent years we have destroyed the budget line which dealt with disasters and provided an immediate and concrete contribution in unfortunate cases such as this .
I think these disasters must make us reflect in the short term , so that we can activate instruments which show the citizens that Europe is not an abstract entity , but can deal with these requests and needs . However , we also need to think about the medium and long term , so that we can implement concrete planning operations , for example in relation to defence and rigorous management of the land .
It would also be useful sometimes for Member States to be able to resort to measures on a European level .
Mr President , once again we are called upon to weep for the victims of natural disasters .
In the case of the recent floods which hit some areas of Campania , the emotion is even greater because of the high number of victims and the fact that they included several babies and children .
The National Alliance delegation supports the contents of the joint resolution and joins in the grief for the families of the victims . However , we can already imagine what the Commissioner will reply in response to the request for aid from the Commission : that there is no EU budget line for immediate and visible aid to affected populations .
The National Alliance therefore hopes that in the next EU budget , which is already at an advanced stage , this line will be inserted .
Furthermore , while deploring the fact that the joint resolution is incomplete - if our Italian colleagues in the other groups had had the sensitivity to consult us informally , we would have raised this point - we ask that the government and the region of Campania be allowed to transfer a part of that region 's Structural Funds , for use in the reconstruction and restoration of the land .
Unfortunately Italy 's land is violated to a great extent by building speculation and regulatory plans at district , provincial and regional level , drawn up in many cases for the benefit of clients and parties .
Also , hill and mountain areas are gradually being abandoned , because people find it impossible to live there . This is partly because there are not enough government programmes to support them , and because they are lured to anonymous urban peripheries by commercial strategies , sometimes shown to be based on false appeals , which promote the idea that city life is infinitely better than living in the country .
To conclude , Mr President , how can anybody fail to see , in this violence and lack of attention to the land , a typical sign of our civilisation which has desecrated everything , and where everything tends to be seen in rational and scientific terms ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by addressing the resolution on the floods in Campania , in view of the fact that , compared with the other ecological disaster , there were human victims here , which we greatly regret of course . The Commission would like to express its most sincere condolences to the families of the people concerned .
Having said that , I must now go on to explain exactly what can be done in the two cases .
Firstly , for quite unconnected reasons , the fact is that in last year 's budgetary debate it was decided to stop the budgetary line concerned specifically with urgent aid in cases of catastrophe .
So that is the situation , and unless you decide to reinstate that budgetary line , as things stand at the moment it is not possible to act by means of the urgency procedure .
Secondly , it is possible to act through the structural policies procedure .
And in this case , as far as the region of Campania is concerned , I have to tell you that the Commission has in fact been discussing what can be done in that area , which fully meets the Structural Fund Objective 1 requirements .
So the affected areas can benefit from the rehabilitation measures provided for in the multifund operative programme of the European Regional Development Fund .
Furthermore , the guidance section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund can also help , with measures to promote rural development and combat the abandonment of farm land , and to address reforestation .
Lastly , it is also possible that the Social Fund may be able to fund work-related training activities , especially in the field of prevention .
As for the Doñana National Park , I want to say that at the moment the Commission is of course receiving information from the Spanish and regional authorities , in accordance with their areas of competence .
In that respect , the first official meeting took place recently , in New York , between my colleague Commissioner Bjerregaard and the Spanish minister , Mrs Tocino , during the meeting on sustainable development .
As to what can be done , my answer to you is that in fact the area around the Doñana National Park which has been affected by the disaster is also included in Objective 1 of the ERDF .
However , you have to bear in mind - and we would like to make this point very clear in the case of Campania and of Doñana - that , because of the lack of a budgetary line for natural catastrophes , there may be a temptation to use the ERDF every time a catastrophe occurs , but the regulations do not make provision for urgency aid to be provided from this source .
I want to make that clear .
Nevertheless , it is possible , as Mr Valverde López said , to carry out an immediate reprogramming exercise so as to give priority to the disasters caused in the area around the Doñana National Park .
It is possible to do that , and in fact the Commission is already in contact with the Spanish authorities and the regional Andalusian authorities with a view to carrying out this exercise , and letters were exchanged on the subject last week .
So it will be possible to provide an answer to this situation too .
As regards one of the amendments defended by Mrs Laura González Álvarez , my comment is this . The complaints system is always a contradictory procedure , not just in the case of Doñana or Campania .
So in the case of Doñana , just as with any other complaint lodged under Community procedure , the Commission can never archive it unilaterally .
It is always done by means of a contradictory procedure .
What you said is right : a complaint was lodged by the organization you mentioned .
The Commission conveyed that complaint to the Spanish government , and the Spanish government replied on 31 January 1997 , describing the measures it had taken .
The Commission conveyed the Spanish government 's reply to the complainant , who accepted the explanation .
Before the complaint was archived , on 25 March 1997 , the complainant you mentioned still had two months , according to Community procedure , to reopen the case .
They did not request to reopen the case .
I am telling you this for your own information , and to point out that , in Community procedure , no complaint can be archived without there having been a contradictory procedure , as is quite right .
The joint debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Votes ( continuation )
Mr President , I only seek information : can you advise me whether , under the Rules concerning the 50 % voting , the roll calls for urgencies and the roll calls for the Pex report count towards that 50 % ?
Yes .
That concludes voting time .
The Pex report on the European Union 's communication policy announces with a surprisingly clear conscience that this policy aims to " awaken European citizens to the cause of European integration ' ( recital A ) , that its effectiveness constitutes the " conditio sine qua non for obtaining the support of most European citizens for the integration process ' ( recital B ) and that it is necessary to step it up " in view of the great events approaching the EU in the coming months ' ( recital C ) .
For our part , we see in this all the foundations not only of a reasonable information policy , but also of propaganda campaigns aimed at convincing the citizens that there are no options other than those defined for them by the Eurocrats .
In our amendments to this report , which have been rejected by the European Parliament , we asked that a code of good conduct finally be drawn up to define , for purposes of information , the principles of transparency , neutrality and respect for pluralism and partnership .
This code should consist of four sections .
Firstly , European information campaigns must not interfere with national electoral campaigns .
No information campaign funded by the Union or by bodies which it subsidizes should be able to be organized in a Member State during the six months preceding referenda or legislative European or presidential elections .
Secondly , information campaigns must not involve the unilateral development of a particular opinion on a subject which is not supported unanimously .
They must allow the expression of all opinions which reflect the political trends represented in the European Parliament .
The institutions of the Union , their administrations , their offices and officials should , in exercising their duties , always provide neutral and objective information .
They must not in any circumstances become involved in a national debate , either directly or indirectly .
Finally , a committee on ethics , made up of representatives of all political groups in the European Parliament and representatives of the national parliaments , should give a prior opinion on European information campaigns .
It should , in particular , peruse electronic information , radio communications and television advertisements before they are broadcast .
Thirdly , information campaigns must be conducted in close association with all the partners .
No campaign should be launched within the territory of a Member State without the prior agreement of the authorities of that state , and those authorities should be involved in it .
No public meeting related to an EU information campaign should take place in a state without inviting elected representatives of all political leanings to participate in it .
Papers , periodicals and documents of all types published by the European institutions , or by the bodies linked to them by contract , must , where they mention certain opinions , be fair in terms of the space given to the different theories represented within the European Parliament .
Fourthly , information campaigns must adhere to the rule of financial transparency .
At the end of each year the European institutions must publish the following , in separate documents made available to the public at no cost : an exhaustive list of the information campaigns which have been carried out , including their references and costs ; an exhaustive list of the organizations which have been subsidized for the purposes of information , communication or education campaigns , or who have received funding which could be used for this purpose ; an exhaustive list of experts who are remunerated in various ways and are involved in information campaigns where they do not appear officially as salaried staff of the European institutions .
In conclusion , the European institutions should refrain from financing political parties , either at the national or European level , or associations linked to these parties , even for projects which are supposedly for simple purposes of information .
They must also refrain from financing or subsidizing projects from which certain parties would benefit .
The committee on ethics already mentioned should ensure with particular vigilance that the principles of transparency are respected .
Had it addressed the core problem of the lack of openness within the EU then this could have been a very good and valuable report on the information and communication policy in the European Union .
But information can be misused as an instrument of power in society , and can easily be replaced and exploited as propaganda .
Reading between the lines , it is evident that this is the way in which people want information and communication to be issued from the institutions of the EU .
Quite simply , the intention is to convey the vision of the EU 's infallibility .
I certainly agree that the EU institutions must be more open and less bureaucratic .
A start could have been made by introducing the principle of public access to official records , proper filing routines and recording of incoming post .
But this is not included in the report .
In the light of the situation in the European Parliament 's part-session this week , which saw proposals made to prohibit TV crews from filming during voting , it is clear that there are many who wish through censorship to prevent the political debate within the European Parliament from reaching the citizens .
Instead , the intention seems to be that communication with the EU 's citizens should take place in advance via arranged information campaigns .
In my opinion this is entirely the wrong course to take .
At numerous points in the report reference is also made to the fact that the citizens are ill informed about how the EU operates and are therefore negatively disposed to the EU .
But surely it is not the institutions in themselves that are the major problem , but the policies for which they are responsible that leads to criticism of the EU .
These are two separate issues .
The report formulates an information policy for the EU .
The first question asked is why such a policy is needed in the first place .
Are the citizens not satisfied with the Union ?
The report is totally unacceptable .
It mixes up information , communication and propaganda .
Proposals such as the one advocating that large sections of the population that have " negative feelings about Europe ' need to be informed evoke unpleasant reminders of the political propaganda of fallen empires .
Of course there is a need for information , but it must be based on entirely different premises to those set out in this report if we are to succeed in converting distrust into confidence .
I have therefore voted against the report .
I am certainly in favour of any proposal which develops a policy of education rather than propaganda .
In the information society in which we now live , propaganda is counter-productive .
People want facts , not opinions .
Regrettably , the European Commission does not as yet seem to recognize this .
Recently a constituent drew my attention to a Commission publication for use in schools entitled ' What Exactly is Europe ? ' .
According to this publication , the United Kingdom has exactly no Protestants .
Upon investigation , I discovered that this information had been sourced from the Guinness European Data Book .
People of the Protestant faith in my constituency have been offended by ' What Exactly is Europe ? ' and this has only served to undermine the credibility of the EU .
Not only do we need improved cooperation between the institutions in our information policy , we need to make sure that the information which is provided to citizens is accurate and will not give offence .
In view of the fact that the President asked me to stand down at the end of my contribution to the debate , I should now like to complete my statement in writing .
I have already said that pretty wrapping paper is not enough , but that the contents must also be right .
If the information and communication policy of the European institutions is regarded in such a way that its content can be changed by the use of pretty wrapping paper , then it is not worthy of the name ' information ' - we should change it to ' manipulation ' .
I warmly welcome the rapporteur 's view that this Parliament must pursue a policy of complete openness and transparency with regard to the way in which this institution operates ( recital E ) .
Moreover , the rapporteur is absolutely correct in stating that information campaigns cannot simply consist in unilaterally developing a specific position on a proposal that does not meet with unanimous agreement ( recital H ) .
It would be splendid if the EU institutions were to live up to this .
For the EU institutions simply to canvass for more power for the EU , a United States of Europe , increased federalism , EMU membership and so on using the taxpayers ' money is neither particularly humble nor democratic .
To run a campaign using such devices as the comic-strip character " Captain Euro ' in order to convince people of the merits of the euro is to underestimate the citizens ' intelligence and the ways in which they form their own political opinions .
Many citizens are evidently suspicious of the EU .
Increased bureaucracy , the increased divides between citizens and their politically elected representatives and wastefulness in respect of taxpayers ' money make many citizens quite justifiably suspicious of the EU as a project .
The citizens ' scepticism about the EU is not based on ignorance .
It is based , rather , on the fact that they cannot envisage themselves having any influence over the organization , and on fears that a federal EU will become profoundly undemocratic , bureaucratic and controlled by market forces .
This is a question of political evaluations , not ignorance on the part of opponents of the EU .
If those who hold the political responsibility within the EU 's institutions do not appreciate this fact , then it will never be possible to develop an information and communication strategy that is capable of achieving two-way communication with our citizens .
Unfortunately , the above points are , in my view , missing from the Pex report .
Competition in the air traffic sector
The next item is the report ( A4-0141 / 98 ) by Mr Scarbonchi , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for Council Regulations ( EC ) :

I.amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 3975 / 87 laying down the procedure for the application of the rules on competition to undertakings in the air transport sector ( COM ( 97 ) 0218 - C4-0258 / 97-97 / 0137 ( CNS ) ) ; II.on the application of Article 85 ( 3 ) of the Treaty to certain categories of agreements and concerted practices in the sector of air transport between the Community and third countries ( COM ( 97 ) 0218 - C4-0259 / 97-97 / 0138 ( CNS ) ) ( Draftsman of the opinion : Mr Ribeiro , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy ( Hughes Procedure ) .
Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome provided the Community with a legal basis for assessing alliances and mergers .
Article 87 also provided for the adoption of any appropriate regulations ' to give effect to the principles ' presented in these articles .
The secondary legislation which has been built up since then gives the Commission the power to consider cases where the competition rules were being disregarded , but initially excluded transport .
The first liberalization package adopted in December 1987 included Regulations 3975 and 3976 , although their scope was restricted .
The first allowed the Commission to apply the competition rules in the air transport sector , imposing penalties and granting exemptions , but only in respect of traffic between Member States .
The second regulation allowed the Commission to adopt block exemptions for certain practices but under the conditions laid down in Article 85 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
What justification is there for the Commission 's proposal ?
The Commission believes that a number of new factors have intervened since 1989 : the liberalization of the aviation market since 1997 , the weakness of external flights resting only on bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries , and the future development of agreements with the United States and the countries of central and eastern Europe all mean that a precise framework is needed more than ever to deal with the inconsistencies or gaps in the current system .
These factors have to be added to the grounds put forward in 1989 , regarding the legal uncertainty facing the airlines .
So , in order to cope better with the new liberalized framework of rules , to protect consumers ' interests , to protect small and medium-sized carriers and to ensure balanced competition between the various European and non-European operators , the Commission is calling for the same powers in respect of transport between the Community and non-Community countries as it has on intra-Community routes .
The first proposal for a regulation will extend the scope to cover all air transport services , including international routes .
A new article 18a has been added to resolve any legal conflict with Member States or third countries by obliging the Commission to consult the competent authorities before withdrawing an exemption .
Nevertheless , the network of bilateral air service agreements between Member States , third countries and their national airlines pose a formidable legal challenge to uniform and compatible competition rules in the air transport sector .
It remains to be seen how these conflicting powers will resolve themselves in practice .
Secondly , the Commission proposes a regulation allowing the non-application of Article 85 , for a limited period , in certain categories of agreement between airlines , decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices on international routes .
The Commission 's decisions may relate to joint planning , the coordination of capacity and timetables , revenue sharing , consultations on tariffs , slot allocation and joint operation of services .
These two proposals represent substantial changes as regards the application of Community competition rules in air transport , especially in its international aspects .
They improve the Commission 's powers to monitor alliances between airlines .
Despite the reservations expressed by several companies , the Commission can already use its powers in accordance with Article 89 of the Treaty of Rome , and is indeed obliged to do so as guardian of the Treaties responsible for applying Community law .
The main advantage of our proposals for all parties concerned - airlines , governments , legal services , the European Commission and , of course , passengers - is to set up a homogeneous framework , with definite legal guarantees , for the whole of the European Union , and to promote the position of civil aviation companies within the European Union .
Of the amendments proposed , the three principal amendments accepted by the Committee on Transport - Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 6 - aim for greater coherence in Community regulation by using the wording and scope of the regulation on competition rules in the maritime sector .
Amendment No 4 limits the powers of the Commission to the application of competition rules only to routes which depend on a Community airport .
This amendment defines the scope of the powers of the Commission , which would have no jurisdiction in a commercial alliance or agreement between two non-European companies which did not affect Community air traffic .
Amendments Nos 4 and 5 aim to clarify the procedure to be applied where bilateral agreements between two companies , one from the Union and one from a third country , are in conflict with the European Community 's competition rules .
The present proposal for a regulation specifies simply that , in cases of conflict , the Commission must consult the relevant authorities in the country concerned .
Amendments Nos 1 and 3 propose new recitals referring to air transport security , public services and duty free . I will not oppose them during the vote .
I accept them because the sentiments expressed are shared by everybody although , legally , they do not seem to be really appropriate in the context of the two regulations .
To conclude , I will briefly mention the three amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party .
I am not in favour of these because they go against the European interest , against consumer interests , and against the interest of fair competition by which we must be guided , at least in the sphere of air traffic .
The airlines are against this regulation because they judge it to be contrary to their own interests , with the provision for the European Commission 's anti-trust authorities rightfully to prosecute any cartel involving the airlines of the European Community and a third country if the benefits contravene competition rules .
I call upon my colleagues not to pass up the opportunity , once again , to grant the Commission clear and unequivocal procedures and powers to guarantee uniform application of competition rules throughout Europe , whatever the airline or the alliance in question .
Those , ladies and gentlemen , are the reasons why we are making these proposals , which have been put to the vote and accepted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Mr President , being responsible for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I am pleased to have taken part in this work , on which I compliment my colleague Mr. Scarbonchi .
My pleasure derives from the fact that we have been able to contribute to the inclusion or strengthening in the proposal submitted to the House of some aspects of air transport which we consider to be of the greatest importance , and which are always relevant when proposing amendments to the regulations covering competition rules and approved agreements and practices .
We refer to the question of safety , which in this type of transport must be given priority in the context of the Community and international competition rules .
We also refer to the so-called services of general interest , with the support of Article 7 ( D ) of the Treaty currently undergoing ratification . We think air transport services should be seen as public services in the case of peripheral and island regions , particularly the Azores , the Canaries and Madeira .
We would further refer to our concerns about the effects the changes now taking place and the liberalization of the Community air transport market may have on jobs and workers ' rights in the sector , and also on users , with particular emphasis on the position of small and medium-sized companies .
Finally , we would also refer to the scope of the proposed regulations , which should apply to airlines operating out of or into one or more airports within Community territory , and the processes for consultations and the settlement of any disputes , which should not exclude the participation of representatives of the Member States involved in them .
Mr President , air transport is a vital growing sector with more and more people flying each year .
Thanks to increased competition , the level of fares in the EU - on some routes at least - continues to fall and more and more passengers are able to fly .
It is our duty to protect the interests of passengers by encouraging more small airlines to set up and expand and by not allowing large airlines to completely dominate the market by wiping out all competition .
We must therefore ensure that , in areas where air transport is an essential means of transport , it is not destroyed or damaged by excessive competition .
The Commission , in my view , is to be congratulated on its efforts to persuade Member States to give up their bilateral agreements and to allow the Commission to negotiate for the Community as a whole .
Consequently , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists , I am pleased to offer our support to the rapporteur tonight .
The Commission has powers in these areas which we believe should and must be extended .
Mr Jarzembowski 's amendments , on behalf of the PPE , appear to support the Community approach rather than the Member State approach but we feel that they will have completely the opposite effect .
The object of the amendments , in our view , would be to confine the Commission 's competence to apply competition rules to its right to negotiate agreements .
We believe that is not acceptable .
One effect , for example , would be the omission of the Atlantic routes .
Indeed , in my friend and colleague 's report - Mr Seal 's report on the effect of the third liberalization package - he pointed out that there were still a number of obstacles which would prevent the entry of new airlines .
These would affect areas such as slot allocation and certain network alliances .
We therefore cannot agree that Mr Jarzembowski is correct in wanting to limit the Commission 's application of competition rules to its present mandate .
This , as he knows full well , will restrict their ability to make progress to just Switzerland and the central and eastern European countries and we would regret that .
We therefore support the Commission 's demands to have more rights to negotiate , for example , the open sky agreements .
Any limitation on the present Commission mandate is in contradiction of our request to encourage the mandate to be extended .
In conclusion , we believe the rapporteur - and indeed the Commission - deserve our support in improving aviation in the European Union and beyond because we believe their proposals will ensure fair competition , they will be good for the consumer and they will be good for competitive airlines .
I commend them to the House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Group of the European People 's Party think the Commission 's proposals to extend the competition rules on air travel to include third countries are logical in principle because , Commissioner , internal and external regulations are bound together for practical reasons , which makes it essential to have one single regulation .
Yet in some respects the Commission is trying to run before it can walk , for only when the Council has fully transferred to the Community the responsibility for negotiating air traffic agreements with third countries - a policy which we in the PPE Group support - does it become logical to transfer to the Community sole responsibility for competition rules governing our relations with third countries .
You cannot do the second without the first .
Is the Council really prepared , and - if I can put a direct question to the UK government , if Mr Watts wants to have a word with Mr Prescott - is your government ready , to transfer jurisdiction in this area to the Community ?
We hold the view that in the complex field of international transport it would be logical for the Community to be in charge of air traffic agreements for all Member States .
But the Council is not prepared to do this , and I have not seen the UK presidency submit any proposal to this effect within the Council of Transport Ministers .
For years the Commission has been asking for jurisdiction in this very area , but even the UK presidency has failed to be moved .
But if we deny the Commission its wish , then we will be unable fully to extend the rules of jurisdiction to our relations with third countries , because this would create a bigger overlap between the Community 's competence and that of the Member States , and the airlines would suffer as a result .
That is not something we wish to see .
I would say to the rapporteur , Mr Scarbonchi , that if the AEA supports these proposals , as we do , then this will benefit all European airlines , for you know how difficult it is to get any kind of agreement out of the AEA , with British Airways , KLM , Sabena and Lufthansa always at each others ' throats .
But if the AEA adopts a common position , then there will be real support for this as the best solution .
We are therefore asking the other groups to support our three amendments .
In this connection , Commissioner , I would ask you to give us more details of your intended decisions on the cooperation agreement between British Airways and American Airlines .
We support your efforts to apply certain conditions to this agreement , such as those which seek to reduce the dominance of both companies in the transatlantic route to and from London and to ensure that there is fair competition on the transatlantic routes .
Commissioner , you have now suddenly decided to look again at the old alliances , and to do the same to the new ones , in order to establish how far they comply with competition rules .
We think that is a good thing to do , we are not at all unhappy about it , in fact quite the reverse , for we believe these alliances all have to be investigated in the same way .
However , you should present and discuss with us your guidelines for reviewing and handling inter-company alliances , and you should do so either today or within the next few weeks - as you announced in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
We know that competition law is your domain .
All the same , I think it is important to discuss the guiding principles with one another .
But whatever you decide to do , Commissioner , to remove and prevent distortions of competition , I have certain misgivings about it all . We want to open up the market for competition between airlines .
We do not want to replace competition - deficient though this may well be - with state intervention .
Above all , we should not distort competition by applying state intervention or even market allocation orders .
In this respect , Commissioner , we are anxious to know if you can tell us something about the guiding principles you intend to use .
By the way , you know we tend to support you in these things , which is more than the Council does .
Mr President , the European Commission , when looking into alliances between airlines , should not lose sight of the global competitiveness of these European companies .
Strategic alliances are now of fundamental importance in strengthening the international competitiveness of the European air travel sector .
Our airlines should therefore be supported by their own authorities when going through the process of restructuring .
Unfortunately , support of this kind is rarely forthcoming and instead highly expensive conditions are imposed on airlines for the licensing of alliances - such as the withdrawal of slots and flight traffic restrictions .
The Commission should only intervene when a violation of competition law has actually occurred .
Its competition policy should not involve measures which will only handicap the European air travel industry and jeopardize the future of European airlines , particularly the smaller companies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the liberalization of air transport , which was completed in April 1997 with the introduction of rights relating to mainland-island connections , has caused profound changes by bringing this sector into line with market rules .
It should be noted as an exception , however , that there is a set of conditions in the Community legislation which give Member States and the Commission the right to intervene in order to deal with certain situations and needs .
In that respect , bearing in mind the importance of the sector to the European economy , to jobs and to internal and intra-European communications , and the fact that air transport plays a vital role in reinforcing economic and social cohesion , by providing rapid transport links between regions and , most particularly , access to peripheral island regions , Community legislation has allowed for the possibility of imposing public service obligations and joint operation agreements between airlines to ensure that these transport links are maintained .
In spite of what I have just said , those obligations have not been complied with in some cases , as a result of labour disputes , among other reasons , and this has jeopardized economic and social cohesion and citizens ' freedom to travel to and from the regions in question .
To be specific , I refer to the events which have frequently affected the ultra-peripheral regions of Madeira and the Azores , as they did once again only a few days ago .
For that reason , I consider that any airline which has exclusive rights to a specific route by virtue of its being a public service , and which is subsidized by the state on that basis , in the interests of economic and social cohesion and the accessibility of the region in question , must provide those services and serve those regions in a properly professional manner .
In any event , regardless of the selfish and unbefitting attitude of the pilots , who are putting privileged interests before those of the public and other company employees , I think the government should open the sector up to competition between airlines , with the same quality and safety requirements and the same financial support , to compensate the islanders for their isolation and remoteness .
I had asked the Commissioner to comment further on the policy which is to be applied to alliances between airline companies .
Perhaps he can do this in writing or even speak to me on the matter sometime in the near future .
Time is short , but the guiding principles for agreements in the air travel sector are of fundamental importance , in my opinion , and we need to have more contact on matters such as this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Code of conduct for computerized reservation systems ( CRSs )
The next item is the report ( A4-0089 / 98 ) by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2299 / 89 on a code of conduct for computerized reservation systems ( CRSs ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0246 - C4-0418 / 97-97 / 0148 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , computerized reservation systems , hereafter to be called CRSs , occupy a relatively unknown but powerful place in air transportation .
These enormous , fast networks are responsible for the lion 's share of the airlines ' turnover .
85 % of all seats on scheduled flights are sold globally via the five independent CRSs .
The oldest CRS , SABRE , was set up in the past by American Airlines , but is now making even more profit than American Airlines itself .
Airlines which do not participate in a CRS are strongly limited in their opportunities to sell tickets .
CRSs also offer their subscribers - travel agents - and the traveller the advantage of speedy information and reservation .
Guarantees are required , however , to ensure that the client receives objective information when he makes enquiries at the travel agency about the options .
Since 1989 there has been a European code of conduct in order to guarantee this objectivity .
CRSs and airlines are obliged to give equal treatment to all parties concerned .
The Commission proposal we are discussing at the moment aims to improve the operation of the code of conduct .
It includes the subscribers - in other words the travel agents - in this , in order to promote fair information and to prevent inaccurate reservations .
A valuable new component is the possibility of integrating rail services , particularly high speed trains , into what is being offered .
I regard it of great importance that , for short and medium distance journeys , travellers are made expressly aware of the alternative of the train .
Flying consumes a great deal of energy and is a major cause of air pollution , so there is every reason to consider the train if the time difference is not too great .
The integration of rail transport into the CRSs must be done with the necessary preconditions .
Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 6 and 10 , which relate to this , aim to promote equality between flights and high speed rail links .
Carriers and alliances will continue to be able to sell tickets independently , without having to give neutral information .
However , in that case the traveller must be aware that he is buying from a particular supplier , hence Amendment No 1 .
This principle is further extended to the Internet in Amendment No 9 .
The opportunities to reserve tickets via this worldwide network are growing quickly .
When browsing Internet pages , we should always remain aware of who is supplying the information .
The CRSs have gigantic amounts of market information at their disposal , including travel agents ' sales figures .
They offer this information for sale in an electronic format , but because they only offer the complete package , it is only the wealthy airlines that can afford to buy it .
So that gives them an advantage in negotiations with travel agents .
They would like to have selective amounts of information , for example , just for the region they serve .
Amendment No 7 opens up this possibility of selective acquisition of information , which thereby comes within the reach of the travel sector .
A sticking point in the present division of costs is the fact that each reservation leads to costs for the airline .
Amendment No 8 limits this to routes for which actual tickets have been issued .
Amendment No 13 ensures that the link between ticket and route is safeguarded .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism proposes in Amendment No 11 that a distinction should continue to be made between travellers having to change aircraft , possibly including an interval , and situations when the aircraft is only making a stopover .
Bearing in mind the overall picture , I would like to draw the following conclusions .
The code of conduct has been fulfilling an important function since 1989 , but there was cause for further improvement and for bringing it up to date .
The Commission proposal contains a number of significant improvements which benefit travellers in particular , but also travel agents .
The proposal rightly creates the possibility of displaying high speed rail links as an alternative to flights over shorter distances .
In order to make the rail alternative feasible in practical terms , a number of preconditions must be met , such as an agreement between the CRS and the railway company .
In order to avoid the customer wrongly thinking that he is getting a neutral offer , the fact that he is consulting an airline or a group of airlines must continue to be displayed .
The Internet is developing as a new sales channel for airline tickets .
In that case , what must also be shown throughout is which provider the client is logged on to .
CRSs occupy a powerful position , both in the field of marketing and in marketing information .
This should not be allowed to become a monopoly position de facto , just because it is only the financially very strong companies which can buy that information .
My final conclusion is that there is still room for some improvement in the area of providing the best possible information for the customer , and in the area of combating double or fictitious bookings .
I am grateful to the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their cooperation .
Unfortunately Mr Kinnock is not able to attend this debate because of the time at which it is being scheduled .
He was kind enough to write to me to say he considered my report to be of an extremely high standard .
In any case , I have tried to treat this important matter with the greatest possible care .
Besides , I think it is extremely important that in future travellers will be able to make a considered choice between the plane and the train .
This will not only promote fair competition , but also help to protect the natural world and the environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it used to be when you wanted to travel somewhere that you would go and stand at a counter .
You then had to wade through piles of brochures , a process which could often be complicated and not always successful , before you got to your destination .
The computer has now taken over this work and has made the whole thing much less complicated .
This new technology now gives us access to an unwonted supply of information and a wide range of choices , and what is more , at very competitive prices .
As such , it has been very well received by the consumer .
Now that the computer is with us , we really must stop hoping and believing that the computer is always an objective thing .
On the contrary , the computer is a real box of tricks and there are now many thousands of people whose only job is to manipulate the computer to suit one supplier or another .
The airlines , and even the travel agents , have tried to give customers the illusion of objectivity , while all the time they were only looking to increase profits .
While there is of course nothing wrong with wanting to make a profit , this has done very little for the consumer .
The proposals before us , including those of Mr van Dam , are very sensible and will lead to better consumer protection .
I also see that we need this interconnection when it comes to the modal split with rail transport , so that at the push of a button the traveller knows which system is better , which is cheaper and , furthermore , which is more environmentally friendly .
I believe that Members of this Parliament will also benefit from this , but that is just by the by .
One final point : the review of these systems is not something which will be finished and done with today .
It will have to be repeated at regular intervals , because you can be absolutely sure that there will always be someone in the know trying to get round the regulations .
Mr President , I shall try to be brief .
The important thing is really to thank the rapporteur , for he has submitted an excellent report which has been unanimously approved in committee .
With quite a few countries in the middle of election campaigns , it is always very nice to be able to say that a report has been carried unanimously because of its absolute objectivity .
Thank you very much , Mr van Dam , for this report .
Reform of the code of conduct is very sensible , and it will increase the objectivity of the information provided .
The most important thing now is to include high speed trains in this system , so that people are better able to recognize those routes where it is more practical to take the train than to fly .
This is something we want to see for shorter trips - in other words , more journeys by train than by aeroplane - in order to decongest air space and preserve the environment .
In this respect the advantages are enormous .
Unlike the Commission , I consider the display of code share flights to be a sensible move .
Here I agree with the rapporteur .
This system has proved to be very effective .
Finally , I think it is right to produce a consolidated version of the three pieces of legislation , so they can be more clearly understood by consumers .
In this respect , codification is something the Commission should be following up .
I believe we can reach a consensus here : we have a good proposal and this is now to be improved upon by Mr van Dam .
I hope the Commission accepts the rapporteur 's proposals and then everyone will be happy .
Mr President , I would like to note by way of introduction that I have a somewhat sceptical attitude towards rules of this type as a phenomenon .
I believe that we in the EU must beware of formulating too many detailed rules .
We may , quite unintentionally , create a market situation without any fresh ideas , in which we preserve the status quo by means of legislation .
I am fairly convinced that if the EU had not interfered in the problems concerning reservation systems , the market would have solved them automatically .
Travel agents and airlines are well aware that customer service is one of their most important competition tools .
This is my principal standpoint .
At the same time , this cannot be said to be a new phenomenon , since the code has been in existence since 1989 .
On a more pragmatic level , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on the very fine work he has put into this report .
In spite of my basic standpoint , I believe that the Commission and Mr van Dam have both succeeded in striking an extraordinarily important balance in this matter .
I feel that the positive aspect of this report is that the railways will be included in the reservation system .
This is perhaps something one would not normally think about in this context , but this may actually be one of the most important steps towards a liberalized railway sector .
The railways will in future be allowed to compete side by side with airlines , and consumers will be able to make a much clearer choice between trains and planes .
This ties in with the fact that the railway companies will in future be operating in a much more competitive market than at present .
A key question in this report must also be the matter of fares .
I would like to emphasize that the railways must join in and bear their costs in order to be included in the CRS system .
We cannot once again subsidize the railways but not the other forms of transport .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , on behalf of my colleague Neil Kinnock , allow me to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr van Dam , on his report .
Not only have you managed to initiate yourself into the mysterious technical terminology of computerized reservation systems , but you have also managed to propose a series of amendments which substantially improve the proposal .
Computerized reservation systems are extremely complicated databases which offer a wide range of subscribers - travel agents , tour operators , hotels , ferry companies , hire companies - the means to access information about air lines and other services and , at the same time , make it easier to reserve and issue tickets .
Parliament will be interested to learn that computerized reservation systems are thought to be the world 's largest users of computerized services , and offer instant access to the services of more than 140 000 travel agents throughout the world .
There are four major systems in the European Union , and one of them has a market share of more than 70 % in 10 of the 15 Member States .
Of course , this high level is what has provoked the concern of the legislative authority .
But Community regulations also allowed this to be dealt with on the basis of competition rights .
Although the code has worked very well , our recent review suggests that some improvements are needed , in view of the latest advances in the Internet or in high speed trains .
And that is the basis of the Commission proposal to modify the code , as Mr van Dam has described in his report .
As I said at the beginning , most of the amendments propose very constructive changes to the existing text .
So the Commission can accept the amendments proposed by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , except on two points .
Firstly , the Commission feels unable to accept the second part of Amendment No 8 , dealing with billing information on magnetic media .
As far as billing information is concerned , we think all billing media should receive the same treatment , and the amendment would treat magnetic media differently .
Also , we think it is superfluous to propose that participating air lines should not be charged a fee for bookings they have disallowed .
Secondly , the Commission does not find Amendment No 11 , on the classification of flights , acceptable either .
The Commission proposed a new classification , in order to take account of recent advances in the aviation sector .
We think that to return to the old classification system , as Mr van Dam and his committee suggested , would be to fail to take these changes into consideration .
Apart from these two points , as I said , the Commission thinks that Mr van Dam has done an excellent piece of work . I want to congratulate him , and also thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their helpful work on this subject .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Marketing of seeds - Implementation of Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 94
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development :
A4-0128 / 98 on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directives 66 / 400 / EEC , 66 / 401 / EEC , 66 / 402 / EEC , 66 / 403 / EEC , 69 / 208 / EEC , 70 / 457 / EEC and 70 / 458 / EEC on the marketing of beet seed , fodder plant seed , cereal seed , seed potatoes , seed of oil and fibre plants and vegetable seed and on the common catalogue of varieties of agricultural plant species ( COM ( 97 ) 0403 - C4-0459 / 97-97 / 0217 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0129 / 98 on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 94 of 20 June 1994 ( COM ( 97 ) 0327 - C4-0492 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , the first report , dealing with the directive on the marketing of beet seed , fodder plant seed , cereal seed , seed potatoes , seed of oil and fibre plants and vegetable seed , or in short the seed marketing law , produced an amendment not that very long ago and also resulted in a positive debate with the Commission .
The matter in question concerned the adoption of a simplified certification system for conservation seed which was intended at the very least to restrict the genetic erosion of threatened species of agricultural plants .
You know that these directives on agriculture are dealt with in Article 43 , in which the European Parliament has only a consultative role .
If we submit our amendments to these directives and the Commission , after taking due note , states that it is regrettably unable to accept Parliament 's amendments , and if we then put our proposal to the final vote , it will all be a pointless exercise as far as we are concerned .
The Council can then ignore the substance of Parliament 's submissions when drawing up its decision .
However , if we adopt a different approach , in that we suspend the final vote and reach a compromise with the Commission , so that the Commission and Parliament have a common position , then we will be in a relatively strong position when it comes to agriculture , even with respect to Article 43 , for then the Council will only be able to reject this common position unanimously .
Unanimity in the Council is a rarity .
This happened only once , when we wanted to change the legislation - and Mr Fischler , you will recall that this concerned the labelling of beef , when you conceded Article 100a to us and the Council again committed itself unanimously to Article 43 , only then to reach compromise after compromise in the matter - and this was only done to achieve unanimity in the face of the Commission and Parliament .
I hope we can also reach agreement over this small amendment and consequently get a good result , for this time the issue is not the simplified registration of conservation seed , that is to say old varieties and local varieties , but rather the adoption of a simplified procedure for the approval of certified seed or basic seed for propagation .
The Commission has carried out tests over a period of time and has come to the positive conclusion that external examiners and inspectors can also be used for the official inspections , that inspection at a higher level , involving the agencies of the state , is only necessary under certain precisely defined conditions , and that the process of seed approval and quality certification will not suffer as a result .
We have , for the most part , accepted this view .
We have only made some slight amendments .
For one thing , we would like to see a swearing-in procedure for those carrying out the inspections .
Such a commitment should ensure greater personal responsibility .
We have made proposals as to the size of the plant sample which should be taken by the official inspectors , and have also proposed measures to be taken in the event of violations .
I expect we can agree with the Commission on this .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has tabled an amendment which concerns the swearing-in of inspectors , but I prefer the amendments which we approved unanimously in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The second report which I am presenting here is connected with the seed marketing law .
After two years of negotiations with the Commission , focusing in particular on the certification of seed which is severely affected by genetic erosion , we were able to achieve success .
The matter in question concerns a Community programme for the conservation , specification , collection and use of the genetic resource base in agriculture .
Parliament submitted this programme to the Commission in 1993 , after it had been established in Rio that the great diversity of plant life which we have constitutes one of the most important elements for future civilization on this planet .
We therefore launched a programme , with its own budget heading , which was designed to account for the genetic diversity of agricultural plants and animals .
It was also intended that efforts would be made not only to ensure the safety and protection of this genetic diversity - and even to extend it - through databanks and gene banks , but also if possible to strive for genetic diversity in farming practice .
Unfortunately , the Commission adopted a somewhat hesitant approach to this programme .
Of the ECU 20 million which was made available over the following five years , the budget for 1997 was even cancelled completely .
The problem clearly lay in the insufficient availability of manpower .
This is incomprehensible , because obviously staff are available in other areas and they could have been redeployed . Clearly - and the Commissioner will no doubt soon enlighten me - this programme is not one of DG VI 's more spectacular achievements .
I would be happy to stand corrected on this .
The programme in question has acquired a considerable reputation at international level .
When the WHO held a conference on genetic diversity in Leipzig in 1996 , the EU was the only region in the world which was able to present such a programme .
It was interesting to see how the Commission vaunted this about , and indeed with justification . I supported this at the conference .
But surely the necessary steps then have to be taken in the pursuance and execution of this programme .
Let me just add one more comment . We must create a closer link between this programme and those which have been set up under Regulation 2078 , or with programmes associated with the environmentally friendly use of the countryside , so that we get a complementary effect and the in situ conservation and support of genetic diversity can be secured via these programmes .
If , as Agenda 2000 intends , we then provide economic backing for these programmes in the form of structural aid , and if we see to it that those products which are made from the great variety of plants and animals available continue to be in demand as quality produce in the local markets , then and only then will we achieve a form of stability which is not limited - if I can take a drastic example - to conserving genetic diversity in museums and in some botanic garden in the countryside , but actually constitutes an economic basis for the farming industry . I am convinced , when applying all those compensatory measures which can and should be taken , that the focus of our efforts must lie in safeguarding the economic basis for agricultural activities , and this includes those special varieties of plants and animals .
That is the only way in which we can achieve the necessary long term stability .
Madam President , I should like on behalf of my group to congratulate Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf for his two excellent reports .
There are a lot of things that irritate our citizens about the EU when it is perceived to be imposing new rules or removing ancient rights without justification .
Usually these perceptions are misconceived - the result of gross distortion of facts by tabloid newspapers .
However , the proposal to limit the availability of traditional varieties of seeds , particularly for fruit and vegetables used by amateur gardeners as well as those used commercially by smaller farms , has led to deep opposition being expressed by such well known and respected bodies as the Henry Doubleday Research Association .
Many concerns have been expressed that the great wealth of varieties which still exists within the countries of the European Union could be reduced as a result of official Community policy to a few standard strains of seeds throughout Europe .
The Socialist Group therefore welcomes the Commission proposal to facilitate the addition of new species to the list of recognized species .
Commercial farmers have also been concerned that they too could lose out and be forced always to buy a limited number of expensive seed strains from big seed breeding companies .
I represent several such companies in my constituency and recognize the value of their work in developing pest resistant crops and seed varieties that are especially suited to particular climates and terrains .
However , the right balance needs to be struck between their interests , those of the commercial and non-commercial growers and the need to certify conservation seeds , that is , seeds of plants useful for biodiversity .
The proposals by the Commission to simplify the inspection process of these seeds are to be welcomed in principle but the Socialist Group shares the concerns of the rapporteur and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development as a whole that there should be additional safeguards to ensure that inspections are carried out by qualified objective personnel .
Madam President , Commissioner and those ladies and gentlemen who have remained patiently with us , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has already said something about the decision making side of things .
I would like to restrict myself to the subject of seed and seed marketing .
As we all know , seed is an important resource for agriculture and it is also the basis for foodstuff production .
The provision of good seed is ultimately a prerequisite for a secure nutrition system .
What is more , the quality of the seed has a decisive effect - a very decisive effect - on the quality of the food produced , in many cases even regardless of the various processing stages .
For these reasons , the inspection of plant and seed stocks naturally assumes great importance .
Most countries today are accustomed to having their seed crop certified mainly by public bodies .
However , such a system has made the inspection process somewhat more cumbersome .
Against such a background , the Commission has now submitted its proposal for the simplification of this inspection process .
There is already a substantial need to create a greater sense of responsibility in this sector .
Seed breeders and cultivators have to be incorporated more closely into the seed recognition procedure .
Simplification in this area is indeed desirable and would also mean that unofficial inspectors could carry out the prescribed examinations .
Here the spotlight will naturally fall on the employees of seed producing companies , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has repeatedly pointed out .
These people , with their knowledge and experience , are absolutely made for the job of seed inspection .
Admittedly there is a risk that this will lead to conflicts of interest , and this is something which we shall have to counteract .
On the whole we in the Group of the European People 's Party can accept this report , retaining as it does the necessary amendments .
Thank you very much , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , especially for your pertinacity .
Madam President , firstly I would like to compliment Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf on his first report , at least . It is positively excellent .
I agree that there should be controls to ensure that seeds coming into the market are of the right quality and meet requirements .
My question to the Commissioner is , can a seed firm now have its analyses carried out in any recognized laboratory anywhere in Europe - that is , not only in that particular country 's own state controlled laboratories , as certain countries are claiming ?
Furthermore , I have a couple of comments on the diversity of our seeds .
I must distance myself somewhat from Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's statements , because if we want a seed market , then there has to be a certain level of quality , and there should be close scrutiny to ensure that seeds on sale are of the declared quality .
Therefore , we should be a little cautious about the existing great diversity .
We need to be careful to avoid a situation whereby whatever is in the gene banks comes into our market and destroys it - the world market and the European market alike .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of one of the two regulations we are debating today in the context of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report is to coordinate , support and promote , at Community level , the conservation , characterization , collection and utilization of genetic resources in agriculture .
These genetic resources are made up of all traditional plant and animal varieties which correspond , in general , to clearly defined geographical areas or soils .
They represent a great variety , a great diversity of genetic heritage , of hardy and robust plants and animals .
They are in all cases much better adapted to the implementation of sustainable development in agriculture , something to which many of us are attached . They are much better adapted than some new creations - I am thinking in particular of genetically modified organisms - which are linked to the sole objective of ever greater profitability and , let us not deceive ourselves , increased profits for certain large industrial groups .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report , of which we approve and which I congratulate , in passing , on behalf of my group , rightly underlines our interest in preserving varieties of plant or animal species to conserve the genes which could be useful for agriculture in the future .
This report also underlines , albeit more indirectly , the role which these banks and conservation networks play in the service of the Community , which is , a priori , a good thing .
Having said that , I cannot help thinking that with the legal protection of biotechnological inventions which Parliament adopted on Tuesday , we will paradoxically be helping both to bring into the Community system costs related to gene conservation and , by means of technological patents , to privatize the profit from these same genes , which will have been conserved using money from the European taxpayer .
But you will doubtless think I am trying to cause trouble .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on both reports .
They have certainly given us a lot to think about .
Some experience in my own constituency leads me to say that we must produce seed of the highest quality .
To achieve this we must have strong inspection measures in place .
While no-one likes to have inspection measures , it is the only way in which control can be accurately implemented .
But while we must have inspection measures , they must not be overly bureaucratic , because that is one of the problems that aggravates farmers most .
The measures must be so structured that they gain the confidence not only of the producer but of all involved in the industry .
And we must ensure that there is a balance between the commercial and the non-commercial producer .
I certainly feel that random sampling is something we are going to have to learn to live with .
It is not going to be nice ; it is not going to be easy ; some people will object to it ; some people will not like it ; but that is part of life , that is the way things go at times .
We must also be sensitive to the needs of the seed producers , so I would certainly appeal for the careful and sensible implementation of this particular regulation .
Madam President , I am delighted that the Commission is simplifying the certification procedure for seeds intended for propagation .
The Member States will have to show themselves worthy of each others ' confidence and the confidence of the Commission , the guarantor of the Treaties , by the care they take in exercising the controls for which they are responsible .
Absolute accuracy in exercising the various controls will have to rid us at last of our phobia of fraud of all kinds which , like a cancer , eats away at confidence in the construction of our Europe .
We often hear it said that Europe is involved in too many things .
I believe that Europe is facing up to its responsibility by ensuring control of the conservation and safeguarding of seeds , our joint world heritage .
Furthermore , in the decades and centuries to come , these seeds will need to be used as a standard to restore certain characteristics to the plant species which have undergone genetic modification . In some cases it is impossible to predict the harmful or perverse effects which could result from these practices , which are not always necessary for the wellbeing of mankind .
Once again , we must remain vigilant to ensure that mistakes do not become irreparable , for lack of caution .
It is therefore incumbent upon all the people responsible to be precise regarding inventories and the management of collections so that no basic species or important variety of these species is forgotten .
Madam President , Commissioner , I believe that this sound report puts us on the right track .
Madam President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur and , indeed , the Commission for bringing up this issue again .
It is very important that we prepare an up-to-date inventory of the state and nature of the genetic resource base in agriculture .
It is also necessary to conserve and protect these valuable resources of both seeds and animals .
Many varieties of seed , both cereal and vegetable , are no longer in everyday use .
We must make every effort to protect and save them for the possibility of future use .
I give you the example of the now famous International Rice Bank where research into cross-breeding of many out of use and local strains of rice has led to the development of a new variety which is now showing up to a seven-fold yield improvement .
Similar possibilities apply to animals .
For example , some rare breeds of cattle , now almost extinct , may provide disease resistant traits and food producing improvements when cross-bred with conventional breeds .
So we must make the investment , not only in records and inventories , but also in gene banking and conservation of what still remains .
Also , it will be necessary to encourage interested people to continue to breed these rare animals .
This will require financial support , as this activity is a labour of love and not economic .
In conclusion , in my opinion , one of the most important aspects of conservation of seeds and animals is the ever increasing possibilities in the area of biotechnology which these genetic resources may provide for the absolute benefit of a rapidly growing world population , much of which is already undernourished in many regions of the southern hemisphere .
The approach to research through biotechnology will also give us seeds and plants with the ability to survive and produce in arid , infertile areas with above normal temperatures and shallow soils .
Biotechnological research must continue and must be properly funded .
Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for a successful report .
It is important for common regulations to be drawn up in the area of certification as regards seed types and approved inspectors .
However , we must guard against losing confidence in the certification system by allowing absolutely anything under the sun to be accredited .
Firstly , it would be far too expensive , because the certification process for new seed types is long and costly .
Certifiable seed types should be those intended for cultivation .
Secondly , the processing time for certification would be lengthened unnecessarily if all types of wild grain were to be certified .
One of the purposes of certification must be to test out new types of seed that are resistant to plant diseases in order to reduce the use of crop sprays .
In my view , another important aspect is to obtain an assurance that inspection will be carried out under reliable conditions .
Inspectors will have to be authorized by the state .
We must ensure that farmers in all Member States are treated equally by the inspectors .
There is some cause for concern at developments tending towards the random awarding of inspection contracts .
That would not be in the best interests of either farmers or consumers .
Madam President , in Amendment No 1 the rapporteur suggests that the new inspectors should be sworn in before they are officially licensed .
I personally cannot support this proposal .
I do not know exactly what the situation is in other countries , but in the Nordic countries there is only one professional group that swears an oath of office , and that is the judiciary .
Unfortunately , it would only invite ridicule if we were also to oblige inspectors of potatoes and flower seeds to swear such oaths .
Moreover , it would make no difference as regards the possibilities of imposing penalties for offences such as incorrect or fraudulent inspection .
Requiring inspectors to be sworn in would unfortunately , I believe , merely over-complicate the whole situation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , for the very constructive way in which the Commission 's proposal has been handled .
The task before us was to secure the amendment of seven seed marketing directives , dating back to the late sixties and early seventies , in order to clarify , simplify and facilitate the marketing of seed within the European Union .
The Commission proposal has three basic aims . Firstly , to extend the scope of the current provisions for the carrying out of temporary experiments , by which alternatives can be explored for improving the provisions laid down in these directives .
Secondly , to facilitate the inclusion of new plants in the catalogue of plants covered by the directive , and thirdly , to lay down provisions on the suitability of plant names .
The Commission 's proposal also simplifies the procedures used for the official recognition of certified seed in respect of the clause by which plant stocks which are to be used for seed production do not necessarily have to be inspected by the official agents of the seed certification authority , but may also be certified by other inspectors .
Independent persons , appointed by companies engaged in seed production , seed propagation , seed processing and seed distribution , could in future also act as seed inspectors .
In this connection I should like to point out that the answer to Mr Kofoed 's question is ' yes ' .
The broad agreement which the proposal has received in Parliament is a clear sign that we are on the right path .
I should therefore just like to say something about the only aspect which has given cause for slight controversy , namely the on-site inspections .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf referred to the procedure laid down in Article 43 .
Each institution has to be fully aware of its function .
But it is not my personal wish , nor that of my colleagues , to disregard the procedure on position taking simply because it is only a position and nothing more .
On the contrary , where it is possible and when it is justified for practical reasons , we shall of course take appropriate account of the amendments which are being submitted here in Parliament .
I am therefore pleased to be able to inform you that the Commission unreservedly accepts Amendment No 4 for the evaluation of the new procedures within a period of four years .
The Commission also accepts Amendment No 1 , relating to the swearingin of inspectors , in the form proposed by the rapporteur , and likewise Amendment No 5 , with a small alteration .
However , we are of the opinion that both amendments taken together fail to convey the right meaning .
Amendment No 2 is acceptable to the Commission provided it is extended to take account of the amended decision of 1995 , which further provides in certain cases for a reduction in the level of official inspections to 5 % and 15 % respectively .
Amendment No 3 , which contains the proposal that action shall be taken in the event of contravention by licensed inspectors of the rules governing official examinations , can also be accepted in principle by the Commission .
However , since it is the view of the Commission that the measures contained in the amendment could be lacking in balance , it is thought that these should be reviewed further in a comprehensive study .
Furthermore , for legal reasons the amendment should be edited and an appropriate wording employed throughout .
Let me now move on to the second item in this joint debate .
At this juncture I also wish to thank the rapporteur for the keen interest shown in Regulation 1467 / 94 and I can assure him that the European Parliament 's position will be of great value to the Commission in its deliberations on how to proceed with this regulation .
In addition , I would like to thank the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the generally positive way in which they have received the Commission 's report .
This report shows that the regulation in question is already allowing important work to be done in the Member States , and that this is contributing to the objectives of the common agricultural policy , particularly in respect of the relationship between agriculture and environmental protection .
Thanks to this regulation , Europe can now coordinate the efforts which are being made for the preservation and environmentally friendly use of the genetic resources of the agricultural industry .
The results of this are already being disseminated , primarily via the Internet .
This is acknowledged throughout the world , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has already pointed out .
The important work which has been done towards the conservation , specification , collection and use of the genetic resources of the European agricultural industry , which has been funded within the framework of Regulation 1467 , has significantly strengthened our position in the international negotiations taking place on species diversity in agriculture and on genetic resources for the agricultural industry .
In his report , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf indicated that the budget funds for Regulation 1467 must be increased and that greater manpower resources must be deployed in this sector .
The Commission is very aware of the problems which exist in this area , and as far as staffing levels are concerned I can only point out once again that in DG VI we are still experiencing major difficulties in providing the appropriate level of cover for all the tasks in hand .
As regards the comment often made in this House that all these tasks could easily be attended to by redeploying personnel , I should just like to record that I stand by what I have already said , namely that we are willing at any time to have the offices of DG VI undergo public screening .
Then everyone can tell us which operations are to be cancelled or postponed .
We have a problem here and I can therefore only appeal to the budget authorities , in view of the acknowledged importance of this regulation , to provide adequate support for the Commission 's proposal .
I should , however , like to express my thanks to Parliament once again for the interest it has shown in this report and for the positive manner in which it has been received .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The rapporteur has asked for the floor .
Madam President , I should like briefly to pick up on two points .
The first concerns the matter of swearing-in .
In our country it is customary for persons taking up public positions to be sworn in .
This practice may possibly be unusual .
It is intended not only as a commitment to duty but also to ensure impartiality in cases involving mutual interests .
There are indeed inspectors who also work for seed companies .
The report makes a reference to this and indicates that inspectors have to be given greater independence to carry out their work without pressure from other quarters .
My second point is a question for you , Mr Fischler .
The second report states that we think it would be sensible for this programme - and I am now also extending this to programmes covered by Regulation 2078 - to be made available to those countries in the transitional phase of membership .
I am not looking here for a promise which you cannot give us at this juncture .
But the fact remains that we now have to look at this issue , because in the countries concerned such resources could well be lost partly through changes in agricultural practice , and we would then have an awful lot of catching up to do .
Proposing to those countries undergoing transition that they apply measures which are in line with the objectives of this and other programmes , whose aim is to promote an environmentally friendly agricultural industry , therefore seems to me to be eminently sensible .
Madam President , I would like to look at this question once again , for it seems to me to be an important one .
Within the framework of the accession procedures and the new funding packages which are to be provided from the year 2000 , it is planned to give priority to developing the processing sector and to creating a stronger management structure and a more effective environmental policy in agriculture , with ECU 500 million to be made available to the 10 applicant countries for agricultural purposes .
I am quite prepared , particularly now when there is a need for programmes to be drawn up in talks with the countries concerned , to bring this matter up during these discussions and to make the applicant nations aware of the importance of this issue .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.40 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to ask the Bureau a question arising from the Minutes .
The vote on my report took place yesterday afternoon under the direction of your good self . I would like to thank the 225 Members who voted , 168 of them backing my report .
Over 400 of those present this morning were present for voting yesterday morning .
Votes have often taken place at half past one , even at a quarter to two on some occasions .
Before voting commenced yesterday morning , it was reported that voting would be suspended at a quarter past one .
I would like to ask whether the Bureau intends to introduce variable voting times .
Sometimes we vote until one o 'clock , other times until a quarter past or half past one .
It all seems rather arbitrary .
I feel I am the victim of voting being suspended at a quarter past one .
I would like to ask the Bureau to put forward concrete proposals on fixed voting times so that this sort of thing cannot happen .
We have fixed voting times but not fixed subjects for the voting period : we cover as many items during the voting period as we possibly can but , if we run out of time , the reports not voted on are carried over to the next voting session .
Mr President , I would just like to make a point which may perhaps have escaped Mr Pex .
For some time now , the agenda has made provision on Thursday evening at 5.30 p.m. for votes on topical and urgent subjects and the continuation of the morning 's votes .
I can understand that that might have escaped you , Mr Pex , but I think it is very important and that in future we will have to plan our work according to the agenda .
As President of the Thursday morning sitting , I could in theory have closed the sitting at 1.00 p.m. sharp , but thanks to the flexibility of the House , I was able to let it continue until 1.15 p.m.
I sincerely hoped to put the Pex report to the vote but this was not possible .
Everyone knew , however , that if the vote had not been held by 1.15 p.m. , it would have taken place the same evening .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I have no comment to make on the Minutes but would like to draw both your attention and that of fellow Members of this House to the fact that we have a lady in our midst today who is celebrating a very important birthday .
The lady concerned is Mrs Ursula Schleicher who often chairs the Friday sitting here .
I think it might be nice , Mr President , to offer her our warmest congratulations .
Thank you , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
Many Happy Returns , Mrs Schleicher .
Votes
Amendment No 1 , which has been approved and tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Amendment No 5 from Mr Fantuzzi contradict each other ; they are not compatible .
I prefer Amendment No 1 which was adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The Commission has indicated that although it could live with both of them , if I have understood matters correctly , the amendments are incompatible and cannot be supplemented either .
So we have to make up our minds , and I am in favour of Amendment No 1 .
After the vote on the amendments
Mr President , before the vote on the legislative resolution I should just like to confirm again that the changes which the Commission has made to Amendments Nos 2 and 3 are of an editorial nature rather than a substantive one - insofar as an amendment represents a supplement to the existing legal text - in other words , that these changes are in accordance with what we are voting on here , so that we shall then have a common position from Parliament and the Commission .
If you nod now , we can vote !
The Commission has nodded .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution ) Report ( A4-0129 / 98 ) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 94 of 20 June 1994 ( COM ( 97 ) 0327 - C4-0492 / 97 )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , the European Commission would like to extend the application of the rules on competition to international air transport services .
If the Council decided to do so , the Commission would be given the exclusive right to assess the cooperation agreement between European and foreign airlines .
The Commission currently shares this right with the Member States .
According to the Commission , this gives rise to legal uncertainty amongst the airlines concerned .
European rules on competition for the air transport sector are designed to prevent unlawful constraints on competition between airlines on the liberalized internal market .
Tariff agreements are not , for example , permitted within the European Union .
On an international level , there is however no liberalized market .
On the contrary , international air traffic is generally based on detailed bilateral agreements .
In a situation such as this , it would be impossible to apply rules on competition .
In bilateral negotiations , air transport is often just one part of an entire package .
Package deals are the norm .
In my view , it would be better to keep things as they are with powers shared between the Commission and the Member States .
Member States would , within certain limits , then retain the right to conclude air transport agreements with third countries .
Article 89 of the Treaty states that the Commission may intervene by arrangement with the relevant Member State if an agreement would have the effect of overly restricting competition .
Better cooperation between the Commission and the Member States would significantly reduce the legal uncertainty amongst airlines .
I freely admit that the two do not appear to be working very well together at present .
This is because both the Member States and the Commission have been staking out their own territory in the new situation created by air transport alliances .
I am sure that cooperation between the Commission and the Member States will improve over time .
These are the reasons why I voted against the Commission 's proposals .
We are all aware of the importance of the principle of subsidiarity . It allows Member States to solve their own problems , if their action is likely to be more effective than intervention by a European institution .
In my opinion , and in that sense , the question of air transport agreements between Member States and third countries should not make it necessary to extend the scope of the Commission 's powers too much .
However , in these two proposals for Council regulations , the Commission wishes to extend its powers to enforce Community competition rules on air transport between the Community and third countries .
May I remind you that , at present , the Commission only has the Council 's mandate to enforce competition rules with regard to air transport services provided inside the European Economic Area .
If the Commission 's proposals were adopted as they stand , its powers to influence relationships between Member States and third countries would be extended .
For my part , ladies and gentlemen , at the very least I think it would be premature to extend the Commission 's powers in that way .
In fact , at the present time , we have no common external policy in the area of air transport .
Furthermore , the background debate on this subject has only led to a limited number of negotiating mandates .
Furthermore , I would also like to say that no agreements have yet been signed with any country which does not belong to the European Economic Area .
To conclude , it would be a pity if the Commission tried to extend its powers by what I would call devious means , using proposals for regulations to get involved in an area which is at present within the sovereign competence of Member States , except in cases where the Commission has a negotiating mandate .
I believe it would be more appropriate initially to extend the Commission 's powers only to countries for which the Council has given the Commission a negotiating mandate .
Graefe zu Baringdorf report ( A4-0128 / 98 )
The proposal which the Commission has submitted to us simplifies the procedures for the certification of seed for propagation .
The methods envisaged provide for greater involvement of seed firms in inspection procedures .
Official inspections undertaken by seed certification authorities will be partly replaced by inspections for which seed producers will themselves be responsible .
In principle , we approve of this simplification .
Nevertheless , it will be necessary to ensure that self-monitoring procedures are properly implemented , so as to avoid possible discrimination between seed producers in different Member States .
It will therefore be essential to ensure that inspectors responsible for supervising the implementation of self-monitoring use standard procedures in all Member States .
It will also be necessary to apply serious penalties in case of fraud or rigging of inspections .
It will be necessary to ensure that inspectors have greater personal responsibility and that seed firms and producers do not put pressure on inspectors .
This group supports all the amendments , particularly the amendment which provides for the supervision of inspections by sworn inspectors .
In fact , because of the seasonal nature of agricultural products and the need to use temporary labour to carry out self-monitoring procedures , it is necessary for supervision to be carried out by sworn inspectors .
Indeed , that is the only way of increasing the personal responsibility of inspectors , in case of fraud or manipulation of inspections .
I would also to point out an inconsistency .
In the Rothley report on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions , we adopted the principle of the patentability of seeds whilst restricting the ' farmer 's privilege ' . Parliament now has to vote on a report on the promotion at Community level of the activities of conservation , characterization , collection and utilization of genetic resources in agriculture .
The aim of the report we are considering today is to promote centres for the conservation of genetic resources and to facilitate information at a European level .
Does this not mean that , on the one hand , we are going to prevent or reduce the production of agricultural seeds and , on the other hand , finance and promote centres for the conservation of genetic resources , for the sole benefit of multinational seed firms ?
Payment card crime
The next item is the report ( A4-0164 / 98 ) by Mr Schmid , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft joint action adopted by the Council on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union concerning arrangements for the better exchange of information in respect of payment card crime between Member States ' law enforcement agencies and between those agencies and the payment card industry , where such information is required for the investigation of offences ( 5683 / 98 - C4-0136 / 98-98 / 0906 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , alongside unemployment , the fear of crime has become a major concern for many people .
In this context , organized crime is increasingly perceived as a problem .
Mind you , there is a widespread but inaccurate assumption that organized crime essentially manifests itself in spectacular serious crimes .
There is an equally widespread misconception that organized crime is essentially committed by organizations which do not share our nationality but come from abroad .
Both these views are wrong !
Organized crime is basically just the systematically organized committing of repeatable criminal offences , even minor ones , to make a profit .
Most people think of drug-dealing in this context .
Drug-dealing should certainly be included , but it is only part of what we are concerned with .
Systematic theft or the systematic counterfeiting of credit cards , for example , should also be included .
I want to illustrate this by means of an example .
If a pocket is picked , for example in Brussels , we may be dealing in some cases with a drug addict acquiring money so that he can buy his drugs .
But we may also be dealing with specialist pickpockets who are flown into the city and spend a whole day there working systematically .
In the evening they are back on the plane , on their way to another continent .
As for the stolen cards , they are flown to somewhere in Asia .
They are used to buy things there and the goods purchased are turned back into money by fence organizations .
That is organized crime .
Organized crime is increasingly involved in the area of credit cards .
The loss is estimated by police authorities at some US $ 1 billion per year .
That is a lot of money !
The techniques that are used range from misuse - the forging of signatures - through tampering with credit cards , to complete counterfeiting .
This sum of US $ 1 billion which I have mentioned is initially smuggled back into the criminal money circuit and , after moneylaundering operations , it eventually ends up in apparently respectable businesses .
The British government has now put forward a proposal for joint action to facilitate the work of the police in this area .
The objective of this proposal is to ensure more rapid exchange of information about credit card crime , for example about new modi operandi and such like .
This swift exchange of information would take place not only between police authorities ; there would also be better arrangements for the reciprocal exchange of information between the credit card industry and the police .
Both of these initiatives are right .
That is why our committee pronounced itself in favour of this proposal .
But at the same time we also say that it makes little sense to build up a separate information system for every type of offence in the area of organized crime .
It would be more logical - my colleague , Mr Schulz , will go into this in more detail in a moment - to get Europol involved in this matter as soon as possible instead of building up parallel structures .
That would only lead to confusion .
Secondly , what has been proposed is good , but it does not go far enough .
If we are to proceed effectively against credit card crime we need at least two more measures .
On the one hand , we need a standardization of security markings on credit cards .
Most of you may not be aware that every credit card has its own security markings by means of which it is possible to determine whether it is a forgery .
Some of these markings are not visible , sometimes they can be seen under ultra-violet light , and some of them are known only to the initiated .
The problem is that every credit card organization that issues a card uses different markings .
That means that those who accept credit cards in a shop would have to learn 8 , 10 or even more different security markings , but no-one does .
What we need is standardization , along the lines of what happens with banknotes , where there are two or three markings which are known to every cashier .
To this end we in the European Union at least need proposals from the Commission ; the matter will have to be legally regulated .
There is also a common belief that the credit card industry voluntarily takes all manner of steps to prevent the misuse of credit cards .
The truth is that there is a cost-benefit analysis , not unlike the calculation which you may yourselves make when you consider if it is worthwhile taking out insurance or running the risk of damage , because in the long run it works out cheaper than paying for insurance .
Credit card organizations act in a similar way .
That is why so far we do not have the safest basis that there could be , namely not paying with your signature but following the same procedure as with cash dispensers , whereby there is a chip on these plastic cards and you sign with a sequence of four numbers which only you know , in other words a chip and a PIN .
However , the pre-requisite for such an approach would be the availability in restaurants and shops of machines where the code could be entered .
This has for a long time been possible with the use of the Carte bleue in France but not in other countries .
It was done in France not for reasons of security , but to skim off the market .
But that does not matter , it is the result that is important .
The credit card industry is resisting this approach partly with the argument that a silver shop in India would never raise enough money to buy such a machine .
The industry argues that the introduction of such an approach would hinder the further spread of credit cards .
So the industry is not automatically interested in the highest standard of security .
But society does have an interest .
It must be of major interest to us that organized crime should be fought wherever possible , because ultimately it represents a danger to society .
That is a further reason for legal proposals in this area .
In conclusion , I would repeat that what the British government has suggested is a step in the right direction , but it does not go far enough , and the Commission is required to act in response to our far-reaching demands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Schmid , very sincerely for submitting this report .
His statements have shown that we are dealing with a true expert in the subject .
At the start of my own statements , allow me to remark in jest that , having read Gerhard Schmid 's report , I would easily be in a position to try my hand at things other than being a Member of the European Parliament because , if it were not illegal , you could make a lot of money that way !
Mr Schmid has completed a very precise analysis of the technical pre-requisites for this type of crime .
His report highlights a quite significant danger , namely the fact that as a result of technological progress , notably in cashless payment transactions , new dangers of misuse emerge at the same time and in the same areas where simplifications appear to have been achieved . This is the case unless clear definitions are made of the limits and frameworks within which comparable standards are developed to make it easier to control the usability of this new technology , not only for the user but also for the manufacturer of the technical pre-requisites .
In doing so , Mr Schmid has pointed to the crux of the matter .
As the example of France shows , the credit card industry is interested in simplifying the buying of goods by means of credit cards and in encouraging as many people as possible - that is after all the purpose of credit cards - to be able to buy goods with greater ease in an economy which is becoming more and more entwined internationally , so tempting them to buy goods .
But in that case the party which derives most profit also has to ensure that the consumer is adequately protected .
Mr Schmid has just made use of a classic example to demonstrate how , although sealing off one Member State 's market within the internal market benefits both the Member State and its consumers on the one hand , it amounts on the other to a contravention of our Community 's rules on competition .
This only goes to show that the development of a new , integrated economy in the European Union brings a host of dangers in its wake .
One of the dangers which I want to address is the fact that we have not as yet developed a coherent security system in the European Union .
If the collections of data which are needed to create comparable security standards are now to be fed into a new , separate system yet again , it will be the umpteenth system that we have developed in the EU .
In order to provide protection against organized crime , there is not only a security system in the area of credit cards , but also , for example , the Schengen information system or the customs information system .
And then there is also the European information system which collects a range of data from other systems .
So there is a danger - and there has often been critical comment about this in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs - that we shall see the development of several different systems which to some extent collect the same sets of data .
In this case it would make more sense for us to transfer protection against misuse , and the development of strategies for such protection , to the institution which is in fact responsible for such matters , namely Europol .
If Europol is really to be developed as the European Union 's data collection body and as the organization which is to carry out the exchange of data while at the same time checking thoroughly that data protection is being respected , then it makes no sense if Europol is not involved with credit card fraud of all things , one of the growth industries for organized crime .
That is why I make the following demand , as an essential supplement to what my colleague , Mr Schmid , has said : instead of overloading Europol politically with issues - for example , nuclear smuggling - which really have nothing to do with it , as often happens , it would , for example , be better to transfer to this body competence for the area described by Mr Schmid .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mr Schmid very sincerely for an excellent report .
We should not be surprised ; he does after all come from Bavaria , and all sorts of good things come from Bavaria .
This report yet again illustrates in a particular sector the extent of the problems caused by internationally organized crime .
The latter has a decisive advantage .
At a time when there is really an explosion of knowledge , when new technologies appear virtually every day , there are still governments which always arrive on the scene too late , like Dad 's Army .
They clamp down only long after the matter has been resolved .
They shut the stable door only after the horse has been stolen .
That is the real problem , and it is good to highlight it in an area which directly affects our citizens , namely credit cards .
We have a completely new dimension today , with a world-wide struggle against internationally organized crime which is obstructed by political conditions .
Before the Second World War there were perhaps 20 countries in the world that were of any great significance .
Today we have 190 in the UN alone .
Many of us - I know because I used to be on the Committee on Development and Cooperation - do not even know their names .
These countries are increasingly and deliberately being targeted and bought up by international crime and certain dangerous sects , so that a new situation is emerging in international relations as a whole .
In addition , we are also dealing with the problem of major international speculative capitalism .
According to a report from the World Bank , these groups have at their disposal nowadays a sum of between 800 billion and 1 trillion dollars .
If you believe the news , we shall shortly experience another great international crisis like the one in 1992 .
That is why we have to proceed on the widest front .
Today it is a question of creating security in the area of credit cards .
But we should not stop there ; we should go further , because there are even greater dangers in store .
We face a major international struggle against international forces which are criminally organized and which respect no laws , because they are always quicker than those who are law-abiding .
I would like to thank Mr Schmid for pointing this out .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the sign against crime campaign when we dealt with crime in Brussels , today we come to the " vote against crime ' .
We would like to give our full support to Mr Schmid 's report .
I think that it is urgently necessary to proceed consistently against organized crime .
Indeed , we ought also to have had a debate here this week , which has had to be postponed because of the urgency of another topic .
I am confident that we shall be able to have this debate with the Council and the Commission in our next Strasbourg sitting .
In Germany we have heard that gangs of children were shipped into Germany from Romania with the job of picking pockets .
If they had not picked a certain number of pockets by the evening , their lips were burnt with cigarettes or their lower legs were slashed with razor blades .
The organizers were caught in this case .
We can see that our cities face entirely new dangers in the area of crime .
Credit cards were also stolen in the course of these pickpocketing incidents , and were used for fraud , with enormous sums being lost . This is quite unacceptable to us .
That is why I have made the proposal - and anyone who travels can see this in the ASEAN countries for example - that like the German railway pass , credit cards should automatically incorporate photos of the credit card owner , so that you can immediately tell whether the person in question really is the owner of the card .
These cards should also perhaps incorporate a fingerprint so that trained personnel could quickly identify , alongside the signature , whether a credit card was being presented by the legal owner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two reasons why the Commission welcomes today 's debate on Mr Schmid 's report .
Firstly , it is important that the European Parliament should be able to express its views in matters of cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs before the Treaty of Amsterdam comes into effect .
Secondly , by virtue of their quality , Mr Schmid 's report and the amendments it contains should give the Council cause to consider it carefully .
In short , the Commission welcomes this proposal for a joint action .
It should be seen as a practical instrument which facilitates the work of all those who deal with investigations in connection with payment card fraud , and one which respects privacy and human rights .
We are particularly pleased that this initiative is based on a project that was financed with budgetary funds from the European Union , or , to be more precise , with funds which Parliament and the Council made available to assist initiatives in the fields of justice and home affairs .
In addition , I should also like to point out that this initiative should be regarded as a concrete measure to implement the European Union 's action plan to fight organized crime , which has been extensively discussed in this House .
At present , the Commission is concluding its considerations in connection with the task with which it was entrusted in the context of the action plan , of elaborating proposals for measures against fraud and against the forgery of all types of means of payment , including credit cards , and of examining inter alia the introduction of harmonized bases for punishable offences in relation to certain actions .
All these initiatives , among which we should also include the entry into force of the Europol agreement which is expected this year , and which will mean that Europol is at last fully able to act , show that the European Union intends to proceed with determination against criminal wheeling and dealing in the area of the European Union .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
g . ( SV ) We certainly feel that it is important for action to be taken to combat crime within the payment card industry .
It is absolutely clear from the explanatory statement accompanying the report that the proposal should concentrate on such areas as the production of payment cards , their distribution , production of card readers and other payment card-related services . All of these areas are important .
We are wondering , however , whether this is a specifically EU-related problem .
We believe it is not .
The measures mentioned here are all international .
Quite clearly , payment cards do not exist only in EU countries .
Consequently , we do not feel that these matters should be entrusted to Europol , but instead that Interpol , the international , intergovernmental police commission , should take the matter up .
Fraudulent payment card transactions are international and therefore a job for Interpol .
We have thus voted against the legislative resolution .
Use of antibiotics in animal food
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0286 / 98 - O-0075 / 98 by Mr Olsson , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission , on regulation of the use of antibiotics in animal food ; -B4-0287 / 98 - O-0082 / 98 by the following Members : Aelvoet , Roth , Schörling , Gahrton , Hautala , Graefe zu Baringdorf , Lindholm , Holm , Lannoye and Tamino , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on the use of antibiotics in animal feed ; -B4-0289 / 98 - O-0084 / 98 by Mr Barthet-Mayer and Mr Vandemeulebroucke , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on antibiotics in animal feedingstuffs ; -B4-0388 / 98 - O-0098 / 98 by the following Members : Cabrol , Pasty , Azzolini and Santini , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission , on antibiotics in animal feedingstuffs ; -B4-0463 / 98 - O-0102 / 98 by the following Members : Sonneveld , Goepel , Böge , Funk and Schierhuber , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on the rules governing the use of antibiotics in animal feed ; -B4-0468 / 98 - O-0113 / 98 by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , to the Commission , on the rules governing the use of antibiotics in animal feed ; -B4-0470 / 98 - O-0115 / 98 by the following Members : Roth-Behrendt , Fantuzzi , Iversen and Hulthen , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on the use of antibiotics in animal feedingstuffs .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are aware that the problem of antibiotic-resistant bacteria is growing .
This is a problem within human health care , above all in cases where diseases that were previously relatively harmless are today tending to become extremely hard to cure using standard antibiotics .
One of the reasons for this is the widespread use of antibiotics in both human and veterinary healthcare .
But it is also due to the fact that we often use antibiotics routinely in order to prevent diseases or to cure " minor ' diseases , by mixing antibiotics in feedingstuffs and giving them to animals on a daily basis .
Instead , we could employ good herd management and a good environment for the animals .
Then it is possible to forgo the use of antibiotics in animal feed .
It is also probably true to say that we must not hide a poor animal environment by curing the animals daily with a dose of antibiotics .
This is the wrong way to handle the means we have at our disposal .
But aside from the fact that it is justifiable to remove antibiotics from an animal welfare perspective , we must also restrict their use as far as possible so that in future we shall be able to use antibiotics to combat bacterial diseases in humans .
We must therefore strive to prevent the routine use of antibiotics - and also other medicinal preparations - in feed either as growth promoters or to prevent disease .
I believe it is important that we should obtain more research and produce more evidence in this field .
We already know a great deal today , but we can never be too sure .
One argument that I often hear is precisely that there is no conclusive proof .
But even if some people think that we do not have sufficient knowledge , the duty of care should be applied in this context , in other words , even the suspicion that this might in the long term lead to difficult human health problems should mean that we now stop using antibiotics in feedingstuffs .
Some Member States introduced this type of ban long ago .
We know from experience that this has been successful : production can be equally efficient , even if more care is exercised with regard to the animals ' environment .
Once again I would like to put this question to the Commission and to Commissioner Fischler : What does the Commission intend to do to increase knowledge about the link between in-feed antibiotics and antibiotic-resistant bacteria ?
Does the Commission intend to prepare measures to reduce or prohibit the use of in-feed antibiotics within the Union ?
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , antibiotics are a good example of the way in which an invention that was a blessing can turn into a genetic time bomb .
Invented and used in the Second World War , at first on the Allied side , it was a blessing in their care for the wounded , then used in the case of serious illnesses and in operations on people to save lives by using a medicine " against life ' - antibioticum which is equal to anti-life - subsequently spilling over into veterinary treatment as well , but finally generating a flood of prescriptions now that doctors resort to antibiotics whenever anyone gets a cold .
What is interesting is that dangerous bacteria are not on the retreat as a result and are not checkmated over the long term by this medicine .
Instead these bacteria are reacting , they are reacting with mutations , they are reacting with resistance .
In turn , the response to this has always been to develop new antibiotics , and the wheel turns faster and faster .
And then things go completely mad : now people have begun to make use of this means of prolonging life , that is so important for injured and ill people , as a prophylactic or preventive ingredient in animal food , because this medicine overcomes latent illnesses in herds of animals and above all does so in herds which are not kept in an appropriate and ecological manner , where serious mistakes are made in stock-keeping .
In these cases , the antibiotics exercise their greatest effect in improving yield because they suppress illnesses which would otherwise break out .
Now the circle is being closed even more quickly .
We are observing the development of resistance here as well , in the case of animals , in the prophylactic field .
New antibiotics are being invented with ever greater speed , at ever shorter intervals .
We have a great raft of antibiotics which are no longer effective in the case of most animal illnesses .
A time bomb is ticking away because , although there is no direct connection between antibiotics in animals and in human beings , there is an indirect one in the way in which " life ' becomes resistant to applied medicines and then threatens us in the shape of disease germs .
Commissioner , all this could take on the same dimensions as BSE .
I think that there is an urgent necessity for the Commission to turn to scientific work and in the first instance to take the preventive action that Sweden has already taken , namely banning prophylactic use in animal food , and for us to develop scientific bases in order to hold our own in WTO negotiations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , approximately 80 % of the antibiotics produced around the world intended for animals are administered in animal feed .
That is the conclusion of a report by the " Commission Interprofessionnelle et Interministériel de l 'Alimentation Animale ' in France , a body responsible for animal nutrition .
In other words , almost all complete feedingstuffs for animals are supplemented with antibiotics .
Since the BSE crisis , consumers no longer find it acceptable for animals to be systematically fed with foods that invariably contain antibiotics . The risks are obvious according to recent WHO studies which show that , as we have already heard , the systematic use of antibiotics during fattening can have harmful effects , such as the emergence of strains of bacteria which have become resistant to antibiotics and are very difficult to eliminate .
The joint resolution therefore asks the Commission to take advantage of the experience of the Member States which have prohibited some antibiotics in order to check if all antibiotics used in animal nutrition are harmless .
At the same time it also asks the Commission to define stringent scientific standards possibly prohibiting the use of such substances as food additives , or even as drugs , and to ensure that the prohibition also applies to imports from third countries .
This all arises by virtue of the crucial precautionary principle . Compliance with that principle must be formally stated in the revised directive , in order to protect not only the health and safety of consumers but also the interests of farmers .
That is all I have to say with regard to the content of the resolution , but I would like to add that , for this approach to be completely logical , it is not enough to stop using antibiotics in animal feed in order to protect the health and safety of the consumer .
It is also necessary to enforce the directive on maximum residue limits in meat . Even if animals are not regularly fed on foods supplemented with antibiotics , the maximum admissible antibiotic doses may possibly still be exceeded during treatment of these animals .
So it is also necessary to reinforce the tests for antibiotic residues in meat and carcasses produced in the European Union and imported from third countries .
This is based on the same understanding which leads us to oppose countries which , for example , continue to allow the use of hormones as permanent growth factors in animal husbandry , which European consumers do not want .
I therefore believe we would do well to support amendments which complement the resolution in that respect .
Finally , I would like to ask Commissioner Fischler a question .
I understand , Commissioner , that the Commission has arranged for studies to be carried out on the antibiotic resistance of micro-organisms and on antibiotic residues in meat , and this , if my information is correct , within the framework of promises of veterinary transparency made during the work of the committee of enquiry on BSE .
Would it possible , Commissioner , for us to see those reports ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having witnessed the havoc caused by mad cow disease and the great feeling it rightly aroused in our fellow European citizens , we no longer have any right to compromise on what is called the precautionary principle .
It is absolutely necessary for serious research to be carried out with the greatest despatch in order to establish whether antibiotics used in animal feeding , in hospitals and for medical purposes are in any way responsible for the disquieting antibiotic resistance that is emerging .
In fact , tuberculosis is reappearing all over Europe and anxiety is being expressed at a scientific level .
If a serious bacterial epidemic were to occur tomorrow , we would perhaps no longer have the means to combat the disease and the risks it represents .
It is therefore necessary to speed up the work currently being carried out by the Scientific Committee on Animal Nutrition .
Pending the adoption of European regulations , each country should also organize epidemiological surveillance of antibiotic resistance , according to the use of antibiotics in animal production . This would encourage the reasonable use of antibiotics until more stringent regulations are adopted and would restrict the overall quantities used , as recommended by the World Health Organization .
Above all , it would encourage efforts to improve hygiene in animal production , as Mr Olsson said earlier . Antibiotics must not be used as a means to compensate for bad production methods .
Furthermore , it is also necessary to control the use of antibiotics by general practitioners in hospitals , because we all know that the total quantity of antibiotics used in human medications is far greater than the quantity of antibiotics used as additives in animal food .
We must also ensure that the proposed regulations put an end to existing distortions of competition within the single market .
Mrs Barthet-Mayer has very opportunely reiterated the need to make the testing of residues in meat standard at European level .
And , of course , we must work within the World Trade Organization to ensure that the rules we impose upon ourselves in the interests of human health are not only applied in Europe , but also in third countries which supply us with meat and cattle feed .
Under these circumstances , and as these opinions are broadly shared by all the Members who have spoken , this group , which is joint signatory of the joint resolution , supports it and will also support the amendments tabled by the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations which Mrs Barthet-Mayer moved earlier .
Mr President , I participated fully in the drafting of this joint motion for a resolution on antibiotics in animal feed .
I would hope that , after this debate , the House will give it its full support .
Medicated feed or feed containing pre-mixed antibiotic additives have one very definitive purpose on large units : to treat sick animals .
Such feed should only be used for this therapeutic purpose ; they should only be used under strict licence and under strict supervision .
This is the only practical way to administer treatment in the case of a disease outbreak in large units .
For example , it would be almost impossible to treat a pig-breeding and fattening unit of , say , 5 0-10 000 pigs in any other way than in feed and drinking water .
It would not be possible to catch and inject thousands of pigs every day for perhaps a week .
So applying treatment through the feed is the only way in practice .
However , strict rules and codes of practice must apply to all such use .
Indeed , I am happy to say that in most Member States I know this system already applies .
I feel there are many elements in such a code of conduct , a few of which might be outlined as follows .
Medicated pre-mixes and compounds can only be manufactured by registered compounders on receipt of a veterinary prescription from the state veterinary services , giving full details of the numbers of animals to be treated , the withdrawal periods and the sizes of the batch .
Only the tonnage specified on the official prescription should be manufactured .
Batch numbers of this feed must be carefully recorded from manufacturer through to final farm delivery and use in order to ensure maximum traceability .
Medication must not be incorporated into feed to be used for animals within one month of slaughter .
The locked-box or locked-store system must apply to the manufacturer and on the farm where the feed is to be stored and used .
All transporters , lorries and storage bins must be fully flushed before reuse with unmedicated feed .
Residue testing , pre mortem , through urine and blood samples , and post mortem , through kidney and meat sampling , must be carried out by the competent veterinary authorities to ensure maximum food safety .
The use of medicated feed for prophylactic or growth-promotion reasons cannot continue to feature in management , as is the case in some feeding systems and in some Member States at present .
These farms should be given a limited period to change this practice and find alternative methods .
Medicated feed must not be used to support or underpin poor farm management or weak animal health and welfare standards .
It should be noted that the overuse and misuse of antibiotics is not confined to farmers and the agricultural industry : there is plenty of evidence that the medical profession does not have clean hands when it comes to over-prescription .
Nevertheless , the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry should never compromise or put at risk the health of human beings .
Misuse of antibiotics in prophylactics or in therapy can never replace good management .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , antibiotics are used in animal husbandry in two forms : by introducing antibiotics into animal feed and by using antibiotics for therapeutic purposes in veterinary medicine .
With regard to EC regulations , we already have a directive which establishes a list of authorized additives for use in animal feed and a regulation which defines a Community procedure establishing the maximum residue limits for veterinary drugs in foods of animal origin .
As it is quite conceivable that the excessive use of antibiotics can lead to the development of resistance to antibiotics , not only in animals but also in humans , it is necessary to implement a policy limiting their use to an absolute minimum .
For that purpose , it is therefore necessary not only to control the use of antibiotics in nutrition , but also their use for therapeutic purposes .
We must therefore take into account maximum residue limits for pharmacologically active substances in foods of animal origin , including meat , fish , milk , eggs and honey .
These maximum residue limits must be established on the basis of the precautionary principle , in order to protect public health .
In this respect , I condemn the ambiguous attitude which is prevalent in the European Union .
For example , some antibiotics authorized by Community regulations as coccidiostat are prohibited in Sweden as additives in foods intended for animals , but are authorized as veterinary drugs , and do not comply with Community regulations relating to the evaluation of maximum residue limits .
Those maximum limits are essential to ensure that veterinary drugs are used correctly in accordance with veterinary prescriptions , whereas the use of additives is tightly controlled by regulations and checked within foodstuffs .
Consequently , we ask the Commission immediately to demand the enforcement of the maximum residue limits in all Member States .
The enforcement of these standards must also be ensured with regard to all imports of foods of animal origin from nonCommunity countries , including meat , fish , milk , eggs and honey .
The residue standards must be clearly defined within the framework of international agreements and particularly in the WTO agreement .
I repeat that animal production has a very important place in European agriculture , and production conditions must not be imposed on producers which render them no longer competitive with imported products from third countries which do not comply with the same conditions or constraints .
In this matter , we must not restrict ourselves to examining the use of antibiotics in animal food , but rather adopt a more global approach and include in our analysis the antibiotics used in veterinary medicine .
If scientific research shows that the development of antibiotic resistance is due to the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry , we will have to ensure that everyone complies with resistance standards in order to protect the interests of European farmers and European consumers , and that means not just producers in all the Member States of the European Union , but also all imports from third countries .
Mr President , during the part-session in Strasbourg in February , a significant step was taken towards healthier feedingstuffs .
This was secured by the European Parliament voting in favour of an amendment - of which I was the author - to the Poisson report on a ban covering the use of antibiotics in feedingstuffs with specific nutritional purposes .
The many reports on the possible health consequences are too serious to be ignored .
As stated earlier in this debate , the use of antibiotics carries the inherent danger of bacteria becoming resistant .
They become resistant to medicines used to cure sick people .
We are courting a situation where many people will die from diseases that could easily have been treated with antibiotics .
Further , it is a recognized fact that as long as farmers ensure high standards of hygiene in animal husbandry , the use of antibiotics is completely unnecessary .
An important point for future agricultural policy reform will be to ensure that regulations on animal husbandry will render the use of antibiotics superfluous .
Currently , several Member States have already banned the use of antibiotics in feedingstuffs , in some cases on the basis of analysis results available from the WHO .
These analyses demonstrate that the use of antibiotics can be extremely costly in terms of treating human diseases .
The WHO therefore recommends stopping the use of antibiotics .
One of the EU 's distinctive marks is the free movement of goods .
All Member States should be free to sell their goods within the EU .
This implies that we have a responsibility and a duty to assure consumers that goods are produced responsibly .
Consumers should be able to choose EU products confidently without having to worry about whether production methods could wreak havoc on citizens ' health , a catastrophe that could result in many more deaths than the BSE crisis , with far more widespread impact .
In this regard , we must not forget that the EU is part of the world market , too .
It is a matter of concern that in many parts of the world large doses of antibiotics are used in feedingstuffs as growth stimulants for animals .
Of course it is important to tighten up EU regulations .
However , we should also focus on improving regulations in the global market .
I have three main requests .
The first is to ask the Council to take note of the recommendation by the House for a ban covering the use of antibiotics in feedingstuffs with special nutritional purposes .
My second main point is that at the earliest possible opportunity , the Commission should prepare a list of the most harmful types of antibiotic growth stimulants and have them banned .
Eventually , all these types of antibiotics should ideally be put on the list of banned substances so that we can put a stop to the use of these health hazards .
I would like to encourage the Commissioner and the Commission to begin focusing on alternative methods of animal husbandry to replace and render superfluous the present consumption of antibiotic growth stimulants .
These are steps that must be taken if we are to be able to look European consumers in the eye .
The European Parliament must help ensure that healthy food will not become a meaningless phrase .
Finally , allow me to ask the Commissioner to explain firstly what is going to be done to promote more sustainable and humane animal husbandry .
Secondly , when can we expect tangible results from research into the use of antibiotics in animal feed ?
What types of monitoring and preventative measures has the Commission introduced in the meantime ?
Thirdly , is the Commission currently working on a revision of the relevant directive on the use of antibiotics in animal feed ?
Fourthly , as a consequence of this , is the Commission currently considering proposing a ban on the use of antibiotics in animal feed ?
Today , we are voting on a joint motion for a resolution .
I would like to encourage everyone to do so .
We are taking a somewhat cautious step , but it is a step in the right direction towards better , healthier food .
However , it is also absolutely crucial for the Commission to understand the issues involved and to come up with a positive response .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to you for giving me the opportunity to present the position of the Commission in relation to the problems of medicinal residues in animal foods and the use of anti-microbial medicines - I am referring in this context to a larger group of medicines , not only antibiotics - in animal nutrition .
The recent report from the National Consumer Council entitled " Farm policies and our food - the need for change ' was mentioned in the questions .
That report is known to us and is currently being studied in detail by the Commission 's various services .
As you know , measures for the monitoring of certain substances and certain residues in live animals and their products are regulated by Council Directive 23 / 96 .
This requires Member States to draw up residue plans every year as certification of veterinary medicines , including anti-bacterial substances , pesticides and environmental contaminants .
Compliance with maximum values for the above-mentioned substances , set on a Community-wide basis , has to be monitored within the framework of these monitoring plans .
The directive provides for targeted controls specifically in relation to the use of antibiotics for fattening animals .
Article 8 of the directive provides that from 1998 , in other words from this year onwards , Member States must publish the results of their investigations of residues .
In the coming year , the Commission will present a report to Parliament and the Council on the basis of the results submitted by the Member States .
If the specified maximum values are exceeded in the case of animal foods which are imported from third countries , Council Directive 675 / 90 provides that a strengthened and targeted check must be made of several successive consignments from the same origin at the external borders of the Community .
Now to the question of anti-microbial medicines in feedingstuffs .
The ban on antibiotics which has been called for by the Parliament has already been explicitly incorporated into the proposal for a directive on feedingstuffs for particular nutritional purposes , so that the use of antibiotics is now regulated solely by the directive on additives , Directive 524 / 70 .
In the intervening years , this directive has been modified five times in the interests of increasing consumer safety .
I shall not go into the details of the many and often complicated requirements which have been laid down for the production , trading and use of additives .
One thing is clear in relation to the question which we are discussing today : when manufacturers make an application , they have to give not only technical information but also details of residues and indicate whether risks to human health may arise from the use of antibiotics .
Before the Standing Committee on Feedingstuffs gives its approval to any use , manufacturers ' applications are also examined by the Scientific Committee on Animal Nutrition .
The following medicines are currently approved on a Community-wide basis for certain types of animal : Pacitracin , Spiramycin , Virginiamycin , Flavophospholipol , Thylosin , Monensin , Salinomycin and Avilamycin .
Virginiamycin for piglets , Pacitracin for chickens and piglets and Avilamycin for turkeys may be approved by Member States , but do not have to be .
Although these three substances do not yet fulfill all the criteria for use with these types of animal , there is so far no indication that the substances mentioned represent a risk to animal or human health .
The Commission has proved in the past that it will ban additives if there is a scientifically justified suspicion of a risk to human beings or animals .
That has been demonstrated inter alia by the fact that we have banned 16 antibiotics in all since 1970 .
Those most recently banned were , as you know , Avoparcin and Artacin .
The Commission will continue to examine carefully any indications that resistant strains may be formed and that these may be transferable from one animal to another or from animals to human beings .
The most recent modification of the additives directive provides that all substances approved before 1988 will have to undergo a systematic re-examination from September 2000 .
This applies in all to six of the eight substances mentioned .
Moreover , from 1 October 1999 , approvals will be given only for a maximum of ten years , and will be Community-wide .
There will then no longer be national approvals as are currently possible in the case of Virginiamycin , Pacitracin and Avolamycin .
In its accession treaty , it was conceded that Finland could maintain its ban on Spiramycin and Tylosin until 1997 .
Under its accession treaty , Sweden may maintain its general ban on antibiotics and other anti-microbial substances in animal food until the end of this year .
Before the expiry of these deadlines , the Commission will decide on a possible Community-wide ban , on the basis of scientific arguments to be submitted by Finland and Sweden .
I am afraid that I have to inform you that the arguments so far submitted by Finland have failed to convince the Scientific Committee on Animal Nutrition .
The arguments put forward by Sweden for a general ban in animal feedingstuffs are currently being examined by the multi-disciplinary working group on " anti-microbial substances ' .
On the basis of the protective clause in Article 11 of the additives directive , Virginiamycin was banned in Denmark in January of this year .
However , the same Article 11 provides that appropriate and detailed arguments are to be put forward in relation to such bans by the Member States concerned , and that the Commission 's Standing Committee on Feedingstuffs will decide on these arguments .
It is clear to the Commission that neither our animal fatteners nor the additives manufacturers would accept a ban without appropriate scientific arguments .
The fatteners would feel that they were at a disadvantage vis-à-vis their competitors outside Europe , and the manufacturers would overwhelm us with an avalanche of law-suits if the validity of our action could not be proven .
International law also obliges us to apply scientific criteria .
At the same time , we must take the fears of consumers into account .
That is why we need a scientifically correct basis for our decisions .
In well-founded cases of doubt the Commission can apply the precautionary principle , as indeed it did in the case of Avoparcin .
In the context of its research programmes , the Commission is encouraging science to develop alternatives which might replace these antibiotics in animal feed in future .
I would mention the term probiotics .
A proposal for a first project is currently being considered by the relevant experts .
I also expect a great deal from improvements to the conditions in which animals are kept .
If these could be raised to the level of the best , the use of antibiotics for animal feed would a priori be of no economic interest .
For its part , in order to acknowledge growing concern among consumers , the feedingstuffs industry has made known its readiness to carry out a programme to monitor developments in bacterial resistance .
This monitoring , which is to begin over the next few days , will look at whether and to what extent there is any increase among economically useful animals in agriculture in bacterial strains that are resistant to medicines which are also partly used in veterinary medicine and some of which are part of the same family as antibiotics which are approved for human medicine .
Some ECU 900 000 are being made available for this programme in the current year .
In April 1998 , in relation to the subject of resistance development , the Commission 's Scientific Steering Committee agreed on the appointment of an inter-disciplinary working group which will probably submit relevant findings at the end of this year .
In particular , the working group will deal with the problem of the increase in resistant strains as a multi-disciplinary task .
In the process , there is to be a critical examination of all the fields of application in which antibiotically active substances are used , namely in human and veterinary medicine and in animal feed .
The working group will look in detail at the following questions , inter alia : firstly , the use and misuse of anti-microbial medicines in animal and human medicine ; secondly the use and misuse of anti-microbial medicines as additives ; thirdly , the question of resistant and multi-resistant germs ; and , finally , the factors responsible for the increase in resistant strains .
In pursuing this initiative , the Steering Committee is following the direction which the World Health Organization suggested for this subject at its conference in October 1997 in Berlin .
The working group 's concluding scientific assessment will put the Commission in a position to assess the applications by various Member States relating to a ban on antibiotics in animal feed , on the basis of a solid scientific foundation .
At the same time , consideration is to be given to the concerns felt by representatives of health-related professions and of consumers in relation to the development of resistant strains of bacteria .
In those cases where the scientific risk assessment is uncertain or defective , the Commission will in any case allow itself to be guided by the precautionary principle .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the Commissioner for his statement .
However , there remains a great deal still to be done to allay the growing concerns amongst citizens across the European Union about the emergence of strains of bacteria resistant to most antibiotics due to overuse both for animals and human beings .
When I wrote the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the Commission Green Paper on food legislation , this concern was reflected in the fact that not only was there no opposition to my proposal that antibiotics should only be used to treat illness in animals and not routinely as a prophylactic , but the wording was actually strengthened in the committee .
It was agreed that high standards of animal welfare and husbandry are essential to eliminate any need for such prophylactic use of antibiotics .
For the Party of European Socialists the essential issue here is human health rather than the possible effects on the meat market .
We have all seen what can happen to the meat market when the safety of consumers is neglected , allegedly to protect the market .
My group was nevertheless prepared to accept the joint resolution in its entirety , including paragraph 5 , although not totally happy with that paragraph , in the interest of reaching the widest possible consensus .
However , since the Europe of Nations Group has broken the consensus by putting down a number of amendments , the PSE feels justified in voting against paragraph 5 so that the joint resolution concentrates on the real issue concerning this House - the need to reduce the use of antibiotics in animals in the human food chain to the absolute minimum required to treat specific cases of disease in individual animals and herds whilst further research and exchange of information are carried out .
Mr President , I also would like to thank Mr Fischler .
Nothing reassures people so well as lengthy scientific discourse : doubts remain , nonetheless .
It is a fact that antibiotics are used widely throughout the EU both for medical purposes in respect of animals and to speed up the growth of animals .
As has been stated , bacteria become used to antibiotics after years of use and build up a resistance to them .
In recent years the hypothesis has been put forward that these resistant bacteria can get into a meat-eater 's bodily system and weaken that person 's immunity to infectious disease .
Although at the scientific level there is some dispute concerning this problem , which is difficult to examine , we must tackle the matter now .
Some vets think that the use of antibiotics as a growth stimulant must be unconditionally prohibited .
There is no real water-tight proof as yet , but it is true that a person who is treading warily at one end of the food chain does not really know how many boxes of antibiotics he is about to savour the taste of when he orders his Chateaubriand or his McDonald 's hamburger .
Finland and Sweden , in their negotiations on joining the EU , received a special dispensation in respect of banning certain antibiotics in animal food .
In many other countries , however , they use the so-called safe antibiotics , as listed by the Commission .
The Commission realizes , as the Commissioner said , that it cannot ban all antibiotics without sufficient proof of serious harm to health .
But just who can define what sort of harm is serious enough to adversely affect people 's health ?
Is not merely the fact that there is doubt enough ?
The citizens of the Union move freely from one country to the other , on business or for pleasure .
It is hard to believe that it is only the Finns and the Swedes that could have strict requirements pertaining to the quality of food .
Consumers cannot be treated differently from one country to the next .
I think the EU should most definitely adhere to a principle of caution , especially when it is a question of protecting the health of our citizens , and be strict in the use of antibiotics in animal feed .
Mr President , Commissioner , the issue dealt with by Mr Olsson and others of the use of antibiotics in animal feed is a timely one .
The dispensation made in respect of Finland and Sweden is about to come to an end and the whole EU area must now consider how to approach the problem .
I wish to thank Mr Fischler for his comprehensive response .
Antibiotics are drugs which are this century 's best discovery in the war against disease .
All humanity has derived enormous benefit from them .
However , microbes have the property to rapidly develop strains that are resistant to certain antibiotics .
For that reason , drugs are constantly being developed to overcome the problem of such immune strains .
With modern factory farming methods , however , the conditions of growth for animals are difficult .
Very often the size of the rearing unit is large , space is cramped , and disease can easily spread .
So there is an attempt to prevent the outbreak and spread of illness by , for example , introducing even more antibiotics into the animals ' feed before any really serious disease manifests itself .
This kind of indiscriminate use of antibiotics is common in the EU , but is even more so in powerful countries that practise industrial agriculture , like the USA .
The result of this is that the use of antibiotics is so widespread that immune strains of microbe are being born at an ever increasing rate . This is considerably harmful to public health .
That is why this issue is such a very important one at this time .
The issue actually means taking a position on reforms for the whole of EU agricultural policy and the creation of a European agricultural policy .
The question is whether we want to copy the American agricultural production model , with its large-scale use of antibiotics and hormones , which would mean pushing the issue of public health aside .
Or do we want to evolve a European agricultural system which is both ecologically and ethically based on a sustainable programme , and produce , through broadly approved methods , high quality and healthy foods ?
These are the alternatives that will be weighed at the AGENDA 2000 talks .
The use of antibiotics in animal feed is a big problem that is tied to sustainable development .
It is a shining example of how contemporary greed , in this case the desire for cheaper food , is seriously endangering the ability of future generations to combat illness caused by bacteria .
That is why I give my support to the joint motion for a resolution .
Mr President , the issue here is the problem of factory farming .
Production is carried out in large units and economic considerations are thus often more important than people 's health .
Especially problematic in the EU is Holland 's pig and chicken economy .
We should now debate the use of antibiotics for fattening up animals .
We have evidence that there is scanty scientific foundation for the use of growth hormones to fatten up animals .
The use of growth hormones is forbidden in the EU area , but one and a half billion ecus worth of them are sold .
The Nordic countries ' line in this is a better one than that in the EU as a whole .
The internal market is not protecting people 's health .
We have to recognize that the Commission does not have the resources to solve this problem .
Surveillance is in the hands of the Member States and the Commission should in no way obstruct it .
Mr President , we now know that antibiotics are our most important medicine and often the only means of curing bacterial diseases .
At present , one of the greatest threats to public health world-wide - and also in the EU - comes from bacteria that have developed a resistance to antibiotics , due to incorrect and extremely liberal application of antibiotics . This applies especially to use in animals , but also , of course , to humans .
The bacteria have become resistant to antibiotics and are spread from animals to humans , also via foodstuffs .
I do not fully understand why the Commission cannot use the same arguments with regard to antibiotics in animal feed as are used on the question of hormones in the discussion with WHO , that is , that the precautionary principle should apply .
We all know , of course , how incredibly difficult it can be to prove something by means of research , in other words , there has to be solid evidence , as stated by the Commission .
Nevertheless , reports have been produced , one example being a WHO study in the autumn of 1997 , which highlights four resistant bacteria - among them Salmonella and Coli bacteria - that cause major public health problems .
It is said that these bacteria have had too much contact with antibiotics and have developed a defence and undergone genetic changes .
We therefore have four exceptionally hazardous bacteria that are thriving here in Europe .
We also know that the Swedish government and Swedish researchers , with support from international colleagues , have shown that at least one of these groups of bacteria - the Enterococci - has demonstrably acquired its resistance because of antibiotics in animal feed .
I have now also read that the British parliament 's agriculture committee has recently presented a report recommending an outright ban on antibiotics in animal feed .
It is said that virtually conclusive evidence has been obtained that resistant bacteria can be transmitted to humans .
I believe that this is an opportunity for the Commission to apply the precautionary principle , which I feel it should do .
In the light of BSE , etcetera , there is no reason for us to accept the major risks that are posed by antibiotics in animal feed .
In Sweden such use of antibiotics has been prohibited for the past ten years .
So what have the farmers been forced to do ?
Well , they have been forced to invest and work on a long-term basis to improve the environment and management of animals .
The Commissioner did not directly mention animal production in Europe .
And that is where the whole problem lies : the industrial manner in which we treat animals , the poor housing conditions , the large herds .
It is clearly in this area that work must begin .
In my opinion , this is what the Commission should be taking up the cudgels for : whether we are to have confidence in your agricultural policy for the consumers and for those who must eat the products that agriculture supplies .
Mr President , the large-scale use of antibiotics in animal husbandry is giving cause for concern .
Microbiologists have for some time been warning about the possibility of resistant bacteria finding their way into the human body through meat consumption .
This might have the effect of making people resistant to human antibiotics .
It is a very worrying development , particularly in cases where only one group of antibiotics will help .
It is therefore very important that we restrict the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry .
I am well aware that little is known about the possible risks posed by certain substances .
The knowledge we have gained about the risk of resistance arising from the use of substances such as avoparcin does however mean that we should exercise caution in our dealings with other substances .
Antibiotics must be available to fight sickness .
What we need to do is question the continued administration of these medicinal products via animal feed , particularly substances that are closely related to human antibiotics .
Restricting the use of antibiotics in animal feed must be accompanied by increased research into alternative feed savers .
We should not forget that feed savers play a useful role .
Research has shown that the Dutch livestock industry produces 6.5 % more nitrogen and phosphates without feed savers .
Growth and feed conversion also drop 4 to 8 % .
The industry itself has begun to develop alternatives such as organic acids and oligosaccharides .
Europe should lend its full support to this type of research .
It is also very important that we switch to a less intensive breeding programme that is less dependent on the prolonged use of medicinal products .
The approval procedure for the use of antibiotics also needs to be tightened .
In the light of all that has been said , it is remarkable that antibiotics can still be approved for use as a prophylactic without being tested for any risk of resistance .
Whether they are used as a prophylactic or to treat illness , there are and there will remain antibiotics that carry a risk of resistance .
Although antimicrobial agents to stimulate growth are necessary in the fight against infection , I would like to see them registered as medicinal products and therefore tested for resistance .
Finally , the battle against resistant bacteria is not a lost cause .
Research has shown that reducing the use of antibiotics brings a drop in the number of resistant bacteria .
We should tackle this problem energetically - not least for reasons of public health .
Mr President , we in the Socialist group warmly welcome this resolution , even though we feel that it could have been a little stricter .
This debate has dealt mostly with the risks of antibiotic residues being transmitted to humans , but of course it is the animal ' s health that is the major problem here .
There are at least three reasons for restricting the use of antibiotics .
The first reason has in principle been touched upon by all of the speakers here , namely that the excessive use of antibiotics can result in the development of resistant bacterial strains .
This has been quite clearly proven from a medical viewpoint .
There is , however , another reason that should be noted .
This concerns the impact on immunological defence mechanisms in both animals and humans .
For example , an increased incidence of allergies has been observed in humans in recent decades .
The precise reasons for this are not known , but one conceivable theory is that it is due to the increased use of antibiotics in young children .
This means that diseases that were previously left to the body 's natural immunological defences to combat are now tackled with antibiotics .
In this way , the immune defence is weakened .
It is clear that the long-term effects of this process are completely unknown .
The third reason for not using antibiotics is more speculative , but people have genuinely begun to wonder whether this too could in the long term impact on the genetic structures .
There is , of course , no direct effect of antibiotics on the genes , but there is an indirect link insofar as antibiotics can affect natural selection , that is , nature 's own evolutionary process .
The longterm consequences of this are totally unknown .
As many speakers have already stated , Sweden and Finland have for many years very wisely had a ban on antibiotics in animal feed .
I genuinely believe that this resolution should include a few appreciative words about this wise policy .
The only reference to be found in this resolution is in point 5 , which contains a proposal from the Union for Europe Group that the Commission should investigate whether our ban has damaged the market for meat .
I must say that this point - which we Socialists shall be voting against - quite clearly means that we look first and foremost to the interests of the market , with public health taking second place .
It is evidently the case that both our citizens and everybody here believe that public health must be the prime consideration .
I would like to conclude by saying that there is clearly a growing body of opinion within medical science against the use of antibiotics .
The best solution would be a general ban on this use , failing which the next best option would be at least for those countries that already have such a ban to be permitted to maintain it in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe , as many have already stated , that the matter under debate poses even greater health risks than BSE .
Besides discussing the fact that bacteria have become resistant , we might also note that they have , in certain cases , become more aggressive , for example in hospitals .
Economics must not take precedence over health .
The Commissioner brought both good and bad news in his speech .
The good news was that once again we heard that the precautionary principle is to be observed .
But the question is , exactly when and how will it be observed ?
I believe that it is important to renew the directive on feed additives , starting with the aims that are set out in the resolution .
Secondly , I applaud his comments on the interdisciplinary committee , which is to work through until the end of this year and look into the misuse of antibiotics .
I only hope that the question will not be buried there , meaning that there is a delay in the overhaul of the directive on feed additives .
The bad news was that Commissioner Fischler once again stated that Finland has unfortunately not produced sufficient evidence .
Commissioner , might we not here too apply the precautionary principle in respect of the continuation of the bans imposed in Finland and Sweden ?
A further piece of bad news , which was noted by the previous speaker a moment ago , was that there was no mention of a good animal environment .
Is it not valuable in itself to ensure that animals have a good environment ?
It is a political decision that is needed .
History is being repeated : we pay general lip service to good animal health and the precautionary principle , but when it comes down to money and legislation this ceases to apply .
We have heard an extremely comprehensive enumeration of various mucins .
We must not forget , however , that there is also a risk of cross-resistance .
We cannot place our trust in a technical classification which states that certain substances can be prohibited and others permitted .
Finally , I would like to thank all of the other groups that have so ably given their support to the initiative taken in this debate by my colleague Mr Olsson and the ELDR , enabling us collectively to put pressure on the Commission in this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to express my sincere gratitude for the fact that the position which I have presented here on behalf of the Commission has generated so many positive reactions .
I believe that through the policy which it has pursued over the years the Commission has proved that it is ready to take account of the precautionary principle .
It will naturally continue to do so in future .
I should like to deal only briefly with a few things .
Firstly , several speakers have raised the question of multi-resistance and cross-resistance .
In this connection I would like to stress that these phenomena in particular have a great deal to do with the manner in which antibiotics are sometimes used in human medicine , to which for example Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf rightly referred .
We should be in no doubt that it is important to avoid the occurrence of additional risk as a result of the use of such substances in feedingstuffs .
But the impression should not be given that the use of antibiotics in feedingstuffs is the sole cause of the problems which we face today .
Secondly , I would like to remind you - as I already explained in my statement - that an evaluation is under way of what was conceded to Finland and Sweden in the accession treaty , and that there will be a conclusive evaluation during the current year .
Thirdly , I would like to remind you that the Scientific Steering Committee has appointed a multi-disciplinary working group which is to deliver scientific results by the end of this year .
The Commission will of course subsequently submit an overall evaluation of the opinion of the scientific committees to Parliament as quickly as possible .
All the scientific results will , of course , also be accessible to you .
We want to be transparent , and that is why there are no problems at all with this .
I believe , however , that we should certainly not give the impression that we now want to put the scientists under pressure ; the scientists need a certain amount of time in order to be able to carry out this evaluation .
We must ensure that they have this time .
Finally , I would also like to stress that the example of Avoparcin in particular has demonstrated our readiness to act appropriately whenever any cause for suspicion arises which prompts such an action .
We would be truly ill-advised to act without a scientific basis , because if we did we would probably fail and in the process do great damage to agriculture and also the food industry .
In conclusion , I would like to stress the following : whenever we are considering the extent to which such additives may be used , we should not overlook the true cause of the problem which is to be found at least in part in the mass rearing of animals .
For that reason , in connection with the proposals which we have put forward in Agenda 2000 for the area of investment assistance for agricultural businesses , we shall pay particular attention to the principle which we have embodied there , namely giving greater assistance to especially animal-friendly and species-appropriate animal-rearing , in the development and elaboration of rural development programmes .
As far as possible , we must jointly take this approach into account because the use of these types of anti-microbial substances will then become less and less interesting from an economic point of view .
Mr President , please allow me to put one more brief question to Commissioner Fischler .
I would like to know whether this multi-disciplinary working group which is being appointed by the Steering Committee will also deal with the problem that , as a result of genetic manipulation , resistance to antibiotics is being produced willy-nilly , and more or less as a waste product .
There are investigations which demonstrate that a bacterial strain which is resistant to antibiotics is being specifically developed in milk processing to ensure that residues which may possibly occur in the milk are not effective .
Will these problems be investigated by this working group as well ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like first of all to thank Commissioner Fischler for his replies .
They were , in my view , extremely comprehensive and , on certain points , quite satisfactory .
As far as the residues problem is concerned , I believe that we are , for the most part , in agreement .
I would also like to thank all of those Members who have made extremely positive contributions to this debate .
It appears that there is a large measure of understanding in Parliament with regard to what we are doing here .
I am , however , at the same time a little uneasy .
I would therefore like to put one question to the Commissioner .
The fact is , he said that a good animal environment may mean that we do not need to use antibiotics .
I have great respect for scientific research and share the Commissioner 's view that we must have this , but the choice between having a good animal environment or making use of research is actually a political choice .
This question needs to be pursued both in Parliament and within the Commission .
Does the Commissioner not back this point of view ?
Mr President , I wonder if the Commissioner would be so good as to answer the following question ?
If Sweden and Finland - and Denmark , too , where these matters have also been considered - wish to maintain a ban on antibiotics , will the Commission permit the EU Court of Justice to judge in these matters , or what exactly did you have in mind ?
I have the impression that you not exactly enamoured with the idea of applying the precautionary principle .
Mr President , I shall deal first of all with the question raised by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
A definitive decision is currently being taken in this multi-disciplinary working group about all the subjects which can and should be dealt with .
The list of subjects is already extensive .
The identification of the factors involved in anti-microbial resistance is one of the questions which needs to be clarified .
It would be entirely appropriate to deal with your concern under this item .
I shall pass the point on to the relevant units in DG XXIV .
Secondly , our aim is not to have the European Court of Justice decide ; rather , we want to have both the Swedish and the Finnish application evaluated by scientists in the first instance .
We should not pre-empt the result but wait to see what result emerges from this scientific evaluation .
Now , I will consider the question from Mr Olsson .
I do not believe that this is really a matter in which research is necessary .
I believe that there is already a great deal of knowledge in relation to the conditions under which animals are kept .
It is more a matter of creating an economic environment which makes it possible for farmers to put these animal-friendly rearing methods into practice .
In my view , the truth is that the more species-appropriate a system of animal rearing , the lower the vets ' bills are , although there are higher investment costs to be faced .
If we therefore provide for greater assistance to these methods of rearing compared with other methods in the context of our new Agenda , the incentive to switch to such methods will be greater .
However , insofar as additional research is necessary within the framework of the current research programmes , if appropriate projects are submitted by the Member States and by the different research bodies , there is , of course , nothing to prevent further investigations being carried out .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution on antibiotics in animal feed
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Audit of certain aspects of German reunification measures ( Court of Auditors report )
The next item is the report ( A4-0144 / 98 ) by Mr Garriga Polledo , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 4 / 97 concerning the audit of certain aspects of German reunification measures involving EAGGF compensation payments and export refunds , together with the Commission 's replies ( C40348 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Mr Garriga Polledo cannot be with us today for medical reasons , so he has authorized me to present his report on the Court of Auditors ' Special Report , auditing certain aspects of German reunification , in relation to compensation payments and export refunds made during 1992 .
The Court of Auditors ' Special Report analyses the measures taken to integrate the agriculture of the former German Democratic Republic into the common agricultural policy in three sectors : the eradication of leucosis ; export refunds in the beef and veal sector ; and the reduction of milk production .
The Court of Auditors comes to the conclusion that there has been , firstly , a cumulation of subsidies in the three cases , although it does not quantify the amounts involved .
A simple example of this cumulation of subsidies is provided by analysing and listing the measures adopted in order to eradicate enzootic bovine leucosis ( EBL ) .
Let us examine the refunds paid for beef export and the compensation granted for the reduction of milk production , as a consequence of applying the quota system . The animal suffering from the disease is slaughtered and compensation is given .
Similarly , the slaughter of the animal is entered into the accounts as reduction of milk production , and payment is provided again , on this basis .
Lastly , since the animal had not developed the disease and is considered fit for sale outside the EU - to prevent falling prices in the Community market - it is exported and another payment is made for export .
Mention is also made of irregularities in the leucosis eradication programme .
In the financial checks on the EBL eradication programme in the new Länder it was found that animals slaughtered prior to 1991 had been included in the programme , compensation claims had been submitted for animals which had not been slaughtered , double claims had been made for the same animal , and claims had been presented for animals slaughtered at the wrong time .
I would emphasize that the Commission has imposed the appropriate financial corrections .
In analysing the situation , Parliament 's resolution of 4 April 1990 has to be kept in mind . This underlines the role the Commission should play to facilitate unification , and its participation in the expenditure for the reconstruction of the economy of the Federal Republic of Germany , so as to display solidarity with its people .
The Court of Auditors overlooks the political objective decided upon by Germany and approved by the Commission and the Council : to integrate the five new Länder into the Community .
That implies the full application of the common agricultural policy , retrospectively and with no transitional period , all of which should be done at the least possible cost to the Community and without disrupting the common market .
The market situation in the Federal Republic of Germany was serious , especially in the beef and veal sector .
The task was not at all easy , but there can only be one conclusion : the operation was a success .
And the leucosis eradication programmes have been investigated and the correct fines imposed . Also , financial corrections have been made for the exports and for certain irregularities .
As for the cumulation of subsidies , there is no objection to providing compensation for the slaughter of an animal and again for exporting its meat .
In the first case the aid goes to the owner and in the second , to the exporter .
The same is also true of counting the slaughter of the animal as reduction of milk production .
The allowances are intended for different purposes in the three cases .
By coincidence they are juxtaposed , but it is clear that each form of assistance has its own legal base and objective .
Finally , throughout the whole Court of Auditors ' report the point of view is much too narrow .
Many specific considerations have not been taken into account , such as the absence of a transitional period and the retrospective nature of certain measures .
For all those reasons , Mr President , we must congratulate Germany and the European institutions , since the political objective has been achieved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , on 15 May 1998 , we are dealing with a historic event that took place over eight years ago : German unification .
This was and remains a historic event .
Let us deal with a quite minor side issue which came about only as a result of this situation .
We have often dealt with matters which took place long ago , but it only really makes sense to do so if there is a danger that the event with which we are dealing constantly recurs in a similar form because there is a failure in the system .
Such a danger does not exist in this case , according to the information from the Commission and the Court of Auditors , which we have discussed at great length and in considerable detail in committee .
The Court of Auditors itself has said , in response to a question from the chairman of our committee , that it is very improbable that a similar situation will arise again .
To that extent , the whole matter is of historical significance , even if the report itself does not fully attain the historical significance of German unification , without wishing to offend the rapporteur .
What we are dealing with is the past .
But I should like to offer a few observations , to the Court of Auditors rather than to the Commission . If you are dealing with this type of occurrence - and you cannot just sweep everything under the carpet because of the particular historic situation - you ought instead perhaps to complete the reports a little faster .
It is typical that we are only now dealing with it .
The reason is not that we were so slow , but that it took an infinite amount of time to progress from the first criticism of events , which cannot be denied , to a report from the Court of Auditors , and to the completion of this report and its submission to us .
That happens quite often , and that is why I really want to criticize this aspect alone .
If the Court of Auditors wants to make a sound contribution to our work , it must , like Parliament , have an interest in ensuring that our discussions take place as near to the time concerned as possible , so that justified criticism is not rejected with the argument that everything happened at some point in the past , and that it has all changed since then .
It is not always as easy , as in this case , to check whether everything really has changed since then .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , even though he is not here today , for the work that he has done .
Now we can all draw the same conclusions from it : if we had received the report somewhat sooner , we could have dealt with it sooner , and there might have been greater interest in it than there is today .
The report was unanimously approved in committee .
There are no amendments .
I would say that Mr Fabra Vallés has given us a thorough presentation of the facts of the matter , and we can only endorse that presentation .
Mr President , I understand that Germany is a big net payer to the EU .
I quite understand that the Germans would like more out of the EU for their membership subscription .
It is natural that if eleven billion ecus of German money goes on the needs of others , they should wish to make a smaller contribution to the EU budget .
What I do not understand is why Germany is swindling the EU out of its money .
The basic contention by the Court of Auditors is that the same cows have been paid for twice over .
I think Mr Garriga Polledo is splitting hairs in his report .
He says that those who have received overlapping funds have not necessarily been the same people .
The main problem is that the same cows have been paid for twice over .
Policy has to be implemented under the terms of EU regulations .
It is still unclear to me whether leucosis-infected beef is being sold to Russia or other trade partners of the former GDR .
This has not been denied either in the Court of Auditors ' report or in this one .
If it has been going on , which I doubt , it is an absolutely reprehensible matter .
I would have liked the report to enlighten me on this .
We know how , after the BSE slaughter , much meat at compensated prices was exported from Britain .
In Holland ten million pigs have died from swine fever , and in Germany one million .
I wonder what happened to the meat after the swine fever slaughter .
Did the Commission monitor the proper use of this meat ?
I greatly appreciate Mr Fischler 's work in this matter , and I will leave it up to him to explain what happened to the meat after the swine fever slaughter .
I do not understand how the report could have been accepted in its present unsatisfactory form .
The rapporteur does not know why Germany does not have to pay back the eleven million ecus demanded by the Commission , but only one million .
This ought to have been cleared up before the report was approved .
Mr President , we should undoubtedly acknowledge that certain objectives which are listed in this balanced report have been achieved without major additional expenditure being incurred by the Community .
I should like to emphasize the fact that , in this case , the Community has made a welcome contribution to integrating agriculture in the new Länder into the structures of the common agricultural policy .
The fact that the Community has shared in the costs of re-structuring the economy of the GDR and has provided proof of its solidarity with the people of the GDR in this way is very much to be welcomed .
It is all the more regrettable that the report by the Court of Auditors also indicates certain tendencies towards mismanagement on the part of the Commission in this very delicate area .
In addition to considerable delays in controls and wrongly paid subsidies , individual assistance programmes were not even properly coordinated with one another .
The Court of Auditors thus complains in its report that farmers could have claimed three different subsidies for the slaughter of one of their animals , which would have made multiple payments possible .
Such cumulations of subsidies must be avoided at all costs in the future , particularly bearing in mind the massive organizational challenges which the Union will have to face in the near future .
How can citizens in the Member States otherwise be expected to gain confidence in the European Union in the face of the serious shortcomings that constantly occur ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mr Garriga Polledo sincerely for his report on the Court of Auditors ' Special Report on the audit of certain aspects of German reunification measures in 1990 and 1991 .
There is no need for me to emphasize how difficult and complex German reunification was in its entirety .
I am sure that there is no need either for me to emphasize that reunification was the only correct decision in this historically unique situation .
We had to integrate the new federal German Länder into Community law without a transitional period .
As far as the common agricultural policy in particular was concerned , the process was far from straightforward , as you can imagine .
I am grateful to Mr Garriga Polledo for his explicit recognition of this fact in his report .

In all , three measures were adopted for the integration of the former GDR : firstly , funding of the programme for the slaughter of cattle which were infected with enzootic bovine leucosis ; secondly , the introduction of a regulation on the disposal of the meat through special export refunds , since this meat is quite suitable for human consumption ; and thirdly , compensatory payment for the slaughter of animals to comply with the milk quota .
These measures fully accorded with Parliament 's resolution on reunification in April 1990 .
In its report , the Court of Auditors puts forward the view that there was a cumulation of subsidies and irregularities in the application of the programmes because the measures overlapped .
It also finds fault with the fact that there was no qualitative differentiation in the special export refunds .
However , it has to be borne in mind in this respect that the stock of East German cattle was simply too big for it to have been possible to comply with the milk quota regulation from the outset .
The stock was also partly affected by bovine leucosis .
The Commission had to get to grips with the difficult situation quickly , and implemented the three measures which I have mentioned .
Different assistance conditions applied in each case for the measures in question .
As a result , the number of animals affected was clearly not always the same , and similarly the number of those receiving assistance was not the same .
The fact that all three measures benefited some animals does not constitute a contravention of the provisions of Community law .
That is why , in the Commission 's view , the Court of Auditors is totally unjustified in its conclusion that there was an inadmissible cumulation of subsidies .
As far as the irregularities are concerned - this also applies to point 5 of the draft resolution - the Commission has provided for a financial correction for Germany in the sum of DM 6.9 million after considering all the available data .
The Commission is currently in the process of collecting this amount from the German government and in December 1997 it deducted half of the amount - to be specific , DM 3.4 million - from payments for the eradication plan for 1996 .
The other half will be deducted in the same way in the second half of 1998 from payments for the eradication plan for 1997 .
As regards the failure to differentiate qualitatively in the export refunds , the Commission points out that healthy and normal commercial quality is the only available criterion for export refunds , so that there was no case for any more detailed differentiation .
I am glad that the rapporteur largely supports most of the Commission 's arguments , particularly in relation to the cumulation mentioned by the Court of Auditors , and that he has endorsed them .
In order to prevent delays in on-the-spot financial controls in the framework of the EBL eradication plans , the Commission immediately introduced special controls after learning of possible irregularities in this area .
Unfortunately , the Commission has at its disposal only limited resources for on-the-spot controls from programmes which are cofinanced .
However , it has set itself ambitious objectives in this area .
I should also like to add that systematic administrative controls are being constantly carried out , particularly by comparing technical reports from the Member States with the final financial reports .
In conclusion , I should like to offer the rapporteur my sincere thanks for his acknowledgement of the problems which the Commission had to overcome in this difficult situation in connection with the integration of the former GDR into the common agricultural policy .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Combined heat and power
The next item is the report ( A4-0145 / 98 ) by Mrs Estevan Bolea , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on a Community strategy to promote combined heat and power ( CHP ) and to dismantle barriers to its development ( COM ( 97 ) 0514 - C4-0596 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , cogeneration is the simultaneous production of electricity and heat , or electricity and steam , and I think it is very important for the problems we constantly address in this Parliament , such as the pollution of the atmosphere , which is the most fragile of the ecosystems which form our planet Earth and our life upon it .
Cogeneration allows a lot of energy to be saved , and I want to tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that the cleanest energy of all is the energy which is not used .
So Europe has to move towards using more cogeneration .
This technique has been used for many years .
The paper industry has been using cogeneration for more than 50 years .
What has changed now is the technology .
We now have greatly improved technologies , with higher efficiencies , which is why we can say we should greatly promote cogeneration .
Furthermore , in the European Union we are trying to promote the use of gas for many reasons . For example , it is a cleaner technology than coal or oil .
Also , we have to buy gas from the new producers , such as Russia , Azerbaijan or the United Arab Emirates , because the world contains large reserves , and the efficiency is higher .
At the moment , cogeneration accounts for 9 % in the EU .
In its communication , the Commission says it would like to achieve 18 % within a few years , in about 2005 .
That is not an easy matter , ladies and gentlemen .
We have to remove the barriers .
And if cogeneration has so many advantages - such as high energy efficiency , less pollution , and energy savings - why is it not more highly developed ?
Well , because nothing is easy in today 's complex world of globalization , economic development and the liberalization of the electricity and energy markets , so we shall have to see how we can promote all of this .
There are a lot of auto-producers , but the electricity companies are also powerful . So what is the key to the whole situation ?
As always , ladies and gentlemen , the key lies in the prices .
In previous years , in order to promote these technologies - which , as I say , offer every advantage and hardly any disadvantages - those kilowatt-hours fetched a very high price , an aboveaverage price .
But obviously , the electricity companies have their plants , and they cannot be paralysed so that we can just use the energy from the auto-producers .
So I want to draw your attention to paragraph 8 of the resolution in my report , where it says two things I think are very important .
Firstly , Mr President , it says that in the liberalized electricity markets , electricity produced in these industrial installations should be given priority but , at the same time , it also says that this should be at market price , not subsidized , because we are already subsidizing national coal , renewable energies and other aspects of the components of electricity prices .
So the auto-producers , who use cogeneration , will have to compete in the markets .
We have just approved the directive on gas liberalization , during the last sitting , in Brussels .
The electricity market has also been liberalized .
And the auto-producers will have to function within that market .
Energy from gas is a clean form of energy - though not to the same extent as hydraulic energy , for example , or other renewable forms such as wind energy - and we need the Commission to provide a stimulus .
We also need that for renewable energies .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy approved all the amendments which were tabled , Mr President , apart from one . That was one which Miss Ahern retabled , and I am not going to support it because it is unrealistic .
We can wish for anything we like .
But if it is out of step with physical reality , it will not make much sense .
So I am not going to support the Green group 's amendment to paragraph 11 , but I am going to support the rest of the amendments .
I also want to say that one of the advantages of cogeneration is very important : the desalination of seawater .
The electricity companies already get high efficiency from gas using combined cycles , which is the second part of cogeneration , but we should make use of gas and these techniques to desalinate seawater .
This represents a great technological market for the EU .
The whole of the Mediterranean and the world will need water , which will be the big problem of the twenty-first century .
Mr President , my group also very much welcomes the Commission 's intention to provide greater assistance to combined heat and power .
The technology has , after all , long been well known , although for a long time it was deployed only as emergency unit technology in hospitals etcetera . Far too little use has been made of it in the area of town planning and local authority development plans , and in this context it still runs up against obstacles because of certain minimum running times .
However , the advantages are obvious .
Alongside the necessary demand for renewable energy , this is a very good contribution towards the better achievement of Kyoto 's political energy targets .
It has rightly been said that combined heat and power is sensible because it leads to better utilization of primary energy and to a reduction in atmospheric pollution .
Above all , it offers interesting new possibilities for combination with bio-mass utilization in agriculture and industry , and particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises .
It holds out very interesting prospects of reducing the burden of energy costs on small and medium-sized enterprises and of contributing towards self-sufficiency in energy supply in Third World countries as well .
I should also like to stress that there are very interesting models for the better use of agricultural waste , mainly in winegrowing , in a combined technology of bio-mass utilization and combined heat and power .
I am glad that it has now been possible to reach agreement on the fact that the operators of CHP plants will be recognized as qualified generators of electricity .
I must say to my colleagues in the PPE that I regret the fact that you rejected such recognition a little while ago in the case of the gas directive when it was a question of putting it on a proper legal basis .
Mr President , the Commission 's announcement on the promotion of a combined heat and power industry in the EU area is an important step forward for energy policy .
I would like to thank the rapporteur of the Parliamentary report , Mrs Estevan Bolea , for her work in producing it .
The added benefit of combined production is that it gets us much closer to the aims set out in Kyoto .
Thus , the time has at last come when we can raise the strategic profile of this issue at EU level , especially as we cannot afford to let slip away any means we have available to us to reduce and eventually rid ourselves of the damage caused by the greenhouse phenomenon .
The growth of the use of the combined system is still being hampered by the reluctance of the electricity market to open up .
Producers of electricity can still restrict the number of new players entering the market .
This makes many otherwise commercially viable projects unprofitable .
Furthermore , producers of combined heat and power of any size must have the right to gas in a free market .
Free access to gas is a key factor in profitability when it comes to constructing private or smallscale power stations .
Combined production of heat and power can be fuelled by coal , gas or using biomass .
The Union should , however , try to promote the idea in its entirety and provide it with a market where decisions could be made as to what might be the most competitively-priced fuel .
The method is said to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by raising the overall efficiency of the power plant .
It must be remembered that that will happen especially if and when renewable carbon dioxide-free biomass is used .
I am afraid the lobbying of gas as a fuel will not be enough , especially as the directive on gas expresses the desire to restrict the entry of small plants into the market .
The combined production of heat and power has been a feature of industry for over fifty years .
Today it is found , at least to some extent , everywhere in the EU .
However , it is only in Finland , the Netherlands and Denmark that it accounts for more than 30 % of all electricity produced .
Its promotion is tightly bound up with the national aims of different Member States .
Despite this , we also need input both at Community level and from industry .
As it says in the report , the combined production of heat and power provides a strategy whereby , in the short or medium term , we can promote the effective use of energy in the EU both significantly and cost-effectively , and have a positive impact on EU environmental policy .
Mr President , in the EU area we can discern certain mega-trends in the field of energy .
Firstly , the demand for energy is growing by around 1 % per year .
That means that gas emissions will increase if nothing is done about it .
Secondly , the EU 's level of self-sufficiency in energy will have gone down from the present figure of 70 % to around 30 % by the year 2020 .
Thirdly , electricity accounts for 40 % of all energy produced , and that figure is rising .
Fourthly , it is realistic to suppose that the use of gas , and specifically imported gas , will increase rapidly .
All these large-scale trends can be influenced positively by increasing the combined production of heat and power .
It will improve the efficiency of energy usage in EU countries , it will save on energy resources , it will reduce gas emissions and it will lessen the growing dependence on imported energy .
The production of energy , however , is not the affair of the EU .
It is mainly up to the Member States , which may derive support from the Commission .
The support has so far been modest and that has been mentioned in publications and speeches .
The CARNOT programme , which aims at improved fuel efficiency , simply does not have the resources , and there are even fewer to spread the word on the combined production of heat and power .
The EU is no more than a paper tiger in this matter ; the responsibility lies with Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am rather disappointed with the motion for a resolution submitted to us on the subject of combined heat and power and the barriers which are still being placed in the path of its development .
What is required in order to promote combined heat and power ?
First of all , we need guaranteed access to the supply network for electrical energy produced by means of cogeneration , and secondly , a minimum price guarantee .
This resolution only proposes guaranteed access to the network at the market price .
I am pleased to inform you that Luxembourg , my native country , already has very progressive legislation on this subject . In 1994 we adopted a law which gives alternative energies , that is , solar energy , wind power and so on , and cogeneration , the possibility of access to Cegedel , Luxembourg 's electricity company , with a minimum price guarantee from that company .
In addition , the government of Luxembourg also contributes 1 Franc per kilowatt / hour .
I think this is a very good example of how combined heat and power could be promoted in the European Union . I call on the Commission to resist the lobbying by oil companies which are naturally not in favour of cogeneration because it will reduce the amount of fuel they sell .
Mr President , I ask for the support of the Commission to enable those who produce combined heat and power to obtain guaranteed prices .
Mr President , we have reached the end of a century in which we have squandered more energy resources than in the entire previous history of mankind .
War has been waged , and is still waged over these resources .
Even today there can be no mistaking the consequences for the environment .
It is high time that we radically re-structured our entire energy system .
Success in this endeavour will assuredly be one of the central issues for the next century .
At present Europe is dependent on other countries for 50 % of its energy , a state of affairs which presents a problem not only in ecological and social terms , but also in terms of peace policy .
That is why the development of combined heat and power systems is an essential step in the right direction towards energy self-sufficiency in the European Union .
However , the efficiency of these measures in terms of energy policy will become really effective only if importance is attached in this development to giving priority to renewable sources of energy over fossil fuels , with the eventual aim of full substitution .
This would have to be guaranteed above all by fiscal incentives and fair access to the electricity market .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday we dealt with an urgent motion in relation to energy policy here , and we tackled safety issues in the area of nuclear power .
We all know that the acquis communautaire must be applied in the internal market , so that the decision on whether to operate nuclear power stations is a matter for each Member State itself .
However , I consider it important that the European Parliament should repeatedly stress safety and should above all focus on its commitment to alternative forms of energy in relation to energy generation .
We believe that energy generation in the future is a very special issue to which we must pay a great deal more attention .
This also includes combined heat and power .
I should like to thank Mrs Estevan Bolea most sincerely for her report which points out very clearly how important production is in this area , as well as use in power stations for heating .
I believe that entirely new dimensions are possible in this area .
The prospects of increasing from 9 % to 18 % , in other words of doubling the present contribution of combined heat and power to the Community 's overall energy generation gives me confidence as far as the economical and appropriate use of our resources is concerned .
That is why I have to support the course pursued by the Commission in the White Paper " Energy policy for the European Union ' .
For some time there has also been an intensive liberalization of the internal market for electricity .
We have had not only the internal market for energy but also